




















































Hansard: March 05, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 27A  TUESDAY, MARCH 5, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2503 

 March 5, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 

gallery we have nine grade 11 students from Campus Regina 

Public. They’re in the Trek program. And what that is in short, 

Mr. Speaker, they get to experience some outdoor events and 

environmental education. And just talking to them earlier, they 

spent last Thursday outdoors at Echo, so a brave group of 

students as well. So all members please welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you four women 

who’ve come to the House to hear and watch the proceedings 

today. And they’re just entering in your gallery as we speak. 

First I would like to introduce Donna Kerr. Donna, could you 

just give a little wave? And with her is Pat Colpitts, Darlene 

Keks, and Diane Robinson. And I would ask all members here 

to give them a warm welcome to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the House, 

I’m pleased to introduce three guests that are joining us today in 

the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. Today we’re joined by Roberta 

Wiest, the director of HealthLine; Dr. Jordan Velestuk, who is 

the medical adviser for HealthLine; and Jill Belof. Jill is a 

teacher at St. Catherine School here in Regina. 

 

Earlier today, Mr. Speaker, I was able to join the three of them 

as we made an announcement that HealthLine will now be 

easily accessed by dialing 811. There’ll be a member’s 

statement shortly, but I would ask all members to join with me 

in welcoming them today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to introduce a petition into the House calling for 

reconsideration of passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act. And we know the proposed Saskatchewan 

employment Act was introduced in December 2012. It’s a 

sweeping rewrite of our labour laws, including labour 

standards, occupational health and safety, the health labour 

relations Act, and The Trade Union Act. 

 

But since that time that it was introduced in December, literally 

hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been carried 

out in the interest of due diligence. If Bill 85 becomes a new 

consolidation of labour laws in the province, working people, 

particularly young workers, immigrant workers, and other 

vulnerable workers, will suffer from a hasty watering down of 

our current labour standards which set the minimum standards 

for all Saskatchewan workers. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May, and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do so present on behalf of citizens from 

Moose Jaw and Regina. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

rise today to present a petition on cellphone coverage for 

northern Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, 

and the neighbouring communities of Michel Village and 

St. George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known 

as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch 

Narrows First Nation, along with the community of 

Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring communities 

in each of these areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that this petition has been 

signed all throughout Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

petition that has been signed here today are primarily from 

Dillon. And I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Congratulations to Saskatoon Writer 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 

this chance to congratulate one of my constituents, author Yann 

Martel. The movie adaptation of his book Life of Pi, which 

premiered in Saskatoon in the fall, was a big winner at the 

Oscars last month. Award winner Ang Lee won the title of Best 

Director for the second time, and the movie also won awards 

for original score, cinematography, and visual effects. The 

screenplay transformed the complex novel into a stunning 

three-dimensional cinematic experience. 

 

Though Yann Martel was born in Spain and lived all over the 

world, Mr. Speaker, he has made Saskatchewan his home. 



2504 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

Martel has been a proud Saskatoon Nutana resident since 2003 

when he was offered a writer-in-residence position at the 

Saskatoon Public Library. He and his award-winning novelist 

wife, Alice Kuipers, are raising their children in my 

neighbourhood. 

 

Martel’s novel, Life of Pi, has won a number of awards and sold 

over 7 million copies worldwide since its release in 2001. The 

book is said to be an inspiration to many throughout the world 

and during Lee’s acceptance speech, he expressed his need to 

thank Yann Martel for writing this incredible, inspiring book. 

 

In addition to writing the Life of Pi, Yann is known for his 2007 

challenge to Prime Minister Stephen Harper to read books that 

“expand stillness.” The list of books can be found on the What 

is Stephen Harper Reading? website. 

 

Yann will be a featured speaker at the weekend’s NDP [New 

Democratic Party] leadership convention, which will add even 

more excitement to this important event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you to recognize the beauty of the novel’s 

interpretation on the big screen and to ask you to join me in 

congratulating Yann Martel for his success. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Hope’s Home Opens in Prince Albert 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to recognize the recently opened Hope’s Home facility in 

the city of Prince Albert. This facility includes a brand new 

17,000 square foot daycare with room to care for up to 44 

medically fragile children with complex medical needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hope’s Home provides important care for 

medically fragile children and their siblings. This greatly assists 

their parents by giving them the opportunity to work, go to 

school, or get that break they need from the constant, 24-hour 

care of a child with complex needs. 

 

Jacqueline Tisher, the founder and executive director of Hope’s 

Home, started the organization in 2004. Ms. Tisher created the 

organization after she experienced the challenges of balancing a 

career and caring for a medically fragile child. Hope’s Home is 

named after her late daughter and foster child, Hope Dawn 

Marie. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the addition of this new facility in Prince 

Albert, Hope’s Home now provides medical daycare services in 

three Saskatchewan cities. The other two centres are Regina 

and Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize this great 

new facility in Prince Albert and also the great care Hope’s 

Home provides for medically fragile children and their families. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Spending Choices 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It would 

seem that the concept of a dollar is lost on the Saskatchewan 

Party. Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party government flooded 

the airways with a new advertisement, and in the radio ad the 

Premier says, “This year we’ll need to control government 

spending again and that means some difficult choices.” But 

those difficult choices apparently don’t apply to the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, who admitted yesterday that 

they spent $92,000 of taxpayers’ money on those ads, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party spent taxpayers’ 

dollars to warn that they’re running out of taxpayers’ dollars. 

There is not a shred of common sense in that, Mr. Speaker. But 

we’re starting to see a pattern here, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana pointed out that while the 

Premier was calling for austerity, he was having a $22,000 

hardwood floor added to his own office. 

 

In Saskatchewan’s resource-rich economy, there should be a 

sustainable plan for growth and middle-class prosperity. Instead 

we have the Premier’s stubborn insistence that we do as he says 

and not as he does. People deserve better than a PR [public 

relations] plan that wastes $92,000 to warn the middle class 

about the shortage of money. And I think the Saskatchewan 

Party should stand to learn the value of a dollar, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Cameco Wins Award 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 

this Assembly to applaud Cameco Corporation on receiving a 

Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada award 

which was presented to them last evening in Toronto. The 

Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada bestows an 

environmental and social responsibility award each and every 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this award honours an individual or organization 

demonstrating an outstanding initiative, leadership, and 

accomplishment in protecting and preserving the natural 

environment or in establishing good community relations 

during the exploration program or in the operation of a mine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Cameco’s model seeks to employ as many 

northern people as it can and prefers northern-owned businesses 

in purchasing goods and services for its Saskatchewan 

operations. Mr. Speaker, I ask that this Assembly recognize 

Cameco on receiving this prestigious award and their efforts in 

establishing and maintaining good community relations in its 

operations. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

New Telephone Number for HealthLine 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

announce in the House today that our government is making 

access to 24/7 health advice easier by changing the provincial 

HealthLine number to 811. Mr. Speaker, residents can now 

access HealthLine for professional health advice any time by 

simply dialling 811 from anywhere in the province. 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2505 

As you know, HealthLine is a confidential, 24-hour health 

information and support telephone line. It’s free of charge and 

services are offered in English with translation in over 100 

languages. Anyone with a health question or who needs health 

advice can call HealthLine and speak to a registered nurse or 

mental health and addictions professional. These professionals 

can help callers make decisions about their health care options 

in a safe, caring, and confidential manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government remains committed to providing 

patient- and family-centred health care in our province, and 

HealthLine is a key part of our primary health care strategy to 

improve access to health information and health services. As 

we mark this important milestone for HealthLine, I ask fellow 

members in this Assembly to spread the word about the new 

number and encourage Saskatchewan residents to take 

advantage of this valuable resource. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Engineering and Geoscience Week 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, March 3rd to 9th has been proclaimed Engineering 

and Geoscience Week in Saskatchewan. Engineers and 

geoscientists are integral to the safe development and 

maintenance of the infrastructure and technology needed to 

help keep our export-based economy competitive and 

improving our quality of life here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us have enjoyed the important work of these 

professionals, whether it’s travelling on the highways, crossing 

a bridge, or entering a building. Mr. Speaker, the Association of 

Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan or 

APEGS is the governing body responsible for over 10,000 

members in the province, and they have organized various 

activities to commemorate this week. 

 

APEGS members make significant contributions in a number of 

important sectors, including agriculture, construction, forestry, 

manufacturing, mining, transportation, and resources. 

Engineering and Geoscience Week is an opportunity for us to 

recognize the significant contributions these professional men 

and women continue to play in designing the future of our 

province and for making sure our citizens can get to the vital 

services they need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that this Assembly recognize Engineering 

and Geoscience Week and the dedicated professionals for their 

innovative and creative contributions to our province. Thank 

you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

Strong Kids Campaign 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last month I 

had the pleasure of attending the annual general meeting for the 

YMCA [Young Men’s Christian Association] and they 

highlighted the Strong Kids campaign. Every year the YMCA 

Strong Kids campaign raises funds to provide financial 

assistance to children and families for participating in the 

YMCA programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I would like to acknowledge this great 

program which ensures the YMCA activities are accessible to 

everyone in the community. Through participation in these 

programs, families are able to take advantage of health and 

fitness programs to live healthy lives. Children and teens can 

also attend camps to acquire social and leadership skills, 

after-school literacy training, and vocational training. On 

average, one in four children coming into the YMCA requires 

financial assistance to join and stay in programs which benefit 

themselves immensely. 

 

This great program is sustained through generous donations 

from residents within the community. Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

that this Assembly recognize the YMCA Strong Kids campaign 

and its ability to provide programs in a safe and healthy 

environment so many of our children, teens, and families can 

benefit from this. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Agreement with IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan are looking for answers with the Sask Party’s 

IPAC [International Performance Assessment Centre for 

geologic storage of CO2] cover-up. From day to day the story 

changes with new facts and complications revealed. First the 

minister clearly told the Crowns committee last June there was 

a contract in place. She referred to a contract 52 times in two 

meetings, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that no contract existed. 

 

Recently she told an investigative reporter she had been told 

prior to those committee meetings that there wasn’t a contract. 

But yesterday the minister’s new claim was that she didn’t 

know when she’d learned that there wasn’t a contract — a fact 

that the MNP investigation had clearly found well over a year 

ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public deserves answers. Was the minister 

negligent in her responsibility as minister, or did she knowingly 

provide misleading statements? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The MNP report calls the agreement a 

contract. The university calls the agreement a contract. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Those aren’t the only misleading 

statements made by this minister during this cover-up, Mr. 

Speaker. The minister testified . . . 

 



2506 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

The Speaker: — I would caution the member to choose his 

words wisely and not to impugn the honour of a member of this 

House. I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It gets tricky when the facts are one 

thing, statements are another thing. But the minister testified to 

the Crowns committee last year, making claims that value for 

money wasn’t an issue. She claimed that it wasn’t about dollars, 

that it was about process. Those claims in committee have been 

exposed as incorrect. Now the minister has been charged . . . 

changed her answer and has shared that she was aware there 

was waste, that they were paying too much. She also stated that 

she knew that when she was testifying in committee, when she 

was saying something entirely different. 

 

The facts being one thing, her statements being another, Mr. 

Speaker, you can understand why the people of this province 

are confused. How is this anything but deliberate, misleading 

statements to the legislature and the people of this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I have cautioned the member in the use of his 

words and the word deliberate. I would ask that he withdraw 

that remark. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Withdraw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I withdraw the remark. 

 

The Speaker: — Did the member say he was withdrawing that 

remark? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — That’s correct. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So my question would be, why are the 

facts one thing and the minister’s statements another? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that there was an agreement, an arrangement between the 

University of Regina, Royal Dutch Shell, and the Government 

of Saskatchewan to do some work on carbon capture and 

sequestration. We know that under that agreement, the 

University of Regina was to manage the money and the 

personnel to start up the company, IPAC-CO2. We know that 

under that arrangement and the management of the U of R 

[University of Regina] that some of their employees did not 

follow the U of R processes. Through those employees, a 

sole-source contract was entered into. The U of R 

acknowledged publicly that they were managing the funds at 

that time and they were managing the personnel. 

 

The gentleman involved, Dr. Wilson, has stated publicly it was 

his decision, that he made it and the reasons why. We know that 

it was sole-sourced. We know that there was a conflict of 

interest while it was under management of the U of R. We also 

know that once IPAC incorporated and a board was put into 

place, actions were taken immediately to find out where 

everything had gone and what happened. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, getting information on this 

file has been like pulling teeth. The Sask Party has tried to 

brush this problem under the rug and deflect responsibility. We 

see some of that here today, instead of providing answers and 

accountability that’s deserved by Saskatchewan people. And 

the more the minister talks, the more the disturbing leak of 

information continues. Yesterday the minister revealed in her 

scrum that CVI [Climate Ventures Inc.], the for-profit company 

that the Sask Party funded with taxpayers’ dollars the start-up 

of, also has contracts with Crown corporations. That’s new 

information that wasn’t revealed to the Crowns committee or to 

reporters who have been asking questions for a long time on 

this file. 

 

To the minister: which Crowns have contracts or had contracts 

with CVI? How much were they for? Did dollars flow on 

handshakes or contracts? Were they sole-sourced, and has there 

been any problems reported? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Actually it was this minister that 

initiated a search throughout government to see if there was 

contracts with a company called ClimbIT because it’s owned by 

the same gentleman that has Climate Ventures Inc. So there are 

three contracts within the Crowns. One is with SaskTel; the 

contract is for $22,914. It was let through an RFP [request for 

proposal] process. There is two contracts with SaskPower. To 

date, one, $15,000 plus taxes, has flowed and the other contract, 

$13,950, has flowed. Both were sole-sourced because they’re 

under the threshold of $25,000. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is a cover-up, plain 

and simple. It started with a slow leak of disturbing 

information. Misleading statements have been repeatedly made, 

unacceptable conflicts of interest have been revealed by 

investigation, and management of IPAC is saying the 

handshake deal led to unboxed, unneeded equipment, and 

mostly waste, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party continues to ignore every 

opportunity they’ve had to provide answers and accountability. 

Will the minister reverse her course of action and once and for 

all call on the Provincial Auditor to fully investigate and review 

this IPAC cover-up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the U of R has fully 

acknowledged that they were managing the funds and the 

personnel at that time. The person who decided to enter this 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2507 

contract has fully acknowledged that it was his decision.  

 

But you know, it’s interesting that this is more about a political 

hopeful, quite frankly a leader hopeful, because when in 

committee he asked me, he asked me which individuals were 

involved. He asked me for the names. Quite frankly I did not 

say that publicly in committee, but I told him that in private I 

would tell him who the names were, who the people at the U of 

R were. He never bothered to find out. He never bothered to ask 

me after. 

 

In committee he can talk about . . . And you know why? 

Because they were choices by the U of R. And all he wants is to 

send out a perception that there’s a cover-up when time and 

time again, myself as the minister and the previous minister has 

given him the information. And he has absolutely ignored that. 

He knows money isn’t missing. He knows where the money 

went. He knows that it was an overpriced contract. He knows it 

was a sole-source contract. He knows there was a conflict of 

interest. He knows all of that happened under the management 

of the U of R. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company Bus Routes 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, for many Saskatchewan 

people, especially seniors, travelling on STC [Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company] is important. They attend their 

medical appointments in the city. They go shopping. They visit 

friends and family. What is outrageous is that the Sask Party 

government is cutting bus routes so they can pay for their 

priorities like three more politicians. 

 

On routes to Lanigan, Blaine Lake, Eastend, there will be no 

STC service. One senior from Holdfast wrote to the paper and 

said she’s been left stranded. To the minister: why are these 

people being told to hitchhike to their medical appointments? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, STC is a public transport company that offers a good 

service around the province. Mr. Speaker, having said that, the 

subsidy for STC back 10 years ago was $1.6 million. As of this 

year, Mr. Speaker, the subsidy will be $10 million. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a huge increase in subsidy. 

 

What we need to do, through the board of directors and through 

management of STC, is look at routes and cost savings in the 

corporation. Three routes were looked at, Mr. Speaker, the three 

that were mentioned. They had an average ridership per trip of 

two people or less, Mr. Speaker. That’s running a bus for a 

whole route for one or two people per trip, Mr. Speaker. It also 

did some courier service. But, Mr. Speaker, it was far from 

making money. They were certainly losing a lot of money. We 

have moved forward with STC to eliminate those routes, Mr. 

Speaker, because we don’t feel it affects one or two passengers 

per trip. 

 

As far as the courier service, Mr. Speaker, we know that there 

 

are private courier services in the province that will pick up that 

business. And we certainly hope that other individuals that want 

to cover off that service that STC was providing would pick up 

those routes, Mr. Speaker, and fill in that void. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, that’s interesting. The 

president of Gravelbourg Chamber of Commerce made it very 

clear: there are more people using the route than the minister 

says. So to find out, he emailed STC. They said they would not 

hand over the numbers due to a commercial sensitivity. Really, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will the minister provide the president of the chamber with the 

information they requested on the passenger numbers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the numbers are very 

clear. On one of the routes, there is an average of one person 

per trip over the last five years. On two other routes, there’s an 

average of two people per trip over the last five years. Mr. 

Speaker, those are the numbers that STC has provided publicly, 

Mr. Speaker. And when you look at the company, we are 

providing a service that is certainly well-used and appreciated 

throughout the province. 

 

There is no public transport system that doesn’t have a subsidy. 

We know that public transportation systems in Regina and 

Saskatoon have huge subsidies and so does STC. Having said 

that, all those public transport companies, Mr. Speaker, look for 

efficiencies. These are three routes that is not an easy decision 

for STC or the government to make. But, Mr. Speaker, to keep 

the subsidy in control — up at $10 million — tough decisions 

have to be made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, for small 

businesses in rural Saskatchewan, STC shipping has been 

useful and affordable. Private sector options are double the cost. 

The cost increase could kill small businesses, and farmers will 

have fewer options for parts that they need to fix their 

machinery. To the Minister: why is the Sask Party failing to 

deliver for the people of rural Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, in a growing 

province there are courier services that will cover off many of 

those routes, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have any trouble with that. 

But it’s interesting that the member would sound so incensed in 

why this government would back away from rural 

Saskatchewan. Well it certainly hasn’t. Because under the NDP 

in the 1990s, they shut down 13 routes in rural Saskatchewan 

— 13 routes. And he sounds so incensed that this government, 

raising the subsidy of $10 million, has eliminated three routes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 



2508 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

Rent Increases for Tenants 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday we learned that the Sask Party’s plan for affordable 

housing is completely useless. In a city with the rental vacancy 

rate hovering around 1 per cent, affordable housing is simply 

not a priority for this government. Tenants at a building in 

Regina received notice for a huge increase in their rent. One of 

the increases is jumping by $520; that’s 77 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that kind of rent increase is completely 

unaffordable, especially to a person who is living on a fixed 

income. To the Minister: why does the Sask Party have no plan 

for the middle-class and working families who are being hit 

hard by rent increases that almost double their monthly living 

costs? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

acknowledge that this is a difficult situation that’s going to 

impact these individuals at the building that was identified in 

the media yesterday. Some of these are long-term residents, Mr. 

Speaker, and this is their home. A sudden change of this nature 

would be very stressful for anyone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the landlord in that particular case is a member of 

the Saskatchewan Rental Housing Industry Association. We 

encourage all tenants to take advantage of their tenant 

assistance program which they have. In addition, Mr. Speaker, 

with respect to this particular situation, the director of the 

Office of Residential Tenancies will be meeting personally with 

these tenants tomorrow, and he’s also been in close contact with 

the association. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on this matter I’m prepared to meet with the 

affected tenants after question period with my colleague, the 

Minister of Social Services, to talk about the issue and see what 

can be done to help these particular individuals. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this Minister’s sympathy is cold 

comfort for these people who are trying to find a place . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And they laugh. Look at them laugh 

about this. Their rent’s going up by 77 per cent and they laugh 

about it, Mr. Speaker. They have no plan for affordable housing 

in this province, and they tweaked a rule to allow for six 

months notice for rent increase. And that notice might as well 

say eviction because that’s what it really is all about. And that’s 

shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Other provinces have a plan to stop this kind of outrageous rent 

increases. It’s about rent controls, and that’s the kind of plan we 

need in a modern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the tenants of 

Robinson Street building are here today. They are petitioning 

the government to stop these outrageous increases and help 

them stay in their homes. Some have lived in that building, and 

as the minister has identified, for over 30 years. Will the 

minister do the right thing and institute rent controls to stop 

gouging renters here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

made it perfectly clear we’re not going to institute rent controls 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we formed government in 2007 landlords 

were only required to provide a three-month notice for rent 

increase. In 2008 we recognized that there were pressures on 

the rental market and the legislation was not adequate. So in 

response, Mr. Speaker, we increased the notice required for rent 

increases to six months. We further amended the legislation in 

2012 to increase the notice period to 12 months, Mr. Speaker, 

the highest in Canada, unless the landlord belongs to an 

approved association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan rental housing association was 

chosen specifically for their code of conduct, their code of 

ethics, and their tenant assistance program. When a tenant 

contacts the association, they will attempt to bring the two sides 

together in respect to the rent increases. And if that doesn’t 

work, Mr. Speaker, they’ll assist the tenant with finding other 

accommodations or other programs. And we’re confident that 

that program will be of great assistance to encourage the parties 

to get together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, Mr. Speaker, as 

the minister talks about what’s happening across Canada, we 

know that 80 per cent — 80 per cent — of Canadians live with 

some form of rent control under all stripes of political parties. 

And that’s true, and that’s what should be happening here in 

Saskatchewan. And they know the tweaking they’ve done with 

rent control laws in Saskatchewan just aren’t getting the job 

done, and they don’t work, and they leave people out in the 

cold. And rent control is something that we need now to stop 

the slow, painful, inescapable eviction notices that in fact these 

people are facing. 

 

Without rent control, outrageous $500-a-month increases like 

this have become the norm in too many of our communities. 

And that’s simply unacceptable and the government should be 

ashamed it has nothing to offer these tenants to protect them 

from being gouged. 

 

Why does the minister sit on his hands when he could be 

putting in rent controls to help tenants afford the basics and stay 

in their homes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to differ with my 

friend opposite. This rent increase is an exception to the rule. 

The rent increases that we’ve been seeing across the province 

have been more in the 3 to 4 per cent range. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve already said we’re not going to consider 

rent controls. And even the New Democrats acknowledge that 

rent controls didn’t work. Mr. Speaker, in their 2007 housing 

report, it’s quoted as saying rent controls would be a 

disincentive for investment, and rent controls create uncertainty 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2509 

that will lead to a decline in the housing availability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rent controls are a disincentive to invest in 

existing housing stock, and they’re a disincentive to invest in 

new housing stock, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Funding for Universities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under the Sask 

Party’s watch, the mood at our province’s universities has 

become quite depressing. Because of the Sask Party 

government’s funding decisions, the talk now is of layoffs, job 

cuts, reduced programs, Mr. Speaker, as well as increased 

tuition. 

 

But with the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, it’s always somebody 

else’s fault. They will never accept blame. We heard today, Mr. 

Speaker, from the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] with respect to the IPAC 

cover-up, actually suggesting it’s the NDP’s fault that the 

situation has occurred the way it has, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: why, Mr. Speaker, will he not 

admit that it is his government that has had a central role in 

creating the financial mess at our universities here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member 

opposite and I can advise the House that this government has 

never in fact reduced or frozen funding at either university or at 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology]. Mr. Speaker, in fact our government has 

increased it and has increased it by well over 40 per cent since 

we’ve formed government. The same cannot be said for other 

provinces. British Columbia announced in their budget that they 

will cut funding to post-secondary institutions by some $46 

million over the next three years. In Quebec, universities are 

being forced to cut $124 million by April. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the universities are an important asset in this 

province. They’re responsible for the economic development in 

this province. We regard them as economic drivers. And in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, they’re responsible for a lot of the research and 

innovation that takes place in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the University of 

Saskatchewan. It was this government that broke its election 

promise to properly fund the Health Sciences Building. It was 

this government, Mr. Speaker, that forced nearly $100 million 

of debt onto the university’s books and which has caused the 

financial problems at the University of Saskatchewan. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, that has tightened the financial picture on campus, 

and we’re seeing layoffs. We’re seeing programs eliminated, 

Mr. Speaker, and we are seeing the belt being tightened at the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the Minister of Advanced Education: will he 

admit that his decision, his government’s decision to force 

nearly $100 million of debt onto the university’s books, Mr. 

Speaker, is the cause of the problems that the University of 

Saskatchewan is now experiencing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we are pleased with what 

is taking place at the University of Saskatchewan with regard to 

the Academic Health Sciences Building. This government has 

provided in excess of $200 million for that process. The 

university has borrowed an additional $70 million of their 

money for an investment on the D and E wings of over a 

quarter of a billion dollars to date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will work with the university with regard to 

the completion of the changes necessary to A and B wings. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have never said no to a request from the 

university with regard to the Academic Health Sciences 

Building. We have continued to work with them so that they 

can ensure that construction goes ahead. I toured the facility last 

week and, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that they are 

making good progress. D wing is in the process of being 

occupied, and E wing is well on under construction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have a sad record of what 

they have done with regard to post-secondary education. We’ll 

take no advice from them on how post-secondary education 

ought to be funded in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask. Party’s election promise 

was not to force $80 million of debt onto the university for the 

Health Sciences Building. Their promise was to complete the 

project, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister says he is committed to funding the health 

sciences project, but he won’t put that in writing with the 

University of Saskatchewan. He won’t do that, Mr. Speaker, 

because he does not want that liability showing up on the 

province’s books. He wants it to show up on the university’s 

books, Mr. Speaker, in order to make the provincial budget look 

better than it actually is. 

 

Will the Minister of Advanced Education admit, will he admit 

that the nearly $100 million of debt was forced onto the 

University of Saskatchewan’s books in order to make the 

provincial books look better than they actually are? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

looking for some admissions. There ought to be some 

admissions coming from the members on that side of the bench: 

1993-94, minus 2.5 per cent reduction; ’94-95, minus 4 per cent 

reduction; ’95-96, zero per cent; ’96-97, zero per cent; ’97-98, 



2510 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

minus point one — that’s a lot of years in a row with no 

growth, no expansion, nothing whatever to cover the costs that 

were there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the late . . . just before forming government, 

they could have built the Academic Health Sciences Building 

for approximately $120 million. They didn’t do that. While we 

waited for them to do something over there, the costs of that 

project more than doubled. Mr. Speaker, that government, when 

they were in government, ought to apologize for how they 

handled things. It is an embarrassment to the province. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that is fixing, changing, and 

repairing the things that they left behind. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party simply won’t 

admit when it’s made a mistake and when it’s broken an 

election promise. They won’t admit that it was a mistake to 

cancel the film employment tax credit. The Minister of CIC 

won’t admit that there were mistakes made about the cover-up 

of IPAC. And now this minister won’t admit what the true 

motive was to push nearly $100 million of debt onto the 

universities’ books, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s look at the University of Regina. Here we also see huge 

cuts taking place, Mr. Speaker. There’s talk of sessional 

lecturers being reduced in great numbers. Sessional lecturers 

provide a huge amount of the undergraduate education, but 

under this Sask Party government, sessional lecturers are being 

eliminated at a great number. 

 

My question to the Advanced Education minister: what does he 

have to say to the sessional lecturers at the U of R who have 

been contributing faithfully to the University of Regina 

community but now will be receiving their pink slips in the 

mailbox? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the people at U of R or 

anybody else ought to look back and look at what took place 

during their government: 1993-94 at the U of R, minus 1.3; 

’94-95, minus 4 per cent; ’97-98, minus point six per cent. And 

you know what else they did, Mr. Speaker? They had the nerve 

to say to the universities, both universities, we are going to 

charge you $15,000 to have a lawyer from Regina, Harold 

MacKay, go out and help you learn to live on less money so 

you can do it. That’s the legacy that those people left behind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working with the universities. We value 

the contribution that they make to the people of this province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to ensure that the Academic 

Health Sciences Building gets finished. We are working with 

the university. We have never said no. We have never turned 

down a request on that. We are continuing to work on that, 

unlike the members opposite who have a shabby, shabby 

record. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Crown Investments on 

her feet? 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce 

an order for a special committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for Crown Investments has 

asked for leave to present an order for special committees. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Traffic Safety 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That a special committee on traffic safety be appointed in 

accordance with rule no. 150(1) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

to conduct an inquiry on matters related to improving 

traffic safety and reducing fatalities by examining the 

dominant factors that cause traffic collisions in the 

province: impaired driving, distracted driving, excessive 

speed, intersection safety, and wildlife collisions; as well 

as education and public awareness issues related to traffic 

safety; and 

 

That the said committee shall hold public hearings to 

receive presentations from interested individuals and 

groups, and report its recommendations to the Assembly 

by August 30th, 2013; and further 

 

That members Hickie, Wilson, Cox, Parent, Steinley, 

Chartier, and Vermette be appointed to the said 

committee. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It has been moved by the Minister of 

Crown Investments: 

 

That a special committee on traffic safety be appointed in 

accordance with rule 150(1) of the Rules and Procedures 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to conduct an 

inquiry on matters related to improving traffic safety and 

reducing fatalities by examining the dominant factors that 

cause traffic collisions in the province: impaired driving, 

distracted driving, excessive speed, intersection safety, 

and wildlife collisions; as well as education and public 

awareness issues related to traffic safety; and 

 

That the said committee shall hold public hearings to 

receive representations from interested individuals and 

groups, and report its recommendations to the Assembly 

by August 30, 2013; and further 

 

That members Hickie, Wilson, Cox, Parent, Steinley, 

Chartier, and Vermette be appointed to the said 

committee. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? All in favour, say aye. 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2511 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All opposed, say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Carried. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 85 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure I’m 

thrilled to rise to speak to this bill today. It’s a massive bill 

that’s been introduced right at the end of the last portion of the 

session in December, and really only a scant three or four 

legislative days ago. And yet we’re still reeling from the impact 

of this bill and the depth of it, the breadth of it, and the impact 

it’s going to have on working people in Saskatchewan. So this 

is an important bill, a very important bill — likely the most 

important bill of this Legislative Assembly or this session. And 

we’re very concerned about the impact of the bill on the various 

people that it will impact, and quite frankly it’s the working 

people of Saskatchewan that appear to be under attack here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When the minister introduced the bill back in December, 

December 5th, he did a number of things when he introduced 

the bill. And I guess, you know, he thanked the people that he 

had consulted with, a list of various organizations. He also 

indicated some of the main provisions that he felt are important 

in the bill. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t 

indicate why these changes were needed, and I think that’s 

something that working people are very concerned about, is 

where is the motive for these kind of sweeping changes to the 

labour laws of Saskatchewan. 

 

We understand, I think, there’s over 12 bills that are being 

affected. It’s a massive overhaul. And you know, it’s a kind of 

governance style that we see being used by the federal 

government these days as well where you pack as much as you 

possibly can into one bill; you limit the amount of examination 

that’s available by the public, by the legislators. And when you 

see 12 bills being amended here when in fact they should all be 

treated separately so that there’s adequate time to debate these 

bills, adequate time to analyze the impact. 

 

And I think you well know, Mr. Speaker, the difference one 

word can make in any piece of legislation could be significant. 

And we see that in the court challenges that we see in various 

pieces of legislation, for example the recent Whatcott decision 

when words were being examined to determine whether they 

were in fact hatred. These are complex matters, and often it’s 

one word that makes a difference. And I will take some time in 

my words today to indicate some of those words that are 

particularly troubling and have significant impact. 

 

The other thing that we didn’t see in this legislation is 

something that’s outstanding business for this government, and 

that’s to fix the mess they made with the essential services Act. 

We know they’ve been mandated by the courts to do something 

about it and they simply have not taken the proper time and the 

attention that that correction deserves and is required. And it’s 

very disappointing that this minister chose to ignore the order 

of the court to fix that legislation and to defer it in lieu of 

introducing an ominous or omnibus or ominous piece of 

legislation that threatens working people across the province 

without any consultation with them and without any sort of 

regard for the impact on them and their families and their lives 

and their daily lives, and certainly without any motivation that’s 

apparent. 

 

And even if you’ve looked at the original document that was 

tabled in May last year, it’s full of legalese; it’s full of technical 

jargon. It doesn’t speak to any of the ordinary working public. 

It’s really something that you can tell is designed for lawyers to 

read, and certainly the minister is a lawyer. It’s a very legalistic 

document. And it’s a difficult thing for ordinary working 

people to get their heads around. And I would challenge many 

of the members here to see how many have actually read 

through that document from cover to cover and could tell us 

what’s in there. 

 

Now some will, some will. But I would again acknowledge the 

people with their hands up are people who have a legal 

background. So I think that just proves my point, Mr. Speaker, 

that this a document that’s intended, a very technical document 

that was intended for people with certain skills and expertise, 

and it wasn’t one that was meant to be a valid and a credible 

consultative document with the working people of 

Saskatchewan. So that’s where the problem started. 

 

First of all, they ignore the essential services requirements that 

were laid out by the court, and then they decided to smoosh 

together — and I don’t know how you would spell that word to 

the Hansard people — but mash together 12 pieces of 

legislation that . . . Well maybe smoosh works, Mr. Speaker. 

But at any rate they managed to, maybe if I think of my 

Mixmaster, they mangled 12 pieces of legislation that should all 

be treated separately, that had valid reasons and history — 100 

years of history for why they came into being — and they’re 

now presented to us in this bill, The Saskatchewan Employment 

Act. 

 

So just a little bit about what is in the bill. Normally what I like 

to do when I’m rising in the legislature to speak to bills is take a 

look at the provisions of the changes that are being proposed. 

Of course I can’t even possibly begin to do that today because 

of the sheer volume of changes and the length of the document. 

I don’t think it would . . . Well it would just take too long, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m wanting to make sure that we can move 

along the debates as we go along. 

 

Certainly I will comment on a number of the key provisions 

that we’re concerned about, but first of all just a bit of an 



2512 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

overview about the type of changes that are being contemplated 

by The Saskatchewan Employment Act. 

 

First of all, we’re looking at, it’s a consolidation of 12 different 

Acts: The Assignment of Wages Act, The Building Trades 

Protection Act, The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Act, The Employment Agencies Act, The Fire Departments 

Platoon Act, The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Act, 

The Labour Management Dispute (Temporary Provisions) Act, 

The Labour Standards Act, The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act, The Radiation Health and Safety Act, The Trade 

Union Act — which is the grandfather of all labour legislation, 

first in North America — and The Wages Recovery Act. 

 

As you can see even by their names, Mr. Speaker, this is a wide 

range of bills that are being amalgamated and put together in 

one Act. And I think the unique identity of each of these pieces 

of legislation is being lost just by the very fact that they will no 

longer exist separately. Yes, there are always opportunities for 

efficiencies in legislation and there may be some overlap in 

some of these bills. That to me should have been the focus of 

this review. But I think this minister has gone way, way beyond 

that kind of review. 

 

So the new bill is organized in 10 parts. The first part deals with 

preliminary matters which are typical you would find in this 

type of legislation. The second one deals with employment 

standards. So this is now the sweeping level of standards that 

are being applied to all workers. 

 

First of all, in the scope itself, it does maintain an exemption for 

agricultural workers in the Act and it’s going to move all the 

other exemptions to the regulations. So here we have right at 

the very beginning of this bill a suggestion that exemptions will 

be dealt with in the regulations. And that’s something that’s 

been identified as of great concern to many people who’ve 

reviewed the bill, is that much of the substance of the bill isn’t 

there. And that’s a huge concern. 

 

What we’re seeing is that this bill defers a lot of the substantive 

decisions, a lot of the substantive policy, to the regulation 

portion of the legislative suite. And you know, Mr. Speaker, 

what happens when you put everything in regulations is that it 

escapes scrutiny. It can be passed by the executive arm of 

government and we do not see any review by the legislature nor 

by any of the affected people because it’s simply not required. 

The Executive Council can pass regulations without having any 

public review, and that’s not acceptable. 

 

This is the kind of thing where you’re dealing with people’s 

lives, their work lives, and the impact on them and their 

families. And they’re not going to have an opportunity to 

review any of this because it’s going to be found in the 

regulations. Plus, when questions are asked of the minister in 

terms of what’s going to happen, he basically says, well we 

won’t know until we see the regulations. 

 

So it’s a way for the minister to avoid the in-depth answers that 

are required so that people understand what’s in this bill. And 

it’s not just one instance. It comes up over and over and over 

again in this piece of legislation. That has people very worried, 

Mr. Speaker, and I’ll get into some of their specific concerns 

later. 

In the employment standards portion of the bill, which is part II, 

you can see there’s a change to things like overtime which 

allows modified work arrangements to exist. This is something 

that has been highlighted as a concern for many people, many 

workers, and there are a fairly long list of changes there — two 

types of work arrangements; permits are needed for longer 

work periods without a day of rest. And they’re incorporating 

firefighter hours of work provisions into this part which is one 

of the things that has to be done if this omnibus bill is to 

succeed for all the different types of work situations that it’s 

purporting to apply to. 

 

Also in the employment standards portion, there’s some things 

that are interesting and I think will be welcome to workers, and 

the government has certainly touted this one, the fact that you 

can get a leave for organ donation, which is a significant 

change, and leave to attend citizenship ceremonies for one day. 

 

So those are the types of things, I think that, you know, 

generally the public would not have a huge issue with also 

lowering qualifying period for maternity and parental and 

adoption leave. We are told there’s no changes to annual 

holidays or public holiday provisions and that notice provisions 

have not changed as well. 

 

We are seeing a change to the minimum wage in that it’s 

indexed to the CPI [consumer price index]. That’s something 

that the minister has explained. And the payment of wages, the 

electronic payment of wages, that’s something I think that’s just 

getting with the times, and it certainly happens in other 

jurisdictions. So we’ll be interested to see how that works — 

things like pre-paid cards. So it’s a novel way of dealing with 

that. 

 

We’re seeing all kinds of other changes in terms of employment 

standards. Equal pay, discriminatory actions fines, time banks, 

and The Wages Recovery Act are all dealt with in there. In the 

summary that was provided in terms of part III and part V, 

which is occupational health and safety and radiation health and 

safety, there’s a number of requirements that are changed in 

there. Prime contractors, in terms of requiring designation of 

prime contractors on multiple employer work sites. So we’ll see 

how that works out in those areas where there are multiple 

employer work sites. 

 

A number of penalties are being increased, which is appropriate 

when you’re doing a consolidation and review of this sort. 

Reimbursement for WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] 

expenditures, from the WCB on expenditures on industrial 

safety programs. And certainly we were talking about in the 

context of even motorcycle safety that when people can take 

programs, it’s important for them to be able to reflect that in the 

fees that they pay. 

 

So we see where, if there’s industrial safety programs, there can 

be a reimbursement and that seems to be appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker. And again, without going into detail on all the 

legislative changes, I’m merely highlighting some of the 

changes that this bill is attempting to deal with. 

 

Part IV is the appeals process, and there seems to be an attempt 

at streamlining here in a single avenue for appeals. So that’s 

something that we will be watching very closely. Part VI is 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2513 

probably one of the more interesting parts. It’s the labour 

relations section of the new bill. And there’s a number of 

requirements, onerous requirements here that are being imposed 

on trade unions and workers’ unions to make things more 

complicated for them, for sure, but certainly changes that 

weren’t looked for or asked for. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The decertification provisions, there’s new grounds in there that 

I’m going to speak to later. And then voluntarily recognizes 

unions, we’ll see how that portion works out. At least secret 

ballots are continued in terms of union votes, and then there’s 

some other portions on negotiation of agreements and first 

collective agreements, also on last offer votes, union security 

and deduction of union dues, and technological change. 

 

Other areas that are represented in this part is the duty of fair 

representation, fines of union members. And one of the big 

changes here is the removal of the legislative authority of the 

union’s right to fine its members for crossing a picket line. 

That’s a big change for unions and I think something that is of 

grave concern to them as it takes away some of their power to 

maintain their rights in striking. 

 

There’s other ones that haven’t been changed. A number of 

areas — fire departments, health sector, Labour Relations 

Board, all of these are facing some changes as well. Part VII, 

essential services, is just a place marker right now and the 

ministry has indicated that they’re waiting guidance from the 

Court of Appeal. So once this is heard from the Court of 

Appeal, that’s apparently when they’re going to be prepared to 

make some changes based on the court’s decision. 

 

So those are just some of the highlights that were provided to 

various parties at the technical briefing last December. And so 

that was a portion, or I guess a summary of some of the areas 

that are being affected. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, this is 

something I could speak to at great length, just on the actual 

changes themselves, to let the public know and the people that 

are following this bill sort of work through each of those 

changes. But simply it’s too vast of a scope to even attempt to 

try and get through all that. So again a reminder, and I think this 

was something that we were hoping to find in the Act but 

there’s nothing in it on the new essential services legislation. 

And we still are waiting for that despite the fact that the court 

decision was some time ago. 

 

So on May 2nd when the minister introduced the consultation 

— quote, I’ll put that in quotes — “consultation” document, the 

immediate concern was that he only provided 90 days for 

people to review this. We’re heading into summer and we know 

that this is a highly technical document with a significant 

number of changes to 12 different pieces of legislation. And he 

provided the public and the working people of this province 90 

days to look at the changes for something nobody asked for, or 

at least the minister wasn’t telling us who asked for this. 

Although I think if you read his consultation paper, it’s obvious 

he consulted with a certain group of people because he kept 

saying, what we’ve “heard.” But he wouldn’t indicate in the 

paper who he heard it from. So that’s left as a bit of a mystery, 

although I think any sort of aware person could guess that this 

is not coming from the working people, but rather from the 

employer side. 

 

At any rate, our party and our caucus recognized that this 

consultation process was simply not going to work. And this 

fall our critic, the member from Saskatoon Centre, initiated a 

labour consultation tour. And in that tour our caucus visited a 

number of cities and towns in Saskatchewan and actually 

invited people to come out and talk about some of the concerns 

they had with the bill. And the most important thing I think was 

the fact that we actually gave people a voice and a sense that 

they were being consulted, which they were not feeling the love 

from the ministry in terms of their short time frame and the 

massive amount of changes that they were proposing. 

 

So there were a number of recommendations that came out of 

our review, and the categories that the review focused on were 

seven points. First of all, the importance of public consultation. 

That’s something that was overlooked by the government when 

they rammed through in 90 days a consultation process on a 

massive bill with sweeping changes that affects a lot of people. 

And again, one word change can have a significant effect, and 

we’re talking about a bill that is almost 100 pages long, Mr. 

Speaker. So that’s in itself is something that I think the working 

people of this province took as a direct insult from the ministry 

when they felt that they weren’t able to even be consulted on 

this change. 

 

The other thing that our consultations worked on was ensuring 

a balanced working environment. And this is something again 

that, as far as the public was aware and the workers in this 

province and I think many employers, Mr. Speaker, there is a 

balanced working environment. There wasn’t a cry for changes 

to this labour legislation. So what’s motivating this government 

to make those kinds of changes? Is it something that they’re 

interested in because they want to look out for workers? That’s 

not the message we’re getting, Mr. Speaker. It’s not the 

message we’re getting at all. 

 

The third point that our report focused on was the dangers of 

losing strong workplace legislation. As our critic has pointed 

out time and time again, these bills are the result of a hundred 

years of labour laws that came through our province’s history. 

They reflect the values of our public and of the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, the working public, but also employers and 

employees alike. 

 

There was a machine that was working, and if it isn’t broke, 

why would you fix it? That’s the question that kept coming up 

time and time again. What we were looking for, and what you 

would look for in any kind of labour reform, is the fourth point 

— positive changes that will work for working people. 

Working people are the backbone of our economy. And we 

know that, Mr. Speaker. And if you don’t have a place where 

they’re valued and safe and feeling that their work is important 

and that they’re recognized for that, then we are going to have 

issues that start to arise. And this bill does absolutely nothing to 

look out for positive changes that will work for working people. 

 

The fifth point that was highlighted in our tour was to take care 

of the most vulnerable workers. And something I’ve always 

thought, Mr. Speaker, about people who are represented by 

labour unions is that the ones that need them the most, the 

people that need labour unions the most, are those that don’t 



2514 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

have a union. And that’s why unions come about, Mr. Speaker, 

is because there are injustices. There are workers that are being 

taken advantage of and they are incredibly vulnerable. 

 

They’re usually young workers. And I can think of an example 

of my son who was working in a restaurant, in the kitchen in a 

restaurant, and when he wasn’t able to stay on after a three-hour 

shift, he was fired. And that was, he was expected to work for 

three hours, couldn’t stay on past that, and his employer fired 

him. Those kinds of things are unfair, and you can just see 

where the power imbalance exists, that where employers like 

that can take advantage of vulnerable workers. 

 

And that’s not what the role of government is, Mr. Speaker. 

The role of government is to take care of those people that are 

vulnerable because they don’t have a voice, and they don’t have 

the power that they need to be protected. 

 

The other point that we were looking for is to strengthen the 

unions and collective bargaining rights. Those are important 

values in our province, in the history of our province, and is 

something that I think Saskatchewanians can be proud of. And 

that was something that we felt if these bills needed to be 

changed — which we didn’t think they did, but in the event that 

they were — that something that should happen is that they 

should improve unions and the collective bargaining rights. 

 

And finally the last piece which is always important, and I think 

there’s no disagreement with this, is that it should strengthen 

the economy through workplace safety and training. So 

workplace safety and training, just like motorcycle training, all 

those things are things that increase people’s safety and reduces 

injury and the impact of injury on the workplace. 

 

So there’s a number of things that were identified and I would 

urge members opposite to have a look at the concerns that came 

out of the tour. There’s certainly information on our website 

that’s available. And it’s something I think that we 

demonstrated, that if you actually sit down and take the time to 

listen to what people have to say and give them a chance to 

voice their concerns, there actually can be value in that. 

 

We consulted with more than 700 people face to face and our 

Labour critic released his findings. They’re all available in the 

document. The report that was prepared and what our critic said 

is that we heard some common themes. The first is that 

workplaces in Saskatchewan have fairly balanced relationships. 

The balance is there. There was nothing to remove the balance. 

So again we’re not sure why the minister felt necessary to 

introduce these sweeping changes because what we heard is 

that there was already a balance there. And that is a 

contributing factor to our economy and I don’t think we can 

underestimate that, Mr. Speaker. Having a strong economy 

requires having a strong and a competent workforce and a 

workforce that feels that its rights are being protected. 

Throwing that off balance with this reckless overhaul will have 

chilling effects on people and on our economy. 

 

There’s concerns that were raised from working parents and the 

changes to the employment standards will hurt the work-family 

balance. And that’s something again that government should be 

concerned about, is the rights of families and that the balance is 

there for them in relation to work and their family balance. 

Overtime regulation changes, we don’t even know what they’re 

going to look like but we know that working families are 

concerned about that. Overtime is a real challenge for people 

who are trying to raise kids and deal with all the demands of the 

family needs. 

 

There are other comments that our Labour critic made. He 

indicated that workers and employers believe that details 

matter. And some of the ideas in the government’s discussion 

paper, it was identified that they’re just fearmongering, like 

asking if public holidays or vacation days should be rolled back 

when in fact those changes weren’t there. So there were a lot of 

comments in the consultation document that never got reflected 

in the legislation. So again, why? Why were those questions 

asked if this government had no intention of making those 

changes? Were they just hoping to raise the level of fear to the 

point that when they didn’t make those changes, people would 

feel somewhat relaxed, and yet realizing that the other changes 

will have a significant impact on the work-life balance and also 

on the workplace itself? 

 

Okay, so that was kind of the report that our Labour critic 

submitted. And we’ve continued to ask this government to 

basically slow down the process because that’s one of the 

biggest problems we have right now is that the urgency and the 

speed with which this government is moving is simply not 

giving people who are concerned enough time to identify what 

the issues are and have a good look at what the true impact of 

the legislation’s going to be. 

 

We’re hearing a number of things that we need to be wary 

about, so I’m just going to highlight from some of the reports 

that we were able to get about the things that people are 

concerned about in The Saskatchewan Employment Act. 

 

First of all, it’s indicated that this is a bailout in terms of hours 

of rest between shifts. Now what happens is that the new Act 

details minimum periods of rest between shifts for workers with 

no collective agreement. So there’s no definition of emergency 

circumstances. It does set out that the required periods of rest 

do not apply in emergency circumstances. So we don’t know 

what emergency circumstances are, but we do know that 

periods of rest don’t apply. So that raises concern in the 

workers’ view, and is it just a way to force them to work for 

longer hours and is it only for the benefit of the employers? 

Who’s the benefit for for this provision? I think the conclusion 

is that it would be for the benefit of employers. 

 

The next concern that we see is the basic rules regarding hours 

of work. The Saskatchewan Employment Act sets out the basic 

rules for working people with no union regarding hours of 

work, and what it appears is that fewer workers will enjoy 

consecutive days off and many workers will not know if the 

protection exists until the government determines certain 

workplaces to be covered. Again we don’t have the detail we 

need to be able to do a proper analysis. It’s like signing a 

contract without reading the fine print, Mr. Speaker. So who is 

this going to benefit? I think any rational person would come to 

the conclusion that this is going to benefit employers. It’s not 

going to benefit working people. 

 

The next one — and I have a lot of these to bring up, Mr. 

Speaker, because this is a very important Act that’s changing a 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2515 

lot of people’s lives — the next one crossing the line. Labour 

law changes are taking us backwards. The effect of The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act is to take control out of the 

hands of working people and place the employers in a position 

to determine the rules they want to apply to the workers. 

There’s also power for employers to interfere with processes 

such as collective bargaining, strike votes in the internal 

workings of unions. And I’ll get into that in more detail later. 

 

These are fundamental changes that take us back decades. So 

the question again, why is this piece of legislation so unfair and 

so skewed against workers? There’s no input for workers now 

in decision making. The Saskatchewan Employment Act is 

changing the definition of employee and the result appears to 

be, and again we don’t know for sure, but that front-line 

workers will no longer have any input into policy development 

or budget discussions. And this is completely contrary to the 

lean principles that are being consistently referred to by this 

government as the appropriate way to work and have work 

being done in government workplaces. Why, why then, under 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act, are the voices of workers 

being silenced? 

 

Then the next question that we have to ask: what is overtime? 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act does not clearly set out that 

overtime must be paid to workers where daily hours of work 

exceed either eight or ten hours in the case of a modified work 

arrangement. There’s nothing there. So the question is: do 

workers have to work for longer hours for less pay? Is that 

happening, or not? And again the clarity is not there, and the 

questions are not being answered. 

 

There’s other issues that arise — divide and conquer. What’s 

happening here with The Saskatchewan Employment Act is we 

see them creating a divide in the workplace between those who 

provide direct supervision — and we’ll look very closely at that 

definition in a little while here — but those who provide direct 

supervision and then other workers in the crew. What exactly is 

direct supervision? We’re going to create two separate 

bargaining units. And the kind of problems that that is going to 

create is something that’s very, very concerning to a lot of 

workers. It’s going to take rungs out of the advancement ladder, 

it could limit access to overtime, and lend to other lost benefits 

including seniority and salary steps. 

 

[14:45] 

 

There’s other things in this document. The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act does nothing to address many problems 

identified with The Public Service Essential Services Act. And I 

mentioned that earlier, Mr. Speaker. We have been waiting and 

waiting for this government to get its act together on essential 

services. And that’s what this bill should have focused on, and 

we see that there’s nothing there at all. So when is it coming? 

How much longer is it going to take? 

 

But I think the biggest issue for, in this case, the SEIU-West 

[Service Employees International Union] is that there are going 

to be significant delays in bargaining. And this is, I think, one 

of the most important things. Because as you know, Mr. 

Speaker, delays in bargaining are not only difficult for the 

workers. It’s difficult for the public; it’s difficult for the 

employer. And anything that creates delays in bargaining is 

going to have a direct impact on the economy and on the 

working people and the lives of working people. So The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act does nothing to improve the 

collective bargaining experience. 

 

Currently the collective bargaining continues to be plagued 

with roadblocks and delays, and we see nothing in this Act to 

improve this. And in fact what it allows is for the employer to 

force the vote on the last offer, and then the minister can force a 

membership vote on the same last offer. This is not fair, Mr. 

Speaker. And again it’s obviously something that speaks in 

favour of the employer and it creates an imbalance that simply 

is not going to work. 

 

One of the things I want to address now is some of the specific 

issues that have been identified by, in this case, SGEU 

[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union]. 

And I think these are really important for the people to 

understand. So I’m going to go through these in some detail. 

 

As I said earlier, the problem with the bill itself in general is 

that it’s combining 12 pieces of labour legislation, and the 

stakeholders who have to go through this with a fine-tooth 

comb simply will not have enough time to do a thorough 

review. If this bill’s going to be pushed through at the end of 

this spring session, there just isn’t enough time for people to do 

a proper analysis when you look at the volume. 

 

And you know, it’s worth noting that when The Trade Union 

Act and The Labour Standards Act were last reviewed, it was a 

two-year process, Mr. Speaker. So what is the hurry? What is 

the motivation? Those are questions that we would like to get 

answers for, but we certainly haven’t been able to do so. The 

SGEU is urging the government just to slow down, take a 

breath and allow more in-depth analysis. The minister shut 

down recommendations. He gave them until March 1st. 

 

Last week was the last day for comments and, you know, we 

know that this government wants to push through this bill and 

see it go through at the end of this legislative session. So the 

recommendation again, and I think on behalf of these working 

people, our position as the opposition is to just step back a little 

bit, take some time, allow a proper and thorough analysis, do 

proper consultation, and ensure that these changes actually do 

make sense. And we don’t know who motivated these changes 

or why this government felt the need to introduce such a 

massive change, but we are concerned, especially when we see 

their track record in labour legislation to date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the question is, does this government support extending the 

time frame for review? Will this minister take a serious look at 

these time frames and just step back a little bit and give 

stakeholders an opportunity to fully analyze and comment on 

the proposed changes? I don’t think that’s too much to ask, Mr. 

Speaker. This is 100 years of legislation that we’re messing 

with here, and to give three months, it really doesn’t give any 

kind of time for these people to analyze it. Even if it’s 50 years 

of legislation or 20 years of legislation, it shouldn’t matter. The 

right amount of time needed is not three months, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s all the time that these people were given. 

 

One of the main issues that was identified by SGEU is the 

scope of union membership. Now in Canada we know that 



2516 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

employees are entitled to belong to a union generally, and rare 

exceptions are employees who actually exercise 

decision-making authority in setting management policy. And 

I’m going to talk a little bit about the ILO standards in relation 

to that, the International Labour Organization. But what we see 

in Canada generally is that employees are entitled to belong to a 

union if the union exists in the workplace, with some 

exceptional circumstances. And what we have in the current 

Saskatchewan trade union Act actually adheres to those 

principles, because under section 2 of the Saskatchewan trade 

union Act, 2(f)(i)(A), it defines somebody excluded as “a 

person whose primary responsibility is to actually exercise 

authority and actually perform functions that are of a 

managerial character.” 

 

And I’m emphasizing the word actually in this section, Mr. 

Speaker, because those are key words. It’s one word, but it’s 

critical to the definition itself. 

 

And the second person that’s excluded would be in section (B) 

of this section, “a person who is regularly . . .” And again I’m 

going to emphasize regularly because that’s a key word: “a 

person who is regularly acting in a confidential capacity with 

respect to the industrial relations of his or her employer.” 

 

There’s two key words there: regularly and confidential. 

 

What Bill 85 does is it goes way further than that in excluding 

employees from the union. And the result of that is depriving 

those employees from their right to freedom of association. And 

I will outline some of the ILO descriptions of how that’s 

inappropriate. 

 

Under Bill 85, let’s take a look at the new section and what it 

looks like. So what it says here is section 6-1(1)(h)(i)(A). And it 

says the following workers are excluded from belonging to a 

union: “a person whose primary responsibility is to exercise 

authority and perform functions that are of a managerial 

character.” 

 

So we lose the word actually and we have the word primary 

being substituted in that case. Then when we get to the second 

part of the definition where they’re talking about activities of a 

confidential nature, the subsection reads as follows: 

 

a person whose duties include [and I’m emphasizing 

include] activities of a confidential nature in matters 

relating to any of the following: 

 

(I) labour relations; 

(II) business strategic planning; 

(III) policy advice; [and] 

(IV) budget implementation or planning; 

 

The sheer scope of that section, Mr. Speaker, is breathtaking. 

When you look at it, you could see an employer saying anyone 

that’s involved in any of the lean training in any of the public 

workplaces could actually be excluded from the union. And the 

ability to make that kind of interpretation is not far-fetched at 

all, Mr. Speaker. And I think this is something that this minister 

really needs to reconsider and hopefully will accept 

amendments to that when we get into the stage where we need 

to look at this particular section. I think this is, for me, one of 

the scariest clauses in this legislation, is section 6-1(1)(h). 

 

And so the big change as we see in this section is that it said 

actually. It used to say actually exercising authority, actually 

performing functions. And now it says, their primary 

responsibility is to exercise authority and perform functions. 

 

These are the kinds of things that 200-page court decisions are 

written on, Mr. Speaker. These are wording changes that are 

very, very significant and I think to just brush it off and say oh 

no, this is just an overhaul and a modernization of language, is 

divisive. And it’s insidious because it attempts to give people a 

sense of calm where we know the unions are saying, wait a 

minute, Mr. Minister, this is something that’s going to 

significantly affect the shape, the look, the feel of workers’ 

labour unions in the workplace. 

 

And the other thing about activities of a confidential nature 

used to say they’re regularly acting in a confidential capacity 

and now it says their duties include activities of a confidential 

nature in policy advice, budget implementation, or planning. 

Before it had to be a regular part of their work, now it’s only 

included as part of their duties. So if in one afternoon of the 

year the employee is asked to provide feedback to the manager 

on some budget implications for their upcoming year, they 

could be effectively excluded from the union. 

 

What the paper says here is that new duties that will exclude 

employees from belonging to the union are vague and open to 

interpretation. Again it’s that problem with wording. So when 

we say policy advice, the Act describes policy advice. Well 

what does that mean? What kind of policy advice would 

exclude a union member from membership in their union? And 

it’s not an uncommon occurrence for an employee to make a 

recommendation about how the workplace should run. Is that 

policy advice? Is that something when they do that that an 

employer is now going to say, hey wait a minute here, under 

section 6-1, you are now in a confidential relationship and you 

no longer belong to the union. 

 

Now that simply can’t be the intention of the minister. I can’t 

believe that this ministry would intend to do that. But by having 

vague and open language in a legislative section, we have a real 

problem here, Mr. Speaker, because it can be interpreted that 

way and it’s open to employers to make that type of 

interpretation. And this is something that I think is 

inappropriate; it’s dangerous. And I’m hoping that the ministry 

and the minister will take this very seriously because that’s a 

concern that I think, if he doesn’t, he’s going to end up in court 

and we’re going to have to go through the whole process of 

re-establishing workers’ rights and the protections that they’re 

entitled to under our Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the 

freedom to assemble. 

 

Again the notion of, what does business strategic planning 

mean? You can be excluded if your duties include activities of a 

confidential nature relating to business strategic planning. Now 

that’s a wide open concept that could be construed as a part of 

the duties of many employees in many workplaces where — 

and this is something this government does — they encourage 

diverse groups of staff to engage in organizational strategic 

planning exercises. That’s a common activity in many 

workplaces and certainly in government workplaces across the 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2517 

board. 

 

So why is it, Mr. Speaker, that we have workers being excluded 

from the union for being part of those discussions? It simply 

doesn’t make any sense. And I think if you extend the 

definition to its logical conclusion, employers will be able to 

exclude people from the right to assemble, which is against the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

So we urge this ministry and this minister to slow down and 

take a close look at those types of definitions because they are 

loaded with danger. And I think the minister is just asking for 

all kinds of delays in collective bargaining, all kinds of delays 

in court actions which could be simply avoided if they would 

just slow down a little bit and take a closer look at some of 

these drafting problems that are being identified by the workers 

themselves. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, the International Labour Organization 

has a fairly extensive description, and I’m just going to refer to 

it, if I can find it. I know it’s in this package. Oh, yes. They 

have a document called Freedom of association: Digest of 

decisions and principles of the Freedom of Association 

Committee of the Governing Body of the ILO. And this is the 

2006 edition, so it’s a fairly recent edition. 

 

And what the ILO is saying is that these wide open types of 

exclusions will be a violation of our commitments under that 

organization. So we’re a member of that organization. This bill 

has some very clear problems when it comes to meeting our 

obligations to the International Labour Organization. 

 

The changes that could exclude greater numbers of employees 

from union membership could be seen as contrary to the 

principles of freedom of association. So according to ILO 

decisions — and this is a learned body that has considered a 

number of these issues — their decisions have said that 

managerial staff needs to be limited. It needs to be limited to 

persons who have the authority to appoint or dismiss, period. 

 

Management should not be such a broad definition as we find in 

this new Bill 85 where their primary responsibility is to 

exercise authority and perform functions of a managerial 

character. There’s all kinds of decisions and activities in a 

workplace that could fit under that definition. But the ILO is 

clear. Managerial staff should be limited to persons who have 

the authority to appoint or dismiss. When it comes to unions, it 

means whether you can hire or fire. That’s pretty 

straightforward, Mr. Speaker, so I’m not sure where the 

ministry missed that when they were doing the drafting of Bill 

85. It’s not there. It will be challenged, and it should be fixed. 

 

The other thing that the ILO has pointed out is that we should 

always avoid an excessively broad interpretation of the concept 

of worker of confidence. If the definition has the net effect of 

denying workers the right of association, that will limit trade 

union rights and in smaller enterprises could even prevent the 

establishment of a trade union, which is contrary to the 

principle of freedom of association. And we’ve seen time and 

time again employers using various tactics to avoid the 

formation of a union in their workplace, and this kind of 

legislation will facilitate that. 

 

So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask, who is asking for these 

changes? And that’s one of the concerns that the SGEU has 

pointed out in their paper that they provided. So again ILO has 

said managerial staff needs to be limited to persons who have 

the authority to appoint or dismiss, and I would encourage any 

of the people that are involved in the drafting of this bill or 

providing advice to the ministry to take those points seriously. 

And if they want to avoid court action on this, which will likely 

be forced if the government hammers this through, there’s time 

still to make the necessary amendments to bring the definitions 

that I’ve been referring to under the scope of what the 

International Labour Organization has set out as appropriate. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So I’m just putting this government on notice. If they want to 

make changes, now is the time. Ramming this bill through at 

this point in time is going to cause all kinds of problems. The 

SGEU’s paper says that this bill will exclude far more people 

from the benefits of union membership than other Canadian 

jurisdictions. It’s going way beyond what we see in other 

provinces and obviously it breaches the principle of freedom of 

association as set out by the International Labour Organization. 

We strongly urge, as the opposition, that this government revise 

that particular provision. Either the definition needs to be 

deleted because it’s overly broad, or just go back to the 

established definition that exists in the current trade union Act. 

It’s simple, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a big change, and it’s one I 

think that has raised the most concerns for organized workers in 

this province. 

 

And again, why do we need to be ahead of . . . or behind other 

jurisdictions is a better word. Why do we need to regress into 

this kind of language when other jurisdictions in Canada 

certainly haven’t even considered it? Why do we need to be 

regressive and go against the principles set out by the 

International Labour Organization? It simply doesn’t make 

sense. It’s not modernizing the workplace. It’s actually 

regressive language and regressive legislation. So we strongly 

urge the government to make some sort of review to amend the 

bill and make these changes so that they can avoid all the pain 

that’s going to exist if they insist on going ahead. 

 

The other issue that’s of considerable concern to the SGEU is 

the fragmentation of bargaining units. What happens here is 

that there are some changes under Bill 85 that will lead to all 

kinds of disruption and instability in workplaces because what 

it’s going do under — this is section 6-10(1) — it’s going to 

encourage and invite small groups of disgruntled employees to 

break away from their own bargaining unit. And I think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, if you’ve ever been involved in any 

organization, there always will be people who aren’t entirely 

happy with the way things are going. That’s a given. That’s 

human nature. That’s just the way it works. 

 

But to allow them under trade union law to break away without 

a large support from the larger organization and the larger 

membership is simply asking for trouble, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

At this point in time 45 per cent of the members of a bargaining 

unit has to show support for decertification. So it’s not even 50 

per cent; it’s only 45 per cent. And that’s a large enough 

number under the current law — which I don’t think anybody 

was complaining about — to get rid of or decertify or replace 



2518 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

an existing union. And then once that happens, all members 

have an opportunity to vote. So again democratic principles 

apply. And if only 45 per cent are unhappy, they have to call for 

a vote. The vote occurs and the majority have to rule. So we’re 

back to the principles of democracy. 

 

This change is anti-democratic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 

happens now is that a small portion, if they’re unhappy, can be 

carved out of the main unit. And as SGEU describes it, it’s an 

invitation to small numbers of disgruntled employees to disrupt 

the ongoing work of the union. And then the union’s going to 

have to spend time working on that and not representing their 

own members’ interests, for one, and as they see pockets of the 

dissension emerge from time to time in any union, as in any 

organization. 

 

So there’s ways for dissenting groups to make change within 

the union. But just deciding to walk away is not something that 

makes any sense at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The fracturing of 

these bargaining units are not only going to hurt unions — 

think about it; employers now are going to have to deal with 

two bargaining units where they used to deal with one — so it’s 

going to slow down and frustrate the whole collective 

bargaining process. And what if there’s 10 disgruntled units of 

five people? You want employers to have 5, 10 different types 

of collective bargaining sessions? Again, what the purpose of 

this is, we’re not sure. We don’t know what’s motivating it, and 

there’s been no sort of adequate explanation by this government 

as to why this change is seen as necessary. 

 

Fragmented bargaining units are not in the best interests of 

either unions or employers. Here’s a section that will lead to 

this kind of disruption. It’s section 6-10(1). And what it says is 

that if a union has been certified as the bargaining agent for a 

bargaining unit — so we have an existing union — another 

union may apply to the board to be certified as a bargaining 

agent, either for the bargaining unit or for a portion of the 

bargaining unit. So that’s the word I want to emphasize is the 

word portion. That’s the significant change that’s causing 

considerable concern. And I would imagine employers are 

concerned about it as well, but we have heard from the SGEU 

on their concerns in relation to that one. 

 

So the next section that causes problems is section 6-11(1). So 

what happens here is if the union applies for certification as a 

bargaining agent for a unit or a portion of a bargaining unit or 

to move one portion to another portion, then the board has to 

determine if it’s appropriate for collective bargaining or 

whether it should be moved. 

 

Employees and employers want certainty, and these will cause 

considerable disruption in the workplace if these changes go 

forward. The recommendation? Just remove these sections. It’s 

not a big change. It won’t take a lot of time. Strike out 6-10(1) 

and strike out 6-11(1) — simple fix in my perspective, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And we certainly would think that the ministry 

and the minister should take a close look at that. The potential 

disruption and conflict that are going to result from these 

changes are not going to embellish or enhance the work, the 

workers’ relationship in working units here, or workplaces here 

in Saskatchewan. Why? We don’t know why. 

 

Again we just don’t understand why these changes are 

necessary and the minister has not provided any information 

why he feels that this is a change that’s needed. Nobody asked 

for it. Nobody wanted it, but we’re going to get it anyways. So 

hopefully saner heads will prevail and the ministry will take 

some close looks at this particular addition to the Act and to the 

rules that affect trade unions and maybe — sober second 

thought — consult with not just workers themselves but with 

employers and say, do you really want this? Maybe we should 

change it. That’s all we’re asking. Take time; sober second 

thought. 

 

The last area that I want to speak to, as far as SGEU’s concerns, 

is the notion of splitting bargaining units into units of 

supervisors and employees. So this is another area where the 

view is that this will create considerable instability and division 

in workplaces by splitting bargaining units into units of 

supervisors and employees. 

 

As we know, for decades, the norm in Saskatchewan and across 

Canada has been an all-employee bargaining unit. That’s the 

way it’s been. It’s been working just fine. There’s been no 

significant problems with this approach. Therefore the view is 

that there’s no rationale for such a dramatic departure from the 

existing legislation and the precedents that have come about as 

a result of that legislation. 

 

Obviously there’s been a lot of discussion about what is 

management, what is supervision. But the basic principle, I 

think, that’s been accepted across the board in Canada and also 

with the International Labour Organization is that management 

is excluded from unions, but supervision, people at the 

supervisory level, there is no conflict between that job and 

belonging to a union. So I spoke about it earlier about the 

definition and management and that, you know, that’s hire or 

fire basically — those kinds of abilities and strengths. But 

supervisors can be supervising all kinds of things in the 

workplace. The more complex the workplace, the more 

complex the supervisory roles that exist.  

 

And I know that even in my previous employment, I mean I 

was often responsible for supervising support staff, but I was 

not considered to be the employer because the hiring and firing 

was done by the managers in my work unit. So I was 

responsible for their work and assigning them work, which is a 

supervisory responsibility, but I was a member of the union 

because I was not engaged in the hiring and firing of those 

individuals. 

 

What’s happening here under the new bill, Bill 85, is that it’s 

casting a wide, wide, wide, wide net — a very wide net, an 

extremely wide net — that I think is going to not only draw a 

large number of workers into the category of supervisors, but 

it’s going to draw a significant amount of litigation because it is 

infringing on workers’ rights to assemble. And again, if this 

government wants to avoid those types of what I think will be 

highly successful lawsuits that are going to result if this bill is 

passed as is, then they need to slow down, take a careful look at 

this, do a legal analysis, talk to people that are affected by these 

provisions, and make sure that it’s going to work, and it works 

for not just employers and not just workers, but for both. 

 

And again, we keep questioning this government. Why the need 

for change? Who was asking for the change? We don’t know. 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2519 

We can’t figure that out, and certainly the minister isn’t making 

that clear. So who is he working for here? And we want to 

understand this so we can understand why these significant 

changes — which will face legal challenge because they have 

to be challenged — they’re quite likely not going to be 

successful in a legal challenge. So what’s left is forcing people 

to take these to the courts to have them review it because this 

government simply won’t slow down and take the time to do 

the proper legal analysis. 

 

What Bill 85 states in section 6-1(1)(o), and this is the list of 

definitions that you’ll find in the legislation, here’s a definition 

of “supervisory employee.” It means an employee who 

regularly exercises — and I’m going to emphasize here — one 

or more of the following duties. So even if they do one of these 

duties, they’re going to be excluded from the work unit and 

they’re going to be deprived of their right of freedom of 

association under the Charter. First of all: 

 

(i) supervising employees; 

 

(ii) [Secondly] independently assigning work to 

employees and monitoring the quality of work produced 

by employees; 

 

Why would you deprive someone from the right of association 

if they are assigning work to other employees? 

 

(iii) scheduling hours of work or overtime; 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a simple matter of workplace 

management, and it’s got nothing to do with the right of 

assembly. So that alone, in and of itself, I think would be struck 

down very quickly if it was challenged in court. Fourthly: 

 

(iv) providing comments to be used for work appraisals 

and merit increases for employees. 

 

Those are the exact kinds of things I did as a government 

worker when I was working before I took this position on. And 

I would be providing quality work comments on other 

employees. It made sense. But it didn’t remove me from the 

bargaining unit, and there was no feeling from those employees 

that my contribution to their work reviews had anything to do 

with their union rights. There’s simply no connection here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And this is something I think, for me, is one of 

the most egregious points in this new proposed legislation. 

 

And finally the fifth or sixth, I guess it’s the fifth category is 

recommending discipline of employees. 

 

So the view of the SGEU is that this attempt to split supervisors 

out of the main bargaining unit is definitely cause for concern. 

But a provision in this section is even more dangerously out of 

step with established labour relation principles because it gives 

employers the power to veto supervisors’ rights to remain with 

their existing bargaining unit. 

 

So the problem here is in Section 6-11(4)(a) where “the 

employer and the union make an irrevocable election to allow 

the supervisory employees to be in the bargaining unit.” And 

the way they described this is that, in other words, the employer 

will have the ability to withhold agreement, which would 

amount to a unilateral rejection of the union’s decision. So what 

they’re saying here is this violates the most fundamental 

premise of labour law, that an employer may not interfere in the 

right of employees to collectively determine who will represent 

their interests. 

 

And maybe that’s what’s offensive to this government, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the idea of people working collectively together 

to determine who represents their interests is somehow 

offensive. And that’s very disturbing when you think of the 

history of this province and the importance of The Trade Union 

Act and all the things that went into it, and all the work that 

went into it, and all the successful relationships that have come 

about because of that balance. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 

frightening in some ways that this government is considering 

tampering with that premise. 

 

This bill will give the employer the right to determine how 

these supervisory employees will be represented. No longer do 

they have the choice to see how they or where they will belong 

and choose where they need to belong. 

 

There are all kinds of costs and consequences that are going to 

come out of this. First of all, splitting established bargaining 

units by determining that the supervisors have to be in a unit of 

their own is going to result in all kinds of conflicts and 

administrative difficulties. I mean, just think about it. This 

unprecedented move will create deeper human resource 

problems that are going to have a long-term impact on the 

quality and effectiveness of the Saskatchewan public service. Is 

that what this government wants? I really hope not, but it 

appears that it may very well be. 

 

You’re going to see all kinds of extra issues in any kind of 

public service bargaining process. There’s going to be doubling 

of two sets of collective bargaining, two different contracts, two 

distinct terms of employment such as hours of work, two 

unique grievances procedures, two classification plans, two pay 

scales, two benefit scales, two pension plans, two of any 

administrative committee, such has occupational health and 

safety committees. I mean the list is long, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And is any public employer wanting to take on the costs, the 

significantly higher costs that are coming about that? That’s 

contrary to this government’s whole premise. So it simply 

doesn’t make any sense. Even if you look at how this 

government operates now, it’s contrary to the position that we 

see in terms of lean and all those kinds of things. But I mean 

fundamentally what we’re talking about is the violation of 

people’s right to assembly which is enshrined in our Charter, 

and I think we have to keep hammering that point home. 

 

[15:15] 

 

There’s another issue about the movement of personnel 

between non-supervisory and supervisory positions. This 

happens all the time in the workplace. So how are these 

movements going to be dealt with? And I don’t think that 

there’s enough thought, obviously there isn’t enough thought 

being given to that impact on the workplace as well. If there’s 

two separate bargaining units with those, with some of these 

supervisory duties as defined in the new bill, and how are . . . 

They go on to say, if there’s two separate bargaining units, 



2520 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

there will be significant difficulties with continuing 

long-standing practices. How are their benefits going to accrue? 

How is their seniority and sick leave and vacation leave going 

to accrue if they move between these units? And if they lose 

seniority in their home position, are they going to lose it if they 

go to a short time for a supervisory unit? 

 

Again, my experience in government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

that people are filling acting positions all the time. This is the 

state of life in the public service because people are moving on 

with their careers. There’s vacancies; people are temporarily 

replacing them. Do they lose their seniority or their vacation 

benefits if they leave their work unit? These are all kinds of 

questions that are going to cause, I think, an insurmountable 

amount of headache for our public servants, not only the 

workers but also the people that are managing. Is there going to 

be time double counted? Is there going to be infringement on 

seniority rights of other people? Are there going to be two 

different health benefit plans or pension plans? How are you 

going to have that time managed if people are moving back and 

forth? 

 

And there’s all kinds of issues, other issues that the union has 

raised, for example, limiting the horizon for supervisors. It’s 

going to be much smaller than the employee unit. They’re 

going to have fewer options in terms of bumping rights or 

transfers. Employees will be reluctant to move into these 

supervisory units, bargaining units, if they’re going to lose all 

their entitlements. Why would you even want to take on that 

supervisory role? It’s going to be more difficult to get 

supervisors as defined in the new bill. It’s going to set up 

conflicts, rivalries in the workplace. It’s going to have impacts 

on the career options for people in an employee unit. 

 

And so the question is, on balance, are the consequences worth 

it? All employee bargaining units have functioned effectively 

for decades. That’s the point. We don’t understand why these 

need to be changed. The additional administrative costs, the 

potential and stability in the workplace, all of that suggests that 

a move to shunt supervisors into a separate bargaining unit are 

going to create significant problems for no immediately 

apparent reason. 

 

So those are some of the concerns I think that the SGEU has 

raised. They’ve raised them with me. They came to my office 

and explained these to me. And I haven’t had enough time to 

significantly spend time on delving into the details. So I really 

appreciated the fact that they came to my office and took the 

time. I understand that they’ve tried to visit every MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and had been turned 

down by a number of MLAs who won’t take the time to meet 

with them and understand these concerns. And that concerns 

me as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think it’s a responsibility of each one of us to take the time to 

try and understand what the impacts of these wording changes 

are going to have on not only the working people but on the 

work unit itself, on the roles of the employers and all the 

considerable administrative work, every aspect that I’ve 

described. I think all of us need to understand what those 

impacts are. And it’s disappointing to me that MLAs won’t take 

the time to put their mind to these issues because this is a 

significant piece of legislation that’s being put forth. It’s being 

rushed through, and I think it’s going to have grave, grave 

consequences for this government if they continue to go down 

this path. 

 

Again our Labour critic has made significant presentations 

wherever he can about this bill. And he did so just as recently 

as last Saturday where there was basically a panel, a one-day 

panel . . . Or what was it called? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Forum. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Forum. Thank you, mister opposition critic for 

Labour. It was a panel that was put together, and there was a 

number of people that spoke about all aspects of this. And 

unfortunately I couldn’t be there. But he made a presentation. 

I’m just going to highlight for you some of the 

recommendations that he made on our behalf to the panel. 

 

First of all, he’s talking about the time frame. So the first 

recommendation is that this government really should start 

over. Just take a breath and start over. The time frame for the 

review should allow for due diligence and ample opportunity 

for meaningful public engagement. So that’s the first 

recommendation. 

 

The second recommendation is that this government really, 

really should take a view that emphasizes a balance. We don’t 

see this as being balanced. We’re very concerned that this is 

upsetting a balance that has existed, and it created harmony in 

the workplace for decades. And so if this balance is going to be 

upset, as we are afraid it will, then why not scrap the bill and 

start over again? And fix essential services while you’re at it. 

 

Taking time to actually talk to people, and the MLAs have been 

given the opportunity to talk to people. Take that time and 

understand. And I don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you had 

an opportunity to speak with SGEU, but it’s a very compelling 

presentation. And I would strongly encourage you take the time 

to do that and that all members take the time to do that because 

they have some pretty good points, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Recommendation 3 is that the government really should not be 

considering in its review the principles of the 40-hour 

workweek, the standard eight-hour workday, three weeks 

vacation leave, and standard province-wide statutory holidays. 

And there’s a broad consensus in the province that these 

standards work. So that’s the third recommendation that we’ve 

made. 

 

The fourth one is the Sask Party government should consider 

the option of sick time for all employees in the public 

consultations. Consider it. 

 

Fifthly, that they should leave the rules of overtime the same. 

There’s no call to change them. And if employers want workers 

to work beyond the standard workday, they should be paid 

overtime — period. There’s no need to change that. And so 

that’s the fifth recommendation. 

 

Sixth recommendation: if this government really desires to 

streamline legislation — and we’re not opposed to that; 

streamlining makes sense — it should present the various 

regulations in a clean and understandable format. And I think 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2521 

what he pointed out here is that many of the changes that are 

being made — and I haven’t even had an opportunity to speak 

to that — many of the changes that are being proposed will be 

found in the regulations. I did mention that initially at the 

beginning of my comments. But the concern is paramount is 

that we don’t know what these regulations are going to look 

like, so we’re being asked to comment on a bill, workers are 

being asked to comment on a bill where the net impact is not 

yet determined. And that isn’t really fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We should take the time. This government needs to take the 

time to let people know what’s going to be in the details. And 

as you know, the devil is in the details. 

 

So that’s the kind of thing that again, if it’s not going to be 

revealed before the bill is passed, we’re going to be dealing 

with this in the courts and through labour hearings and all kinds 

of rulings that are going to have to be made after the fact. Why? 

There’s no rush here. We’ve got all kinds of time to get it right. 

We have a very little bit of time right now to get it wrong. 

 

He went on to make a few more recommendations. The seventh 

one is that we know the people of Saskatchewan believe that 

current labour legislation is strong and fair and balanced. And 

what we’re looking for this government to do is educate the 

public about workplace rights so more people understand how 

good it is. I mean that’s part of the problem. We’ve had a long 

history of trade union rights, and I think we’re recognized 

across the world for the strength that we’ve shown in that area. 

And why wouldn’t this government show that to the people and 

explain why this suite of labour legislation that exists is there 

and to ensure that people are educated about the importance of 

these laws? 

 

The eighth recommendation obviously is to look at 

improvements, options for improvements to workplace rights 

for independent contractors in the province. 

 

They should also — recommendation 9 — raise the minimum 

wage immediately and index it to inflation. We’re not opposing 

this. Indexing it to inflation makes sense, but it needs to be a 

fair starting point. 

 

Recommendation 10, let unions and their members decide what 

financial information they’d like to disclose. We don’t ask 

businesses to disclose their financial information. When I file 

my corporate return for the business I’m involved in, we don’t 

have to disclose our financial information. Asking unions to do 

that is unfair and unnecessary. And who should receive that 

information in a business context is the shareholders, and in a 

union context, it should be the members. Those are the ones 

who have the right to that information. 

 

Finally, the 11th recommendation is keeping the mandatory 

collection of union dues in legislation. We will continue to 

recommend that and don’t want to see any changes to that. 

 

And the last three recommendations obviously apply the 

principles of the Rand formula and don’t allow for opting out. 

We will continue to recommend that. 

 

Recommendation 13, always, always, in any review, how do 

you make the workplace safer? That should be the concern of 

government is how to make the workplace safer and look for 

continual improvements to occupational health and safety. 

 

And the 14th recommendation is that the government should 

prioritize opportunities for skill training for Saskatchewan 

workers. And obviously focus on a need, the great need for 

increased training opportunities for First Nations and Métis 

people in our province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve probably gone on long enough. 

Unfortunately as I say, I’ve barely scratched the surface of the 

changes. I think the significance of this ominous omnibus bill is 

grave. I don’t think this government has fully appreciated that. 

The ominous omnibus bill is I think an appropriate title for this 

bill. 

 

And I would strongly encourage all members to take 

opportunity to listen to the people from SGEU. I know a 

number of the members have turned down the SGEU and have 

refused to listen to their concerns, and I think that is something 

that’s very disappointing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Take the time. 

All members should take the time to hear out these people and 

hear their concerns because they are valid concerns. I think that 

to rush through with this legislation at this point in time is only 

asking for trouble, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this government 

needs to heed the advice of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So at that point I think, Mr. Speaker . . . I know a number of my 

colleagues still haven’t had an opportunity to comment on this 

bill, and I think I would like to propose that we adjourn debate 

on Bill 85. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 76 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 76 — The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to weigh into the debate on Bill No. 76, The Municipal 

Board Amendment Act. We’ll note that the Act that we’re 

amending is The Municipal Board Act which sets out the 

framework through which the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

undertakes its responsibilities related to the approval, oversight, 

and adjudication of a variety of municipal issues. 

 

So why this bill? Why today in this legislative session? One 

needs to look to the minister’s second reading comments and 

the minister in his second reading comments outlines that the 

goal is to . . . that there’s been issues identified both by the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board itself, the municipal sector, and 



2522 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

the ministry responsible to make boundary alteration processes 

work better and to provide more flexibility for the board, the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board, both in terms of its 

decision-making abilities and in terms of recruiting new 

members. So this is the rationale that the minister has given us 

for amending The Municipal Board Act. 

 

But it might be worthwhile actually talking a little bit about 

what the Saskatchewan Municipal Board actually does. And 

just going to its website, it lays out very clearly what the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board does, which this Act 

establishes this particular board. It’s a tribunal: 

 

. . . set up for regulatory and judicial purposes in dealing 

with issues from local authorities [like] (school divisions 

and municipal governments). [So] the board’s regulatory 

function is to review the debt obligations of some local 

authorities and oversee the financial health of 

municipalities. The judicial function is to hear and 

determine, at the provincial level, appeals from the public 

in municipal matters relating to property tax assessments, 

municipal planning and development issues, noxious 

weed orders, and to adjudicate in matters relating to road 

maintenance and fixed farmland assessment agreements. 

The second reason for their existence is to provide a cost 

effective method of litigation to unburden the court 

system. 

 

So I think it’s important to look why or what may have 

triggered some of the changes to the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board amendment Act. And one might look to some of the 

issues that have happened. Perhaps it was some of the disputes 

that have happened in the Corman Park area, or perhaps it could 

be the very public issue that arose between the city of Regina 

and the rural municipality of Sherwood around the development 

of some of the industrial lands around the city of Regina and 

the fact that there were some fairly direct and major disputes 

where the minister of this government was required to step in 

and see if something could be done to resolve those. 

 

So I think that the minister in his second reading comments has 

said that those are some of the reasons why he didn’t 

specifically mention those cases, but he did talk about making 

the boundary alteration process work better. 

 

So what are some of the amendments that are being proposed 

here in this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well one of the first 

ones, right now, as it stands now, members of the board are 

appointed by Executive Council, and this amendment will now 

allow the minister to appoint part-time members of the board. 

So that is a change or a bit of a departure. Related to this as 

well, the second amendment will enable the minister to appoint 

for a limited term, suspend, and replace part-time members. So 

it’s amending the language around Executive Council to refer 

simply to the minister making these . . . being able to appoint 

part-time members. 

 

[15:30] 

 

One of the other amendments: it clarifies that the Executive 

Council may fill vacancies of full-time members and the 

minister may fill vacancies of part-time members, consistent 

with the changes proposed to allow the minister to appoint 

part-time members of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. One 

of the reasons, and the minister lays this out in his second 

reading speech, is that these amendments are proposed to 

provide more flexibility in the appointments of alternate 

part-time members representing SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] and SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] to sit on the 

panel that reviews and holds hearings regarding municipal 

boundary change applications. The minister had said in his 

second reading speech that this is intended to address issues 

respecting the availability of these members in potential 

situations where the member’s municipality is a party to or 

affected by an application. So that is what that is set out to do. 

 

One of the other amendments is actually making sure that 

processes are more streamlined in terms of when an application 

comes before the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, that it’s full 

and complete, that the board isn’t spending time hearing an 

application or sitting down with an application and seeing that 

it isn’t complete. So the amendments improves the part of the 

process so, says the minister, that it clarifies the board 

secretary’s ability to determine the completeness of applications 

and to notify applicants of deficiencies before it may be 

considered by the board. And the minister argues that this will 

speed up the process and save the board’s time for higher 

priority questions. So that makes eminent sense, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that before the board would hear or review an 

application or an issue that the application be complete. 

 

And the minister also goes on to talk about mediation, that one 

of the amendments will ensure that councils undertake 

mediation to settle the dispute if none has been attempted prior 

to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board’s review and decision. 

So the premise is that a voluntary settlement, even with the 

assistance of a mediator, is preferable to having the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board impose a decision. And 

mediation, I think again, whether it’s in personal circumstances 

or in other circumstances, makes eminent sense. So to be able 

to use the mediation function here I think is a very good thing, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The changes in this bill also include providing clear authority 

for the Saskatchewan Municipal Board to approve a portion or 

portions of an application. This change from an all or nothing 

approach means the board can find and approve compromises 

and solve at least part of the issue. So instead of having . . . 

seeing a tough issue and saying that it can’t be resolved at all, 

this provides an opportunity to address a small piece of it. 

 

So I think on face value that these changes make sense and I 

think it’s important to note that the minister did talk about 

consultation. He says, I’d like to quote here: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry has consulted extensively on 

the changes in this bill with the SMB and the municipal 

sector. Consultations occurred in 2011 on 

recommendations from the ministry’s review of the 

boundary alteration process. Further consultations were 

conducted with the SMB during 2012 on the 

amendments. The board is supportive of these proposed 

amendments. 

 

That’s refreshing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is in fact the case. 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2523 

On this matter, the government has said that they’ve consulted, 

but we’ve also . . . There’s always red flags that come up with 

this government when it talks about having consulted. We’ve 

seen in the past where the government has said that it’s 

consulted with certain groups and organizations and we’ve 

learned later that that in fact hasn’t been the case. But we also 

have a government who likes to steamroll ahead with its own 

ideas and its own plans and then puts the brakes on when 

there’s some public outcry and then takes things out for 

consultation, which I think when you create any kind of public 

policy or legislation that consultation — and again, a real and 

meaningful consultation with people impacted — is absolutely 

imperative to produce the best outcome, to avoid unintended 

consequences so you’re actually not hurting the organizations 

or individuals that you are meant to help. I know that that often 

happens. Or just ensuring that you have a full depth and breadth 

of understanding of the issue. 

 

My colleague right before me spoke about The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act and the consultation and some of the issues 

that are going to arise out of that bill. And I would argue that 

that . . . Those issues that will arise out of that bill will happen 

because the government did not consult and is refusing to listen 

to anybody except those of like mind. 

 

The reality is when you embark upon consultation you have to 

make sure that you are talking to everybody, not just the people 

who agree with you or share your values. In order to implement 

good public policy and create and implement good public 

policy, you have to talk to all kinds of people, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So on this Bill No. 76 it sounds like there has been 

some due diligence on consultation, which is great, but again 

this is a government who has a track record of not consulting, 

putting the brakes on halfway through the process and then 

deciding that it better take it out to the public, and doesn’t often 

hear what it wants. 

 

But with respect to Bill 76, the changes to the Saskatchewan 

municipal Act, the amendment Act, actually sound like they 

will make some of these transitions or the disputes between 

municipalities perhaps move more smoothly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So I know I do have colleagues who will also be 

interested in weighing in to this discussion on Bill No. 76, the 

Saskatchewan municipal amendment Act, so with that I would 

like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 76, The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 77 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 

Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 

on debate on Bill No. 77, The Horse Racing Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012 to make a few comments I guess on the 

proposed changes and the way government had collected a tax 

on people who wagered bets on horse racing. 

 

But I want to go back to the horse racing industry in the 

province and talk a little bit about the history and talk about I 

guess . . . My family was involved in the ’80s. We had race 

horsing. It was something I did with my father as we owned 

horses. It was interesting to hear about. Those were exciting 

times to be growing up, and we’d head off to Saskatoon to 

Marquis Downs to take part in horse racing. It was interesting. 

It was a time for an industry, a lot of fun. 

 

But having said that, like everything else we spent a lot of time, 

you know, talking back and forth as we travelled from Prince 

Albert to Saskatoon and, you know, we had some good days 

and we had some not so good days; we thought we should have 

won but unfortunately didn’t. But I mean the excitement was 

there. You watched it in the crowd. You watched it in 

individuals. And yes, it was very competitive and people, they 

all want to win. Just like we have a race going on right now, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, going on. And we have three fine young 

men that are leading the charge. And I hope, you know, coming 

out of the gates they’re going strong and hard. And I know at 

the end of the day, whoever wins that race, we’ll all respect. 

Whoever wins that race, we will totally respect. And we’ll work 

hard. And you know, I’ll hang my hat behind whoever does 

win, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and support them 100 per cent. 

 

So it’s pretty exciting times. Just like back in the day, we would 

go off to Saskatoon. We’re excited about the race. This 

Thursday we’ll be heading off to Saskatoon. There’s another 

race going on. Exciting times ahead for our party and the 

people of our province. 

 

But having said that, let’s get back, I guess, to the bill. And 

we’re talking about race, horse racing. And some of the 

members opposite want to talk more about horse racing or an 

interesting political race. But having said that, I’ll go back to 

the bill before you cut me off, anyway. 

 

Bill 77 is clearly an opportunity for, I guess, the industry to 

raise some money. And government would return in different 

ways. And I think there’s about three racetracks in the province 

that are currently, were receiving some of the money from the 

tax collected was turned back. And if you look at the notes from 

the minister’s comments, I think most of that money was turned 

back to the industry to help them operate and do whatever, and 

I’m not sure the details on exactly how it is. 

 

But I think it’s clear we have to make sure that we consult, we 

talk to individuals — whether it’s the industry, whether there’s 

three, two. How will they survive? And we want to make sure 

that they do survive, an industry. And they’ve had some tough 

times in the racing industry. We know that. It hasn’t been easy, 

but I think here you have a government who has made a 

decision to cut. And they’re going to repeal, and there might be 

reasons why they’re repealing it. And I don’t know at this point 

why they are doing it, but I think we have to ask some of the 



2524 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

tough questions. And we want to make sure, is it best for the 

industry? 

 

And if they are taking away money from the industry, are they 

going to be making sure they put some of that money back in 

different ways? So where are they are going to get that money? 

So we’re not sure, and I think those questions need to be clear. 

Will they get more money? Is it less money? So how will this 

impact the industry? And I think that’s clear. How will it 

impact individuals who actually own the horses that they bring 

to the horse racing industry and they bring it to the facilities and 

they utilize that? 

 

Having said that, you know, what type of operations are going 

on, and how will they be successful? When you talk about a 

province that talks about being successful, moving forward, 

how is this dealing with the industry and how will this move the 

industry forward? It’s a small business. They have a limited 

time that they operate. We know that. 

 

So if they’ve really done their homework and they’ve talked to 

the industry and if this reason they’re introducing a bill like this 

to repeal the tax collection on it, is there another way that 

they’re going to help the industry or is this going to harm the 

industry? And I’m not sure one way or the other. Those 

questions need to be asked by the minister, if that will be 

clearly identified. And will they consult? And they may have 

talked to some of the industry players. We don’t know that for 

sure. There might be comments going on, letters back and forth. 

There might be meetings. We’re not sure. The minister can 

refer to certain meetings and that’s fine. 

 

At the end of the day we’ll be very clear on some of the 

discussions that need to go on to make sure that the players and 

those that are involved in the racing industry have a place to go, 

to take whether it’s family and sometimes it’s a family business 

who get into the racehorse. Sometimes it’s a hobby. For some 

people, it is a way of life. It’s training. It’s a life that’s 

enjoyable that they train. You have your trainers. You have 

your owners. You have people who are working in the industry 

for jobs. Let’s make sure that we’re not losing jobs. So there’s a 

lot of questions that I know individuals will want to ask about 

this. 

 

So you know, going back to that, I want to talk a little bit about 

examples and use some examples, you know, when changes are 

coming in that the government has. A lot of times this 

government and clearly even the public when you talk to the 

public, they feel truly that this current Sask Party government is 

not listening. They’re not hearing. They’re not consulting. 

They’re not going out and getting the information before they 

make the decisions. They just go ahead on what their idea is. 

And I don’t know if it’s all the backbenchers even get input in 

it. There might be a few of the ministers and key people that 

have the ear of the Premier and the government. And that’s 

unfortunate because there’s so many good things that could be 

going on in this province. 

 

And there’s nothing wrong with changing regulations and 

making changes to legislation but if you’re consulting, if you’re 

consulting, there’s nothing wrong with that, if you’re doing the 

work that needs to be done. And a lot of my colleagues have 

expressed that, debating these bills about how this government 

just goes ahead regardless of consulting, regardless of what 

they’re being told by the industry. If it’s their idea, they’re 

going to push ahead with it. 

 

And you know, they don’t like admitting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that they’re wrong, that they made a mistake. No, it’s deny. It’s 

push. It’s push. And that’s unfortunate because sometimes the 

changes that government could introduce . . . And maybe they 

are good changes for an industry and maybe they are good 

changes for the province, but unfortunately the way this current 

government’s handling it, it doesn’t show that by a lot of 

people. And I mean there’s the public sector. There’s our 

Crowns. You’re looking at all the different areas that we can 

look at. You know, there’s so many different bills coming. You 

look at the labour one, and my colleague talked quite long 

today about it and gave some good arguments about, slow 

down. Sometimes it’s okay to slow down and rethink these 

things out. But no, the government doesn’t. It has its agenda 

and it’s going to push ahead. 

 

And that’s unfortunate that . . . And this bill might be one of 

those bills. We don’t know. We’ve got some tough questions on 

Bill 77 and we’ll ask those questions. I know my colleagues 

have. But having said that, I just want to go back, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and reflect on that. Because I think it’s so important to 

talk about the people of our province, you know — our seniors, 

our Aboriginal population, our youth, our middle-class people, 

people who live in poverty, people who are struggling out there 

— making it in this province. And we’ve seen some of the 

tough questions today, and we’ve seen yesterday and there are 

tough questions going on and people are concerned. 

 

It’s a trust thing. They want a government that will take care of 

every dollar and they will manage those dollars to the best of 

their ability. It’s a trust thing. And when you lose the trust of 

the public that elect you, don’t be shocked when you start 

hearing the kind of coffee shop row talk that I’ve been hearing. 

 

[15:45] 

 

People are not real happy right now. They’re very concerned. 

They’re very concerned about the way you’re managing. And 

they can sit there and yell and laugh about their 70 per cent. 

That’s good. You know, have it. Whatever they want to say, 

whatever. If it’s 50 per cent, if it’s 30 per cent, it’s whatever 

they want. They can have their little laugh with it. But at the 

end of the day it’s about the trust and it’s about the dollars. It’s 

about the public dollars that this government has been asked to 

look after, they’ve been entrusted to look after it. And trust me, 

they’ll get their message. That’s all right. You’re not humble. 

You’re not a lot of different things. You’ll pay a price for it. 

You don’t listen to the public. You don’t consult. You don’t 

hear what the industry is saying, whether it’s the film industry, 

whether it’s our motorcycle . . . You look at the different things, 

the increases all over. The public, our seniors, drug costs — 

there are so many challenges facing . . . The rents. This 

government, and I’ve watched it, you know, they have their 

days where they chuckle about things and everything’s fine in 

their world, but there’s a lot of people not making it in this 

province. They’re struggling. They’re struggling to pay their 

rent, to provide food on the table for their family. And that 

shouldn’t be happening. Our seniors are struggling. Which 

medications do they buy? How do they pay their rents? They’re 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2525 

on fixed income, so there’s a lot of challenges. 

 

So when we look at that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about all the 

different challenges facing the people of our province, they 

expected better. 

 

But it’s amazing to watch government make the decisions it 

makes based on . . . Well I don’t think they consult with anyone 

out there, very few if they do. Certain connections, insiders, 

their buddies, they consult with them. They sure get their input. 

So at the end of the day you see people who are suffering and 

not doing so good under, I guess, a province — and I’m proud 

of this province — but unfortunately the people are not feeling 

a part of it. A lot of people are struggling. They truly aren’t 

having a good quality of life that everyone thinks Saskatchewan 

is. 

 

And I mean, the government can boast all it wants. At the end 

of the day it’s going to be about the people. It’s about our 

seniors. It’s about the Aboriginal population. It’s about people 

living in poverty. It’s about people on fixed income. It’s about 

middle class struggling. There’s a lot of people struggling in 

this province. And we see the government carrying on the way 

it’s carrying on. And some of the money I guess that we’re 

looking at, the public’s paying attention to. And we’ll see as 

things unfold over the next while how well this government 

does. And you know, they can look at their numbers, and if it’s 

63 per cent or 50 per cent, whatever their numbers are they 

want to say, that’s fine. At the end of the day, the people will 

make a decision, and it’s trust. 

 

And I know that we’re going to move forward on bills like this. 

We will ask the tough questions and we will debate these bills 

and it’s important. But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what’s important? The people want a leader and they want a 

government that will manage their affairs properly, that will 

manage every dollar. That they will make sure that, when the 

individuals hand a government the dollars, their hard-earned 

dollars — and I say that — hard-earned. There’s some people 

working very hard in this province. Some of them have to have 

two and three jobs to make ends meet to provide for their 

family. But when their dollars are handed to the government, 

they will hold the government to account for those dollars and 

we, as official opposition, will hold that government to account 

for what they’re doing or what they’re not doing. And it’s clear. 

 

And you know, I think about our northern trappers and I think 

about some of the proposals they’ve put in. They haven’t asked 

for a lot but they’ve . . . [inaudible] . . . for a little bit of help 

from the government and unfortunately, pretty sad, but this 

government turns down even northern trappers who are just 

trying to do some good, trying to help their industry, their 

economics. And there’s some of them that are truly traditional 

trappers, and I want to make it very clear are not commercial 

trappers in the sense of the business where the government 

refers. You know, we’ve got some challenges. We know that. 

But I know you have a group of individuals in northern 

Saskatchewan and in the trapping industry who are truly trying 

to do their best. It’s an industry. And we see some move in 

pricing, and that’s great to see for them and I hope that 

continues. But having said that, they have some challenges, and 

they’ve asked the government for some help. And of course the 

government turned their back on northern Saskatchewan like it 

always does, and that’s a sad reality. And they’ll pay a price. 

The North’s not going to forget about this Sask Party 

government, the way they treat northern Saskatchewan. And 

they won’t forget that — our trappers, our commercial 

fishermen, the roads. 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to go back to Bill 

77 because I know it’s important that we refer to those bills. 

But I’m using examples of a government not listening to the 

people. When you introduce Bill 77 or any other bill or any 

other program or you take care of individuals’ dollars — and 

we’re talking about the public dollars this government’s been 

entrusted to take care — they are going to have to answer to the 

public, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They will have to answer to the 

public. And I don’t think the public’s going to be happy when 

they start finding out some of the information that we’re seeing 

unfold. And over the next while we’ll see some of that stuff 

unfolding. And we look at . . . and I think the universities, the 

challenges they’re having. And I think a lot of different groups 

are having challenges out there. They expect better from our 

government. 

 

So at the end of the day we’ll see where this all goes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and we’ll see how exactly this industry will 

continue to operate in the province. And maybe one of them is 

going to receive other grants, other types of money to keep 

them going. But I think there’s three facilities utilizing the tax 

dollars that were collected on wagering bets, on the tax that was 

collected from individuals wagering a bet on horse racing, and 

to pardon that. 

 

So we’ll see where the government goes. I mean there’s a lot of 

questions that have to be answered. And I think it’s an industry 

that’s asking for support to make sure that it continues to thrive, 

and an organization and, I guess, an industry that’s asking 

government to make sure they don’t turn their back on them 

like they’ve turned their back on so many others, like the film 

industry and so many other individuals like our seniors, people 

who are renting, this government. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point I’m 

prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 77. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 77, The Horse Racing Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 78 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 78 — The Social 

Workers Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 78, An Act to amend The 



2526 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

Social Workers Act. 

 

Simply put, this legislation is being introduced to allow 

master’s of social work qualified social workers to have a 

practice of diagnosis. And the definition in section 2(3)(b) of 

this legislation says that a: 

 

‘practice of diagnosis’ means the communication of a 

diagnosis identifying, as the cause of a person’s 

symptoms, a neuropsychological disorder or a 

psychologically-based psychotic, neurotic, or personality 

disorder. 

 

Now this definition has been clearly worked out in consultation 

with the social workers, the psychologists, and also the medical 

practitioners. 

 

And why is this bill here today? I think what has happened is 

that this is an area of trying to provide service to Saskatchewan 

people when we have a shortage of professionals to provide that 

service. I note that the Minister of Social Services, when she 

was introducing this bill, identified that there were 114 

professionals that are both social workers and psychologists and 

psychiatrists who were able to provide this diagnosis. And the 

numbers were not sufficient to deal with the particular issues. 

 

Also we know that this area of providing services to people 

across rural parts of Saskatchewan meant that it took a long 

time before people could get the services identified. And so 

what this legislation is intended to do is to make sure that the 

citizens of Saskatchewan who require services, professional 

services for these disorders, that they will have access to them 

in a more straightforward way. 

 

And I want to commend the Saskatchewan Association of 

Social Workers for the work that they’ve done in setting out the 

parameters for professional responsibility as it relates to this 

particular amendment. Sometimes it takes a long time to work 

with these particular issues, and the Saskatchewan Association 

of Social Workers has worked very closely with the 

psychologists. It’s worked with the people who are in the 

ministry who are responsible for these issues. What we know 

within the civil service is that we get very good advice from the 

policy people within particular departments. But we also get 

very good policy advice on professional legislation from the 

Ministry of Justice. 

 

And so what we need to know is, has this issue been fully 

vetted by the various groups? And it’s quite clear that it has 

been because it’s been worked through a number of different 

ways. Now unfortunately this particular area of multiple 

jurisdictions to deal with issues that cross over between 

professions is always fraught with difficulties. 

 

And I want to say again that I commend the people who have 

worked on this one to come up with what appears to be clear 

wording that will allow for these services to be provided to the 

people of Saskatchewan. Now it also is a method whereby 

people can be encouraged to get the appropriate education so 

that they can actually do this kind of work, whether they’re a 

social worker or whether they’re a psychologist. And that’s also 

an appropriate situation for people who are involved in this 

particular area. 

Now when one spends a lot of time in court, like I did in my 

professional career as a lawyer, there were many instances 

where people who required services had a number of hurdles to 

jump over to get those services. My hope is that this technical 

or this legislative concern will be behind us so that the people 

who need these services will get them. Now we’ll have to make 

sure that there’s sufficient resources in this area, because 

clearly mental health issues are a huge area of concern for 

people throughout the province but also throughout the country. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this bill has taken quite a 

bit of the information that’s required. I know that one or two of 

my colleagues may wish to speak to this as well and I will 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78, The Social Workers 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 79 — The 

Representation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m glad to rise and join debate this afternoon. I’m talking 

about Bill No. 79, The Representation Act, 2012. And again, 

this is a particularly interesting piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, because of course it’s the fruits of not the poison tree 

necessarily, but certainly the dubious tree in terms of the way 

this government across the way came forward with a plan to 

launch three more MLAs into public life here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Of course they did this right after the election where they’d not 

said a darned thing about three more MLAs. They did this at the 

same time: making choices to increase the monies that seniors 

have to pay for seniors’ drugs. They did this at the same time as 

pleading poverty on different fronts in health care and 

education. And I guess they did this after having campaigned 

from one corner of the province to the other saying that, you 

know, here’s our platform. Here’s our pitch to you, the people 

of Saskatchewan; do you support it or not? The people 

supported it, and that’s the way it goes in democracy, Mr. 

Speaker. The platforms are put forward. But they didn’t say 

anything about three more MLAs. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And I don’t know about you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but for every 

doorstep I was on where the cry was, I’ve got this problem with 

housing or I’m wondering about the future prospects for my 

kids or I’m interested in the safety and vitality of my 

neighbourhood or, you know, we need a new school or the 

roads are in trouble — you know, there are different sort of 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2527 

concerns that get raised on doorsteps. 

 

Not once, Mr. Deputy Speaker, did I have anybody say, and 

you know what really needs some attention in this province, 

what needs some quick action? You know, you should get on it 

right before Christmas, right after the new government comes 

in. You should announce three more MLAs because we’ve 

obviously got a problem that needs solving, and that is not 

enough politicians here in this province of Saskatchewan. You 

know, nobody said that to me on the doorstep, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’m sure that nobody said that to a great many people in 

this legislature. I think the only people that talked about it were 

the in-group on the other side that call the shots when it comes 

to the agenda of this party. 

 

So why did we need three more MLAs? You know, was it 

because as a percentage of or as a ratio of population to elected 

officials somehow Saskatchewan is a laggard and has got a big 

problem and, you know, we need to get with it? Well that’s not 

the case, Mr. Speaker. The numbers would show that in the rest 

of the country, Saskatchewan at 58 MLAs already stood pretty 

fair in terms of the ratio. 

 

So let’s do a little bit of a review here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

Ontario where you’ve got 107 members of the provincial 

parliament, the average there on a population of 13.3 million, 

the average one of those MLAs represents about 124,981 

constituents. Interesting, interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Quebec, where they’ve got 7.9 million in population and 125 

members of the Assembly there, they represent about 63,838. 

Again interesting. British Columbia, 4.5 million, a bit more 

than that but 4.5 million, 85 members of the legislature. 

They’ve got 53,804 constituents apiece. 

 

Then in Alberta — you know good old Alberta, Alberta bound 

— and you’ve got the population of about 3.7 million and 87 

members of legislature for about 43,441 constituents per. 

Manitoba with 1.2 million in population, 57 members of the 

Legislative Assembly there for again about 21,940. Again this 

is on maybe a bit dated numbers, but they’ve changed a bit but 

not that much, Mr. Speaker, but on some of the old census data 

in Saskatchewan with 58 members of the legislature at that 

time, you had about 1.1 million in population. That worked out 

to be about 18,240. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not like, it’s not like you 

look throughout the West and see oh, oh my goodness, we’ve 

got an emergency. We better get on it with a quick injection of 

three more MLAs. It’s not like there’s a great hue and cry from 

the public for this. But instead we see the in-group over there, 

the Sask Party, bulling ahead with three more MLAs, not 

having said a darn thing about it at election time but coming 

forward, you know, almost as soon as they’re packing up the 

ballot boxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to do the job of bringing in 

three more MLAs. 

 

And then on top of that, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got the three more 

MLAs on the one side, but you’ve got them changing the way 

that used to, the formula was handed off to the Electoral 

Boundaries Commission wherein we used to count everybody 

in the province. And for everybody that stands in this 

Legislative Assembly and introduces school groups or talks 

about the importance of children and how they’re the future and 

this, that, and the other thing, everybody knows that that has an 

impact in terms of the work that you do in your constituency. 

Or if you don’t, you should, Mr. Speaker. And if you don’t 

understand that impact, I’d suggest maybe that you’re not doing 

your job. 

 

But I know for myself, coming out of my home community of 

North Central, which is the youngest neighbourhood in the city 

of Regina, we have a lot of young people. And that has an 

impact in terms of the way that you organize resources in terms 

of schools and health care and education. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, if you don’t have that sort of democratic voice being 

accounted for or the need to account that, the way that those 

concerns arise on a constituency basis, then you’re not getting 

the whole picture. And you’re not really . . . You can talk a lot 

about how children are the future and the importance of them 

and so on and so forth, but if you haven’t built that into the very 

foundations of your electoral system, into the very working 

blocks of your democracy, Mr. Speaker, then there’s a problem. 

 

And it’s interesting that that was called out by no less than the 

Children’s Advocate in the province in terms of, you know, 

how could you do this to the children? And again you know, 

the members opposite, once the in-group sets out the marching 

orders, away they go. So you know, Children’s Advocate be 

darned. The way that different people commented on this and 

the way that they had opportunity after opportunity to say, yes, 

maybe we got this wrong. Maybe when we’re calling for 

austerity in other places, maybe when we’re . . . You know, we 

didn’t come clean with this measure at the election time, maybe 

after, you know, we didn’t have it in our hundred. They 

certainly didn’t have it the 2007 list of promises kept, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And you know, after 2007 there’s this great deal made of 

promises made and promises kept. And you know, very fine 

and dandy, but for this round of the Sask Party, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it would seem there’s been a bit of water under the 

bridge and a bit of distance gone down the road away from 

what were reasonable propositions in terms of if you make a 

promise to the people of Saskatchewan you should keep it. If 

you’re going to seek governance, you should seek a mandate 

and you should be clear about that in the platform that you’re 

bringing to the people. And if you don’t have something that’s 

anticipated in your platform, then you should be very cautious 

in terms of how you proceed. 

 

But on a number of fronts after the 2011 election, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we saw a government that wasn’t quite straight with 

the people in terms of the plans they had for it. And I’m not 

sure if it’s just the in-group over there, but I do know this: that 

all members on that side have voted for this bill that put this 

into the amendment to the Electoral Boundaries Commission, 

and then were considering this representation Act here today, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it may be the in-group that’s calling 

the shots, but certainly everybody’s walking along behind them. 

And maybe they’re happy about that, maybe not, but they’re 

certainly moving as a block, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So you know, The Representation Act, in terms of the work that 

was done by the Electoral Boundaries Commission, fair 

enough, there doesn’t seem to be any egregious, shall we say, 

gerrymandering that went on in terms of the construction of the 



2528 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

boundaries. The boundaries themselves were fair enough. And I 

compliment the folks that did that work and the report that they 

made, but again Mr. Deputy Speaker, they had a job to do that 

was, I think, flawed in a really regrettable way in the 21st 

century of Saskatchewan democracy by the addition of three 

more MLAs and the elimination of everyone under the age of 

18 for the consideration of boundary construction. 

 

And so why they’d want to weight it against young people, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, why they’d want to run away from young 

people in terms of building the electoral boundaries of this 

province, well maybe it’s because constituencies with a 

preponderant young populations don’t tend to vote for the 

members opposite. And again, if you can’t beat somebody at 

the ballot box, one of the hallmarks of governments that are 

losing their way is, you know, if you can’t beat them at the 

ballot box and have the force of a better argument, well you see 

the games start to emerge. 

 

And you know, this is a piece of gamesmanship . . . [inaudible] 

. . . Mr. Deputy Speaker. So, The Representation Act? Fair 

enough. Sixty-one seats in the province? You know, that’s not 

what people voted for last time. But those are the boundaries 

that we’ll contest the next election on. And I’m hoping that 

people will remember at that point that the Sask Party 

candidates that show up on their doorstep and say, you know, 

here are all these great things that we’re going to do for you, 

here’s all the hopes and dreams and aspirations that we share 

with you, and here’s how it’s reflected in our platform. I hope 

people will remember to say, you know, well that’s all fine and 

good, you’ve given me the headlines. How about you tell me 

about the fine print? How about you tell me about the asterisks 

that you got or what do you got for the appendices to the 

platform? You know, what else have you got under the counter? 

Because maybe that’s what people should have been asking in 

2011. 

 

And you can’t fault the people for supporting something they 

did not know about, that they weren’t given a chance to say, 

you know, I support that or I don’t. And in the case of this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I hope the people don’t forget about it. And I 

know that in the official opposition, I don’t think we’re going to 

forget about it in terms of, again, the way that this popped up as 

a surprise for the people of Saskatchewan to address a concern 

that nobody raised in the election as an order of urgency for this 

government. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, some fine work done by the Electoral 

Boundaries Commission. They were working with the hand 

they’d been dealt, but the hand had been dealt from the bottom 

of the deck by the members opposite when they came out after 

the election, having not told anybody about it, that they were 

going to put in three more MLAs and they were going to 

eliminate everybody under the age of 18 in terms of the 

consideration for the construction of electoral boundaries. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, there are members in this House I know 

that place a great deal of pride in terms of getting out to talk to 

people on coffee row, on the doorstep, at the kitchen table, at 

the big table at the town hall, or you know, pick your place. 

And again, in terms of all the issues that people of 

Saskatchewan raised in this time of growth, in this time of 

opportunity, you know, growth is fine and good. And I guess 

one of the things I worry about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 

when the government ran on their platform Ready for Growth 

in 2007, I wish they were ready for growth. 

 

I wish they were ready for growth in terms of housing. I wish 

they were ready for growth in terms of infrastructure. I wish 

they were ready for growth in terms of health care and 

education. I wish they were ready for growth when it comes to 

making sure that post-secondary education, the price tag 

doesn’t keep rising higher and higher into the sky. I wish that 

they were ready for growth when people were invited from 

around the globe to come to Saskatchewan to join in this 

economy, to join in this society, to make sure that the 

educational opportunities are there for kids, to make sure that 

the ways that we can come together as communities were there. 

 

I wish that when this government said they were going to be 

ready for growth that they had a plan in place to do more in 

terms of engaging on education and employment the First 

Nations and Métis people of this province which has been, the 

record of this government of which has been condemned fairly 

routinely by people like Eric Howe, who this is what they 

study, Mr. Speaker. This is their expertise. 

 

And you know, the fact that on the First Nations and Métis 

education and employment file that Saskatchewan has fallen 

behind Alberta, has fallen behind Manitoba in terms of that 

work that is needed, in terms of engagement and, you know, for 

all the different fronts like that or the activity that is needed, 

you know, to not just be ready for growth but to do that work of 

genuinely representing the population and making sure that 

their hopes and dreams and aspirations are accounted for in the 

legislated and the financial agenda of the government of the 

day, for all of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there wasn’t . . . 

 

You know, I talk to a lot of people. It’s a great privilege of this 

job that you have an opportunity to talk to folks from all 

different kinds of walks of life and, you know, not one of those 

people have ever come to me and said, you know, I’ve got a 

problem and I think three more MLAs is the solution to that 

problem. I would defy anyone in this House to come forward 

and say, you know, here’s a documented case of where a 

constituent or citizen in the province of Saskatchewan said, 

three more MLAs; that’s exactly what we need. And you know, 

maybe they’ve brought them forward in caucus. Maybe there’s 

some great cases being made for three more MLAs in caucus. 

And you know, I guess I would urge members to bring that out 

into the rotunda or get on the record or, you know, explain to 

their local paper or to the media how this is needed. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And I guess, you know, one concern I’d have with that is I wish 

they’d done it during the election because I think that would 

have been a very unpopular plank to bring forward for the 

members opposite, but at least it would have been honest, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. At least it would have been straightforward. 

At least it would have given democracy and the people who 

vote in elections its due. And that due is that you bring forward 

what you’re going to . . . your plans as the government. You 

bring forward your platform. You say, this is how we’re going 

to balance the budget; these are the different sort of legislative 

items we’re going to bring forward; and here are the plans and 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2529 

programs that we have that respond to the needs of people of 

Saskatchewan. And that wasn’t done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by 

this government. 

 

And again today, here we are debating The Representation Act. 

And you know, representation is an interesting word, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Representation — implicit in it is this idea that 

you’re going to actually represent the hopes and dreams and 

aspirations of people that sent you to the legislature. And again, 

that representation is based upon, is built upon the 

understanding of what you as the person on the campaign trail 

say you’re going to do, and how people out there in the 

electorate say, yes, that’s either a good plan or a bad plan or 

what. But again there isn’t a single person in this legislature, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was elected to represent on a platform 

of, hey, let’s increase the number of politicians. And you know, 

if they’re saying that’s the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d 

suggest that they’re taking liberties with the people of 

Saskatchewan’s support. That will be rewarded for what they 

are come the next election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So again, my hope is that people remember three more MLAs. 

My hope is that folks remember how people under the age of 18 

were taken out of the calculations for building the constituency 

boundaries. And I know that again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

governments that engage in this kind of chicanery or these kind 

of ploys, it’s covering up for something — that if they have to 

sneak it in like this, you know, it doesn’t speak very well of the 

courage of the convictions of the members opposite. So you 

know, it may not be any small wonder that they didn’t include it 

in their platform. But again it’s part of their record, and I think 

it speaks volumes to the kind of interests and priorities that the 

members opposite are pursuing. Again alongside the interests 

and priorities, that you can talk to a lot of different people in 

this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and have a lot of urgent 

issues raised with you, and you’d be going a long, long, way to 

find one person that thinks, oh somehow we need three more 

MLAs. 

 

Anyway, I know that other members are interested in 

participating in other of the debates in front of the Chamber, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so with that I would move to adjourn 

debates on Bill No. 79, The Representation Act, 2012. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 79, The 

Representation Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 80 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 80 — The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to stand today to speak on Bill 80. And Bill 80 is 

being proposed by the Minister Responsible for SaskPower, the 

member from Kindersley, who also serves as the, I believe, the 

Minister of the Environment, Mr. Speaker. And what the bill 

does, Mr. Speaker, is that it allows . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . or Minister for the Economy, for the Economy, Mr. 

Speaker. I just wanted to make sure we got it correct. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that the people out there 

that may be paying attention to this particular process and 

certainly to the Assembly today on Bill 80, what the minister is 

proposing to do today. Primarily the focus of the bill is to allow 

SaskPower to borrow money from up to 10 to $13 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, to increase the amount of money that they would need 

to bring SaskPower to a modern standard as a company that is 

certainly going to need to upgrade and to continue to build a 

future for SaskPower so that the Crowns of Saskatchewan 

remain strong and vibrant for many, many years. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what’s amazing about this particular bill is 

the minister alludes to the fact that SaskPower can certainly 

take on more debt. But what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’ve seen this happen last year and this is really interesting, 

it’s very interesting overall, when you see a Sask Party 

government that everybody in the province knows that they 

don’t want to defend the Crowns and yet they come here today 

under this particular bill and they say we would like to increase 

the amount that in this instance Sask Power can borrow to 

replace aging infrastructure and to make the Crown stronger. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question in my mind the people 

of Saskatchewan want the Crowns to stay. As you can see, in 

2003 there was an overwhelming message delivered to the Sask 

Party indicating to them that people in Saskatchewan like the 

Crowns. They support the Crowns. And it’s really important 

that people out there note that they will stand for nothing when 

it comes to a government, they’ll stand up if the government is 

doing nothing to protect the Crowns. And the people of 

Saskatchewan wanted that message to be heard loud and clear. 

 

So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I think Bill 80 that talks about the 

debt of SaskPower, to try and increase the debt, one would 

wonder, okay what’s the game plan here from the 

Saskatchewan Party? And I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that from our vantage point, again from where we sit and 

analyze this particular bill, there’s no question that the increase 

in debt for SaskPower, as the Sask Party maintain, is allowing 

the company to reinvest into their aging infrastructure and 

continue building for the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that part of the bill is certainly something 

that we would support because obviously a strong Crown sector 

is really important for the province. The people of 

Saskatchewan want that. I think we understand that. But what’s 

really disturbing to us on this side of the Assembly and my 

colleague, the member from Riversdale pointed this out so 

eloquently, is what the Sask Party’s doing on the other hand in 

the backroom of this particular Assembly, in the backrooms, is 

that they are stripping all the profits of SaskPower to pay for 

their poorly managed provincial budget. 

 

And that stripping of all those dividends, Mr. Speaker, does 



2530 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

have two effects, Mr. Speaker. First of all, it leaves SaskPower 

as a corporation with nothing to operate under, absolutely 

nothing in terms of retained earnings, nothing to continue 

building a game plan for the next five to ten years as to how 

they could use some of the profits to replace the aging 

infrastructure as opposed to the debt that is being proposed in 

this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. And that is really where the 

problem begins, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And a second point that I think is worrisome to the people of 

Saskatchewan: as you strip these dividends, Mr. Speaker, and 

you put these dividends into your provincial budget, it also 

shows that the provincial budget itself is not balanced because 

you have to start, as one of the phrases used in the Assembly 

some days, robbing Peter to pay Paul. It really doesn’t make for 

sound economic nor fiscal sense, Mr. Speaker. And that effect 

certainly is going to be felt at SaskPower for a number of years. 

 

So my point that I would make on Bill 80 is that when you have 

the Crowns that are functioning well, they count on a thing 

called retained earnings. So each year SaskPower, that delivers 

all the power to our people, they profit so much per year. And 

that profit that they use in theory should be used to reinvest into 

the company. That profit should be used to replace the aging 

infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. But hold it. The Sask Party don’t 

want any of that because what the Sask Party want to do is they 

want to turn around and take that profit from SaskPower and 

use it to balance their ballooning deficit as a provincial 

government when it comes to operating their annual budget, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what’s happening here with this particular bill is the minister 

is saying, we need the ability to borrow more money. We need 

anywhere from 10 to $13 billion to regenerate and to refurbish 

the Crown corporation called SaskPower. Perhaps I would 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the first place that they should start 

looking at in strengthening SaskPower is to stop taking their 

dividends from them as a government and let the dividends stay 

within SaskPower so they wouldn’t have to assume all that 

extra debt. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of an awkward situation for the 

Sask Party to try and figure that out because we know a lot of 

their members, the backbenchers, they see what’s going on. 

They’re a bit confused yet as to how this is going to work 

because they see dividends being taken from all the Crowns, 

not just SaskPower, but SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance], not just SGI but from SaskTel, and not just from 

SaskTel but from places like the Information Services 

Corporation. 

 

All these Crown corporations make a significant amount of 

money, Mr. Speaker, and instead of using that money to 

strengthen their companies and keep the rates low for the 

people of Saskatchewan, the Sask Party is raiding their bank 

accounts to put it back into the provincial government coffers 

and then claim, as the Minister of Finance likes to do every now 

and then, that their budgets are balanced. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know full well, 

as well as the Provincial Auditor, that their books are not 

balanced, especially if they start seeing some of those choices 

being made this budget year that they are really, really in a lot 

of trouble, Mr. Speaker, as a government. And this is their way 

of dealing with it, is to allow the Crowns to assume more debt 

and they take all their profits. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that SaskPower itself is a 

very, very important part of the Crown family, the family of 

Crowns. I think that as you look at the future growth of 

Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan jealously guard the 

notion that they own their power company. They own their 

telephone company. They own their insurance company. They 

own their Information Services Corporation. They own all these 

companies. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan know full well that the 

common sense plan is to allow these companies to continue 

building for the future because we own them. We’re all 

shareholders in SaskTel. We’re all shareholders in investment 

services corporation. And we’re all shareholders in SaskPower. 

 

So from the comforts of their home, from the comforts of their 

home they say, well at the very least, we own these companies. 

And these companies generate profits. These companies 

generate profits and yes, we believe that some of the profits 

should come back to us as taxpayers to reduce our taxes. But 

they also believe that some of those profits should be reinvested 

in the company so you don’t have to assume more debt. 

 

And that’s exactly the problem that the Sask Party is 

undertaking with this particular bill, Bill 80, is they’re allowing 

SaskPower to go into further debt because the Sask Party is 

taking their profits out. And, Mr. Speaker, that does not spell a 

promise, nor does it allow the Crown corporations to continue 

to build for the future. 

 

How is it that you’re only saddling them with debt and not 

allowing them to use their profits? How does that make any 

sense for SaskPower? And that’s the crux of the problem with 

Bill 80. It doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to 

have a significant problem. It’s going to add a significant 

burden to many of our middle-class families that pay these bills, 

that pay their power bills and telephone bills each month. 

 

It’s an amazing phenomenon, Mr. Speaker, is the amount of 

pride and the amount of accomplishment and satisfaction that 

the people of Saskatchewan have when they tell other provinces 

that in Saskatchewan we own our power company. In 

Saskatchewan we own our telephone company. We own it is as 

the citizens of Saskatchewan and people are quite proud of that, 

Mr. Speaker. And that whole sentiment, that whole sentiment, I 

believe is very, very apparent throughout all parts of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And what I would point out is that when you look at some of 

these bills and how the Sask Party is caretaking the future of the 

Crowns, I tell the people of Saskatchewan pay very close 

attention to what they’re doing because what they’re doing is 

they’re trying to discredit the Crowns. They’re trying to saddle 

the Crowns with all this debt. They’re assuming they’re going 

to use the Crowns to blame them for any mistakes and problems 

they have. And in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, they’re taking 

every cent and profit from some of these Crown corporations 

including SaskPower to try and balance their books on a budget 

that nobody on that side of the Assembly can ever stand up and 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2531 

say that they’re proud of. 

 

[16:30] 

 

There’s no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that the people 

of Saskatchewan need to pay very close attention to this matter. 

They need to pay very close attention to how the Sask Party is 

managing the Crowns and what they are doing to protect the 

Crowns. 

 

And I’ll give you a good example. Last week we heard about 

SGI, as it relates to this Bill 80, that SGI was contemplating 

increasing the amount of registration and insurance on 

motorcycles, on motorbikes. And the argument that was made 

at that time is that the motorbike industry or the riders and the 

people that register under SGI, they’re a high-risk group. 

They’re a very high-risk group and they have a lot of claims, so 

we’ve got to make sure that claims cover all the risks attached 

to the motorbike costs. Well, Mr. Speaker, as soon as the 

motorcycle industry heard about this and the motorbike 

enthusiasts began getting wind of how SGI was going to 

increase these rates, they became highly organized. They 

became highly vocal, and they were very upset at this particular 

government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what happened on that front. And 

I think that’s a real important point to raise when I talk about 

how these Crowns are being manipulated by the Saskatchewan 

Party so that the people of Saskatchewan at the end of the day 

will look at the Crowns and start questioning the future and 

certainly start questioning their loyalty and faith to the Crowns. 

And a good example of that, as it relates to Bill 80, is the SGI 

rates for the motorbikes. Now what happened is — we think, on 

this side of the Assembly — that SGI said, okay, we’ll look at 

this problem. We have to increase the rates because of the 

accident rate and that will certainly get the motorcycle 

enthusiasts upset, but this is a business. 

 

And what they done, Mr. Speaker, is that when this information 

broke, when the news broke, everybody was upset at SGI. 

Everybody was really being critical of SGI. They were saying 

it’s SGI’s fault — SGI this and SGI that. The purpose there, 

Mr. Speaker, the manipulation there is, nobody focused on the 

government that made SGI do this. The Sask Party government 

instructed SGI to do this and SGI had no choice but to put those 

rates into place. And what happened, Mr. Speaker? They 

achieved two objectives here. 

 

First of all, with SGI rates, people were angry at SGI. We’d tell 

them SGI, if they let the Crowns operate as they should, then I 

think SGI will be fine. What happens is manipulation and push 

by the government to make sure SGI increased those rates and a 

lot of people were upset with SGI. But SGI was not the 

problem, Mr. Speaker. It was the Sask Party wanting more 

money from SGI to take away the dividends so they can 

balance their books. That’s where the problem is. 

 

So what happens is people are upset with SGI. Then along 

comes the Premier and tweets, well I’ll try and fix this. And of 

course, Mr. Speaker, we see the manipulation of the public. 

You have SGI being viewed as a bad Crown and the Premier 

coming along and saving the day. That’s the kind of 

manipulation we see when it comes to the Crown corporations. 

And we anticipated on the opposition this is exactly what 

they’ll do. They’ll do this time and time again. They’ll get the 

Crowns or some department or some agency or some program 

announce by the government that’s really unpopular and then 

their intent all along is that the Premier come along and say, oh 

we’re not going to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they done that with SGI. There’s a fine example 

of how they got people upset at the Crown corporation. Because 

the Sask Party, through the back door, made them raise the 

rates, and then all of a sudden, through the front door, the 

Premier comes along and says, oh I’ll save the day. We’ll look 

at that thing. Maybe we won’t do this. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, that’s the manipulation that we see by the 

Sask Party when it comes to the future of our Crown 

corporations. And on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

we said this would be done. Time and time again by the Crowns 

and when SGI announced these rate increases, we sat back and 

we said look, you watch what happens here. All of a sudden, 

the people will be angry at SGI and then the Premier will come 

along and say we’ve changed our mind. And it’s all about 

manipulation to position their leader, their Premier to look good 

and to make the Crowns look bad, Mr. Speaker. And that kind 

of manipulation of the Crowns is very, very bad for the future 

of the Crowns. 

 

And our job as an opposition is to make sure that people 

understood, understood the type of games and the games, or the 

games being played at the expense of the Crowns by the Sask 

Party government. And it goes right, right to the core, right to 

the cabinet, to the Premier and all the backbenchers and to all 

the handlers of the Sask Party. Their intent is to weaken our 

Crowns so they’re able to justify to the people of Saskatchewan 

why they need to sell these Crowns at a later date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there’s no question in my mind we’re going to see a lot more 

manipulation of the Crowns and the value of the Crowns than 

ever before because the right wing agenda on that side, they 

believe that the Crown corporations, the Sask Party believe that 

the Crown corporations should be privatized. There’s no 

question about it in our minds. They want to privatize the 

Crowns. They want to sell it to their buddies. And if they can’t 

sell them to their buddies because the people of Saskatchewan 

want to keep them, then what they’ll do is they’ll start the PR 

campaign to make the Crowns look terrible. 

 

And a good example of that was how SGI was recently in the 

news about some of the motorcycle rates that were going to 

increase. And all of a sudden, out of the blue the Premier comes 

along saying, oh I’ll save the day. I look popular again and I’ll 

announce we’re not going to look at those increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we mean in the opposition of 

how this doesn’t make any sense. Why would you do that to the 

people of Saskatchewan? The simple message that they have is 

you must protect your Crowns. You must take care of the 

Crowns because, Mr. Speaker, in the future we’re going to need 

our Crowns more than ever because there’s two sources or three 

sources of income that we would need in the future to ensure 

that Saskatchewan remains on a sustainable path, unlike what 

the Sask Party envision. 

 



2532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

The first source of income that many governments have, 

including Saskatchewan, is some of the income tax, whether it’s 

corporate income tax or personal income tax, that we receive as 

a government from the people. We use that money to of course 

deliver programs. So that’s the first source of income. 

 

The other part that we can also do as a government is to make 

sure we don’t spend frivolously and make sure that the 

spending pattern remains on a sustainable path, just so you 

know that the people in Saskatchewan know that a penny saved 

is just as valuable as a penny earned, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 

another exercise that we can do. 

 

But when we rebuilt the economy and the shattered remains of 

a province, when the Conservatives were in charge, Mr. 

Speaker, we used those two sources of income. We cut 

programs. We increased the taxes, which we had no choice to 

do both of them. But the government also had at their will, we 

had the Crowns, the Crowns that were able to also provide 

income and help sustain Saskatchewan as a province. And this 

province was facing some serious debt at the time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what happens now in the future if Saskatchewan ever goes 

through that challenge again? I tell the people of Saskatchewan 

— the middle-class people, the moms and dads at home, and 

the people that may be watching this — that if you do not 

protect your Crowns, that if you do not protect your Crowns, 

you’re really compromising our ability as a province in the 

future to try and find ways and means in which we can survive 

financially as a province. And, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is 

not figuring this out at all. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other challenge when you start looking 

at the Crowns in general, as Bill 80 would suggest, this minister 

wants to saddle SaskPower with 10 to $13 billion in debt. 

That’s what the bill is all about. And over the next couple of 

years they’ll start rolling out, oh we’re going to spend 1 billion 

here or $2 billion there. And guess who’s going to be paying for 

that, Mr. Speaker? The users of SaskPower — the mom and 

pop that are at home listening to this, you know, the 

middle-class families. So then they’re going to be paying the 

increased power bill. There’s no question about it in our mind. 

 

It’s not coming back from good management in the Sask Party 

at all, Mr. Speaker. They’re allowing SaskPower to go into 

debt, to increase the rate to people to service the debt. In the 

meantime, they’re taking out all the retained earnings. And 

once again, Mr. Speaker, there’s manipulation at the highest 

level. We’re seeing that, quite frankly, all over the place. 

 

And I can almost guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that when it 

comes to those increases in power rates, you won’t see the 

Premier getting up and saying, oh we’re going to change that, 

we’re not going to do that. What the Premier will say then, oh 

we’re allowing SaskPower to service their debt. This is the only 

way they can do it. If you want to keep the Crowns, you have to 

do this. If not, we could sell it. We can sell SaskPower and then 

all our problems will go away. It’s all about how well you 

position the Crowns because, Mr. Speaker, we see a lot of 

evidence that the Sask Party is not doing anything to protect the 

Crowns. In fact they’re using manipulation. They’re using PR 

and spin and they are quite frankly weakening the Crowns each 

and every single day, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s why I keep telling people if you really want to know 

how the Saskatchewan Party is helping the Crowns, just go 

simply on the website Save our Saskatchewan Crowns, SOS 

Crowns, and it gives you a lot of the detailed information as to 

what they have privatized so far, what they’re going to do to 

manipulate public opinion against the Crowns, how they’re 

going to increase the debt of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, and how 

they’re going to make sure that people are paying much more 

for those services that the Crowns provide. 

 

It’s all part of a conservative, right wing think tank that says, 

this is what you’ve got to do to convince the people of 

Saskatchewan to get rid of your Crowns and to sell your 

Crowns. And, Mr. Speaker, after that it’s an open market and 

whatever company comes here to provide power or telephone 

or insurance, Mr. Speaker, they can dictate the rates. They can 

dictate the prices. They can dictate whatever they want, because 

guess what, Mr. Speaker? The people of Saskatchewan no 

longer own those Crowns. It is owned by a private corporation, 

and wherever those private corporations are from, they will not 

allow any government — including the Sask Party — to dictate 

what price they can or cannot charge, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

the problem for the future. We can see that happening within 

the next 5, 10 to 15 years. But the Sask Party does have this 

plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The conservatives on that side certainly see this as a real 

possibility. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it once before and I’ll 

say it again: it is my belief that in the future, if they do sell our 

Crowns and there’s new power corporations set up by private 

interests, I more than guarantee you that we see some of the 

current cabinet members on some of these corporate boards. 

That’s what I honestly believe will happen, Mr. Speaker, 

because quite frankly they’re looking for a soft place to land 

after politics. And where best to land? Right amongst their 

friends, not amongst the people of Saskatchewan who they have 

compromised when it comes to protection of the Crowns. 

 

I think the Crown corporations need to be protected at a greater 

rate. They need more transparency, and the people of 

Saskatchewan have to pay attention to what the Sask Party is 

doing. And there’s some really good logic, some really good 

points, and some really good information on the website called 

Save Our Saskatchewan Crowns — SOS Crowns. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s some really good information on that. 

 

Bill 80 proposes to see 10 to $13 billion in increased debt for 

SaskPower. Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know what the debt is 

today at SaskPower, but what I can tell you is that what could 

have been saved had SaskPower simply used their retained 

earnings for their expansion, had used their retained earnings 

for the renewal of their infrastructure, had used their retained 

earnings to take advantage of the technology to protect the 

environment more and to produce more earth-friendly options 

for power, all that has all gone out the window. And why has 

that all gone out the window, Mr. Speaker? Because the Sask 

Party has sucked every penny of profit from SaskPower. They 

have taken every bit of profit that SaskPower has had and 

they’re using it to balance their budget, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

an amazing, that’s an amazing story, if people would follow 

what the Sask Party is doing, Mr. Speaker. It is very plain. It is 

very easy to find out. 

 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2533 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan ought to 

be very worried. They ought to be very worried, because any 

time you’re allowing the Crown corporation to go 10 to $13 

billion in debt, Mr. Speaker, and take away every cent of profit 

they have . . . And what does that spell for the future of 

SaskPower, as the bill I’m speaking about, Mr. Speaker? The 

problem is it really saddles the Crown corporation with that 

debt. And the Crown corporation will have no choice; the 

Crown corporation will have no choice but to come and collect 

that money from the customers. And when the middle-class 

families begin to pay a lot more and the lower class families 

begin paying a lot more, then people will realize that the Sask 

Party . . . every increase of power, every increase in those 

power bills, you can thank the Sask Party for that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think if you look at the whole notion of 

exactly how many millions of dollars that the Sask Party has 

taken out of the Crowns over the last three or four years, the 

people of Saskatchewan would be shocked. There’s no question 

in my mind, in our minds that people would be shocked to see 

exactly how much, how much the Sask Party has taken out of 

our Crowns. And this is the same party that really, that really 

were against the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They were dead set 

against the Crowns. We’re going to get rid of those Crowns if 

we’re ever elected, Mr. Speaker. That’s the conservative way. 

And now today in Saskatchewan, what is saving the budget for 

the Sask Party government’s ineptness in terms of being able to 

balance it? Well it is the Crowns that were developed by the 

NDP — that’s who’s saving their budget today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So what’s going to happen? Oh, they don’t like the Crowns. 

They never did like the Crowns. But the problem that they 

have, Mr. Speaker, is they need the Crowns to turn around and 

justify to the public that we have a balanced budget. And every 

time the minister says oh, we have a balanced budget, or the 

Premier says that our budget is balanced, the opposition laughs 

their heads off. And the auditor, I’m pretty sure she’s probably 

just wringing her hands trying to say well, show me where the 

balance is. Show me where the balance is. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the problem is they have not. They can criticize the NDP. The 

Sask Party can, and they do it on a continual basis. But you 

can’t argue with the Provincial Auditor who is an independent 

officer of this Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we need to add more argument, they did 

argue with the Provincial Auditor. They did chastise the 

Provincial Auditor, for what? For telling the truth. The truth 

was their books weren’t balanced. Their budget was not 

balanced. But the problem with the Sask Party is they keep 

saying it over and over and over again. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they’ve got to get it right. The people of Saskatchewan aren’t 

buying your logic that your budget is balanced. Why? Not 

because the NDP say it’s not balanced. We certainly have made 

our point time and time again. But an independent officer of 

this Assembly that has no political ties — and that independent 

officer is the Provincial Auditor — if she says your books are 

full of it, there’s no balance here whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, 

what does the Sask Party do? Well they go after her. You know, 

they begin to chastise her in committee. Well, Mr. Speaker, you 

simply can’t do that. The people of Saskatchewan deserve 

better. They need to know the exact state of our finances today. 

So the Crown corporations, all the contributions, retained 

earnings, are going towards what they call a balanced budget. 

And despite sucking every penny of profit out of SaskPower to 

supposedly balance their books, they’re still getting grief from 

the auditor. So we’re sitting here saying, well will somebody on 

the Sask Party kindly lead this file? So we ask for answers. We 

ask the Premier and he gets up and says, well it’s balanced. And 

of course 80 per cent of the backbenchers are saying, well 

we’re told to say it’s balanced even though we know it’s not 

balanced. So they’ll continue saying, oh it’s balanced. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some serious problems in the Sask 

Party. And from our perspective as an official opposition we’re 

going to make sure we do a number of things to prove to the 

people of Saskatchewan, (a) their budget is not balanced, and 

(b) they’re sucking every penny of profit from the Crowns to 

pretend to have a balanced budget. And they’re saddling our 

Crowns with a whole whack of debt that you and I will be 

paying through our power bill. And their intent is to have the 

people and public opinion in the province turn against the 

Crowns so they can make a quick dime and appear to have 

everything all figured out in a couple of years. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that could be furthest from the truth, because the 

people of Saskatchewan are going to pay attention to this, and 

they’re going to pay attention to this on a continual basis. 

 

So Bill 80, Mr. Speaker, when they talk about the future of 

SaskPower, we will not take any leadership or advice from the 

Sask Party. We know what their game plan is. We know what 

this minister represents. We know what they want to do in the 

long term when it comes to the Crowns. And the trick we have 

as an opposition is to tell the people of Saskatchewan, the 

middle class families, the people that are going to be paying 

these power bills, all the people that are going to be affected by 

this, be very, very careful and watch what goes on when it 

comes to our Crowns. Because we need that vigilance in the 

people of Saskatchewan to make sure the Sask Party doesn’t go 

haywire on us and begin selling all these Crowns on a fire sale 

basis, Mr. Speaker, or as we like to say on this side of the 

Assembly, a wall-to-wall sale of our Crowns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no question in my mind that SaskPower 

needs to be strengthened. We certainly can see that, Mr. 

Speaker. We think that we can indeed strengthen SaskPower 

under the smart growth strategy that the NDP employ, Mr. 

Speaker. And we talk about this on a continual basis. We think 

that SaskPower can indeed lead the nation, not only in reducing 

greenhouse gases, Mr. Speaker, but to look at alternative energy 

sources, Mr. Speaker, to look at alternative energy sources, Mr. 

Speaker. And there are tons of examples and tons of 

opportunities of how we can do net metering, of how we can 

look at solar power, of how we can look at geothermal heat, of 

how we can look at conservation. There are tons of examples of 

how SaskPower can be an exciting Crown that not only protects 

the environment, creates jobs, and keeps the power costs low 

for an everyday family, Mr. Speaker, but they can do some 

solid and exciting innovative projects to make SaskPower even 

something that we can be proud of even more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the rate the Sask Party is going, people will look at 

SaskPower within the next five to ten years, given all the rate 

increases, as a Crown corporation that gives them higher power 

bills each month. And, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to protect 



2534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

the Crowns like you say you are, then you wouldn’t do that to 

the Crowns. You wouldn’t put them in that predicament. 

 

And that’s exactly what happened with the SGI rate increase. 

This minister turned around and everybody blames SGI. SGI 

got their walking orders from the Sask Party and the plan was 

to get everybody mad at SGI and then the Premier to come 

along and say, oh we’re not going to do that now, and he’d 

saved the day. And people will say, oh well that’s nice. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that, in our position, is manipulation at its 

finest. And I tell the people of Saskatchewan that had they left 

the profits in SGI, in SaskTel, and in this case SaskPower, we 

wouldn’t have to have these challenges that we have today, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is a fact, Mr. Speaker. That is a fact. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again I’ll point out the whole notion of the 

panel that I attended a number of hearings on, and of course the 

panel was talking about alternative energies. And I can 

remember one occasion when they were talking about cold 

fusion and hot fusion, and I made the point in Saskatoon that I 

looked at the Sask Party participants on that panel and they 

were all confused. They didn’t know what the heck this was. 

Well I didn’t know it either but I wanted to be able to learn 

more about this whole process. 

 

So I told the presenter that we have cold fusion and we have hot 

fusion, and then that side of the Assembly or that side of the 

panel, you have confusion. Because the problem was they 

weren’t even prepared to look at any of these alternative 

energies. They weren’t prepared at all. They were just going 

through the motion of listening to the people. And when these 

people had these really good ideas, these really good concepts, 

well some of the Sask Party members on the committee would 

look at each other and didn’t have a clue what was being 

presented. 

 

At the very least you should engage the public. Engage the 

people and ask them the questions at the time. Ask them the 

questions as what do you mean by these proposals? Could you 

give us a demonstration? Could you talk about the potential? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they weren’t going to do any of that. And 

all they talked about, the committee members at the Sask Party 

during this committee hearing, all they talked to the people 

about in the room, get ready for power rate hikes. That was 

their continual message, Mr. Speaker. That was their continual 

message. 

 

And I’ll have to say, Mr. Speaker, that people in the room were 

turned off by that approach. People in the room saying, well I 

thought we were talking about alternative energies. I thought 

we were going to bring innovation and excitement and ideas to 

SaskPower, not hear a message and a PR campaign by the Sask 

Party to tell us to get ready for rate increases. 

 

And that’s exactly the point, Mr. Speaker. We are now seeing, 

we are now seeing alarming and continual evidence by the Sask 

Party that their intention is to do two things, two things: 

manipulate public opinion to try to turn public opinion against 

the Crown corporations; and number two is they’re trying to 

make sure they saddle these Crown corporations with debt for 

years to come, for years to come, thus making it very affordable 

and very enticing for the people of Saskatchewan to sell these 

Crowns. 

 

And I say to them that there’s an alternative way we can protect 

the Crowns. And in SaskPower’s example, as it relates to Bill 

80, there are tons of ways we can build SaskPower to make it a 

very exciting, a very dynamic, a very profitable, and a very 

important source of income for the province for many, many 

years if we build on the premise that we have to keep our 

Crowns a public-owned Crown corporation. That’s the premise 

that we have to undertake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s a lot more people out there that are paying close 

attention to this, and I would say to this particular minister and 

to the Premier and to the Sask Party government that the people 

of Saskatchewan do not want their Crowns sold. They don’t 

want their Crowns saddled with your debt. They don’t want you 

to suck every penny and profit out of the Crowns to balance, 

supposedly balance your books when we all know that’s your 

game plan. So why are you continuing on? Why don’t you 

admit your mistakes, admit that your arrogance is getting the 

best of you, and stop being so stubborn and come clean with the 

people of Saskatchewan as it relates to the future of the Crown 

corporations? Stop hiding behind your language that all the 

people in Saskatchewan can see right through, right through. 

 

And we sit here and we smile as we listen to the backbenchers 

saying, oh our budget is balanced. Yeah, right. Well, we’ve got 

a bridge for you to sell. Well that bridge is not in P.A. [Prince 

Albert] of course, but there’s other places. 

 

But I would point out, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that the 

people of Saskatchewan, you want to keep SaskPower. You 

want to keep SaskTel. You want to keep SGI. You want to keep 

the Information Services Corporation, all these corporations 

that make good money. They make good money. 

 

If you want to keep the future of the Crown corporations intact, 

you want to keep the future of the Crown corporations 

promising. You want to keep the future of the Crown 

corporations affordable to the everyday family, the middle-class 

people. You want to keep the Crown corporations dynamic, 

exciting, innovative, evolving. Well, Mr. Speaker, the first 

thing you do, you don’t trust a right wing government like the 

Sask Party who fail to admit their mistakes. You don’t trust 

them to look after the future of the Crowns because they 

ideologically want to get rid of the Crowns. So why would you 

trust them with something that they don’t want to keep? 

 

And that’s the fundamental question that we have in the 

opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, any bill, any bill that they bring 

forth, especially a bill that increases our debt 10 to $13 billion, 

10 to $13 billion, Mr. Speaker . . . While some people may not 

appreciate the $13 billion price tag they were talking about, it 

may increase your power bill at home by 50 or 60 bucks, if not 

120. And then if they decide to sell the Crown corporation, it 

might go up as high as $200 a month. 

 

So the people at home, why should this be an interest to you? 

Why should you be worried about this particular bill? It is 

because it’s going to cost you more money for your power bill 

every month. Every month you’re going to see an increase to 

your power bill, and that’s why you should not trust the Sask 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2535 

Party with the future of the Crowns. 

 

It doesn’t make any sense at all as to why we would entrust 

them with the Crowns because at the end of the day, whether 

you live in Yorkton or whether you live in Wynyard or whether 

you live in Beauval, the bottom line is under the Sask Party 

you’re going to be paying a lot more for power, a lot more for 

telephone, a lot more for insurance, Mr. Speaker, because that’s 

exactly what they’re going to force the Crowns to do. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I tell the people of Saskatchewan that we should not 

accept that. 

 

And there’s ways you fight back. There are ways you fight 

back. And the most important way you fight back is to get rid 

of the Sask Party. Get rid of them all, Mr. Speaker, and put a 

party in there that’s going to protect the Crowns and build the 

Crowns. Because why should you trust a right wing 

government to protect the family of Crowns that people value 

simply because it doesn’t make any sense from the political 

perspective? 

 

And it’s time to fight back. It’s time to fight back and get rid of 

these Sask Party MLAs, Mr. Speaker, because people don’t buy 

their fairy tales. People don’t buy any of their arguments as to 

how they’re going to protect the Crowns. And they especially 

don’t buy their whole notion that their budget is balanced. My 

goodness, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see any evidence to suggest 

that at all. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more I want to say 

on Bill 80, but I’m going to make sure that people hear the 

message, and we’ll continue hammering home these very 

important details as to why Bill 80 is really important and why 

we need to pay very close attention to what Bill 80 is trying to 

represent. And, Mr. Speaker, we simply don’t trust the minister 

in charge nor the party in charge when it comes to protecting 

the integrity of our Crowns and to protect the future growth of 

our Crowns. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 80. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 80, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. It now being near the hour of 5 

o’clock, this House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2503 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2503 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2503 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2503 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2503 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Congratulations to Saskatoon Writer 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2503 

 Hope’s Home Opens in Prince Albert 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2504 

 Spending Choices 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2504 

 Cameco Wins Award 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2504 

 New Telephone Number for HealthLine 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2504 

 Engineering and Geoscience Week 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2505 

 Strong Kids Campaign 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2505 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Agreement with IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2505 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2505 

 Saskatchewan Transportation Company Bus Routes 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2507 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2507 

 Rent Increases for Tenants 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2508 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2508 

 Funding for Universities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2509 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2509 

MOTIONS 

 Special Committee on Traffic Safety 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2510 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2511 

 Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2521 

 Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2523 

 Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2525 

 Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2526 

 Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2529 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


