




















































Hansard: May 01, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 56A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3413 

 May 1, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 

make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to make an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

truly a pleasure to be able to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of the House, a very, very, special guest that’s 

seated in your gallery. Her Excellency Miriam Ziv, the 

ambassador of Israel to Canada, has returned to the province of 

Saskatchewan, has joined us here in the Legislative Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Her Excellency has been posted to Canada since September of 

2008, and it’s our honour to welcome her back to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, on what is her farewell tour of 

Canada. She has been providing public service to her country 

now for over 40 years. And so maybe the retirement goes 

beyond this particular posting, though, Mr. Speaker, based on 

my observation of her energy and her passion, my counsel 

would be that she not just do that yet, Mr. Speaker, in whatever 

other endeavours she might be interested in. 

 

I know Ambassador Ziv has already met with at least two 

government members, Mr. Speaker, including the member for 

Greystone who, as a minister of the government, travelled to 

Israel to further develop relationships there, and also the 

member for Saskatoon Northwest. The ambassador will also 

meet with representatives from the government and the 

University of Regina during her stay in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province has a strong relationship with Israel, 

particularly in the area but not limited to innovation and 

educational collaboration. Researchers from Israel and 

Saskatchewan are working together on a wide variety of 

products such as the development of new varieties of canola, 

and there have been numerous joint university programs and 

exchanges. In fact, Mr. Speaker, later this day the ambassador 

will meet with U of R [University of Regina] officials to 

explore the development of a joint MBA [Master of Business 

Administration] program in public safety. The program is being 

developed by the U of R’s Faculty of Business Administration 

and The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada and Israel have an economic relationship, 

but we also have a shared history. We have common values that 

bind us together. Canada played a part in the creation of Israel, 

voting for Israel’s membership in the United Nations, and 

contributed to peacekeeping efforts in the Middle East to help 

stabilize the region in those early years. 

 

Former prime minister Brian Mulroney, when speaking in 1989 

said this of the relationship, and I quote, “Most of all, in the 

daring and difficult period of Israel’s infancy, when your nation 

needed friends — true friends — Canada was there. Canada 

was there over 40 years ago . . .” and Mr. Mulroney went on to 

say that the support remains even to that day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 24 years has not changed these sentiments, has not 

changed the commitment. Our province and the people of 

Saskatchewan are proud to be good allies, steadfast friends to 

Israel, who we see as such a stable and hopeful source of 

democracy in the Middle East and a defender of freedom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to thank the ambassador for her 

dedication to this post. She’s been a very, a very active 

ambassador, taken great interest in all the regions of our 

country, and specifically in the province. And so with apologies 

in advance for pronunciation, I say this: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Hebrew.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier this afternoon in welcoming Ambassador Ziv to the 

Legislative Assembly. And as the Premier has said, I wish the 

ambassador all the best as she moves on with the next stages for 

what is in store for her. 

 

We do thank her for the work that she has provided to her 

country but also for what that has meant to Canadians and to 

people in Saskatchewan on the social front, as well as with the 

economic ties that are between our countries. Canada’s 

relationship with Israel is important to Canadians and to 

Saskatchewan people, so we thank you for being here today and 

thank you for your service. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you, I have the privilege to introduce to 

members some remarkable young men and women who are 

seated with us on the floor of the Chamber today. They’re all 

involved in the quality of life recreation programs delivered 

through the Saskatchewan Abilities Council, and they all live 

right here in Regina. With us today we have Bruce Kaufman, 

Steve Fiessel, Denise Frigon, Florence Matt, and Mark Mould. 

Along with them today is Lynne Demuele, the program 

supervisor; and Sarah Ottenbreit, who is another one of the 

talented staff that’s involved in the program. 

 

I had the opportunity to meet with the individuals after they had 

a tour of the building and had lunch. And we discussed the fact 

that this Legislative Building belongs to the people of the 

province, to them. So I’m asking all members to join with me 

today in welcoming these individuals to their Legislative 

Building. 

 



3414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the opposition, I would join with the minister in welcoming 

the folks from the Abilities Council here. We welcome them to 

their legislature. It’s very good to see you out today and it’s also 

great when we have people come to our legislature. So 

welcome. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 

several people in your gallery. Today is International Labour 

Day, and we have several working men and women who have 

come to mark that day with us. And I’d like to introduce several 

of those people. With us is Jen Britton, recording secretary of 

the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] — if Jen could 

give us a wave — and she is with CEP [Communications, 

Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada]. As well we have 

Paul Guillet from RWDSU [Retail, Wholesale and Department 

Store Union]. Paul’s over up there. Also, Alex Furlong, the 

prairie director for the Canadian Labour Congress; Alex is here 

as well.  

 

And we have many more. I don’t want to get to everyone, but 

the people I do have a list for, and that’s SEIU [Service 

Employees International Union]. They’re a very active union 

and have a lot of concerns. SEIU-West is represented by Janice 

Platzke; and Terry Nanowski from acute care; Lori Klus, 

long-term care; Kathleen Jackson from the CBO 

[community-based organization] sector; Gail Field, long-term 

care; Sherry Lynds, long-term care; Karen Trafford, acute care; 

Lisa Zunti, acute care. And I think Tom Howe is up there 

somewhere. He’s a staffer. Is Tom . . . Anyways, these are folks 

from SEIU and working men and women. 

 

And we also have people who’ve now retired. The 

Saskatchewan Federation of Union Retirees are also here as 

well. So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

them to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite in welcoming these individuals to the 

legislature today. On behalf of the government members, and I 

think on behalf of all members, I think it’s fair to say we respect 

and value the work that these people do. They make an 

enormous contribution to the growth and success of our 

province and it’s certainly their, very much their right to 

organize and present their views collectively. And we thank 

them for the good work that they do. 

 

I would say to them that no matter who is in government, 

there’s going to be the odd bump and hiccup on the road. As a 

province we have a very good record of having settlements. 

Over 90 per cent of the people that work in our province have 

settlements that were arrived at without job action. 

Unfortunately we don’t have a great record of getting there, and 

that’s something that we want to deal with more proactively in 

the provisions of Bill 85. And in any event, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to welcome them on behalf of all members. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly an 

honour today to introduce to you and through you and all 

members of the Assembly, 42 great students, grade 12 students 

from the Humboldt Collegiate. And accompanying them is their 

teacher Mr. David Millette. Mr. Millette has brought his 

classroom to this Assembly for a number of years now, and it’s 

always an honour to have them with us. And I hope they enjoy 

the proceedings, and welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to join with the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition in saying hello to the Israeli ambassador. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Hebrew.] 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce, 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Peter Siarkos, who is the 

summer student in my office. This is the third year that Peter 

has served in this position. He is a third year student at the 

University of Saskatchewan, studying at the Edwards School of 

Business. And I would ask members to welcome him to his 

legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand today to present a petition on cellphone 

coverage for the northwest part of Saskatchewan. And Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cellphone service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nations along with the community of 

Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring communities 

in each of these areas. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular petition has been signed by 

people from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this 

particular page, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed are 

from Dillon and from Saskatoon. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling for better seniors’ care here in 

Saskatchewan: 

 



May 1, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3415 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 

quality of seniors’ care in our province, including creating 

more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 

standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 

for home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in 

seniors’ care facilities; and providing more support to help 

seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 

as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions calling for the reconsideration of passing Bill 85, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we know since the 

employment Act was introduced in December, literally 

hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been carried 

out in the interests of due diligence. And, as the minister has 

said, labour relations are generally good in this province, and 

there’s no necessity to rush this omnibus bill through that will 

likely govern workplace relations for decades to come. Labour 

relations in all sectors run the risk of being thrown into turmoil 

as a result of Bill 85’s sweeping changes. Thousands of 

represented workers stand to lose their rights to bargain 

collectively and be represented by the union of their choice. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the Government of Saskatchewan 

to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act in 

this current session before the end of May and to place it 

on a much longer legislative track to ensure greater 

understanding and support for the new labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Yorkton, Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, Foam Lake, 

Weyburn, Battleford, Lloydminster, Moose Jaw, Hudson Bay, 

Swift Current, and Maple Creek, among many other places. I do 

so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

asking for repaving, repairs, and maintenance of northern road 

Highway 102 from La Ronge to Sucker River. This road is a 

major highway used by buses transporting our students to 

school, tourism for camping and fishing, and by the mining and 

forestry industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are very concerned for their safety. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the repair and 

maintenance on the La Ronge north road, Highway 102, is 

important to northern residents and must be undertaken 

immediately. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is signed by many La Ronge and area residents. 

I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

National Day to End Bullying 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 1st has been 

declared Belonging: National Day to End Bullying by the Boys 

and Girls Clubs of Canada in partnership with CIBC [Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce]. Mr. Speaker, this great campaign 

is designed to increase public awareness by showing support to 

all young people who have been affected by bullying, in 

addition to showing support for anti-bullying initiatives that 

have been designed to ensure all children and youth feel a sense 

of safety and belonging. To help raise awareness for the 

campaign, the Boys and Girls Clubs of Canada sold T-shirts 

with anti-bullying messages during the month of April to be 

worn today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes that bullying is a 

growing issue facing youth in Saskatchewan. In my new role as 

Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education, I look 

forward to travelling the province and engaging communities in 

public consultations to discuss anti-bullying initiatives, as well 

as developing a Saskatchewan action plan to help guide our 

government’s decisions on how to best address this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

recognizing May 1st as the National Day to End Bullying, and 

encourage everyone to get informed and speak out against 

bullying. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

May Day 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 

today with workers across the world as we recognize May Day. 

May Day, also known as the International Labour Day, 

originated as workers organized for an 8-hour work day. Ironic, 

Mr. Speaker, that this issue continues to be relevant over 100 

years later as we see Bill 85 attempt to change this hard-fought 

right and allow moves towards a 10-hour work day. 

 

In my own community of Saskatoon, there will be a rally taking 

place this afternoon protesting Bill 85. The people of 

Saskatchewan are asking that the Sask Party government slow 

down the bill. There are also people here in the gallery today 

with the same demand. 

 

Achievements that we are happy to see so far this session are 

Howard’s law and Jimmy’s law. The passing of Howard’s law 

makes Saskatchewan the first province in Canada to have a 

mandatory asbestos registry for public buildings. And Jimmy’s 

law is an important step in protecting late-night retail workers. 



3416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, May Day has never been more relevant to workers 

than it is today. The factory collapse in Bangladesh, with over 

380 deaths, reminds many of us that we cannot disconnect our 

purchasing habits from the working conditions of people in 

other countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this House join 

with me in recognizing May Day. I am honoured to stand with 

solidarity with workers throughout this province and add my 

voice to theirs in a call for fair, safe working conditions. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Opening of New Mounted Police Detachment 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday morning, 

along with the Minister of Corrections and Policing and the 

member from Saskatchewan Rivers, I was happy to attend the 

grand opening of the new RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] detachment in Prince Albert. 

 

Throughout its history, the RCMP’s members have earned our 

trust and respect. They come from all over Canada to serve and 

are key contributors to the communities in which they live and 

work. The RCMP has a long history of serving this province. In 

1886, Prince Albert was the headquarters for the North-West 

Mounted Police. Today there are more than 1,000 RCMP 

members in Saskatchewan. They represent, day in and day out, 

the values of our people. They also work with municipal and 

First Nations police services and are an important part of 

successful integrated policing operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is supporting the RCMP. We 

made a commitment in 2007 to provide 120 additional officers 

in this province. We kept that promise and 76 of those officers 

went to the RCMP. The renewed provincial police service 

agreement, which was signed in August of 2011, will see the 

RCMP continue to fulfill this important role in our province for 

the next 20 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

Prince Albert RCMP on their new detachment, which facilitates 

effective, community-oriented policing and allows us to enjoy 

the peace of mind that comes from living in a safe and secure 

community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Child 

Find Saskatchewan is marking the 22nd annual Green Ribbon 

of Hope campaign, which will be taking place throughout the 

month of May. Next week, May 5th to 11th, is Missing Persons 

Week in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is every parent’s worst nightmare to imagine 

their child going missing. Sadly, this is a tragic and devastating 

reality for far too many parents. According to the most recent 

data from the RCMP, anywhere from 50,000 to 60,000 youth 

are reported missing each year in Canada. These are 

heartbreaking stats. 

 

The Green Ribbon of Hope is a symbol to remember all missing 

children and to seek their safe return to home. Child Find 

supports families of missing children through their connecting 

families program, as well as working to locate children and 

reunite them with their families. In addition to this important 

work, Child Find also provides educational programs to 

children and youth on Internet safety and to raise awareness 

about the need to protect children, including running ID 

[identification] clinics throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Child Find’s motto is, a missing child is 

everyone’s responsibility. These are important words that speak 

to the role we all play in our communities protecting children 

and youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the House to join with me 

in recognizing the Green Ribbon of Hope campaign and the 

work of Child Find Saskatchewan. We are all very thankful for 

the important work that the staff and many volunteers do to 

protect our children and youth and support the families of 

missing children. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Support for Multiple Sclerosis Research 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is Multiple 

Sclerosis Awareness Month. In communities across the 

province, most of us know someone who is living with MS 

[multiple sclerosis] or has been touched by it. Saskatchewan has 

the highest prevalence of this disease, so that estimated 3,500 

people in this province living with MS. MS is a chronic, 

debilitating disease in which the communication ability of nerve 

cells in the brain and spinal cord is impaired or destroyed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to augmenting our province’s primary 

health care services that can help people who live with chronic 

diseases, the Government of Saskatchewan supports research 

into MS, including the clinical trial in Albany, New York that is 

testing a procedure that opens constricted veins. Saskatchewan 

was the first province to move forward and advance the 

research into this area, and we will continue to be a champion 

for MS research. 

 

The research team is currently working to assess the 

Saskatchewan patients who were randomly chosen from over 

600 people who put their names forward. Up to 86 

Saskatchewan residents will travel to Albany to participate in 

the study. Mr. Speaker, we don’t know whether angioplasty 

addresses the degenerative symptoms of MS but we want to 

help find answers. That is why we’re committed to MS research 

and to helping the people who are affected by this disease. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of Hearing Services 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 



May 1, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3417 

this House to advise all members that May has been proclaimed 

Speech and Hearing Awareness Month here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hearing loss is the fastest growing disability in 

North America and affects one out of every five people. In 

Saskatchewan alone, ten thousands of people are impacted by 

some forms of hearing loss. Fortunately, those people have been 

able to turn to Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of Hearing 

Services for support since 1981. This organization has been a 

primary mission of promoting a world without barriers for 

people who are deaf, deafened, or hard of hearing. 

 

They offer a number of services including sign language 

interpreter, and computerized note-taker services, a community 

service worker program, a discount hearing aid battery program, 

and access to information and a wide range of technical aids 

and devices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud to work with Saskatchewan Deaf 

and Hard of Hearing Services and our many partners in the 

disability community. In fact, this year’s budget provided more 

than 34 million to support the inclusion of people with 

disabilities in the social and economic life of our province. 

 

Working together, we will ensure Saskatchewan is the best 

place to live in Canada for people with disabilities. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Statements by New Democratic Party Members 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night during 

estimates, the member from Athabasca accused the Minister of 

Highways of firing 90 front-line highway workers. But just like 

his leader the day before, the member from Athabasca is wrong, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

On Monday the NDP [New Democratic Party] leader stood in 

this House and falsely claimed twice that there were 47 patients 

stranded in the hallways of St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon last 

week. We now know that’s not true, but the NDP leader still 

hasn’t had the decency to stand up, retract his statements, and 

set the record straight. So last night the member from Athabasca 

decided to follow his leader’s bad example. He claimed 90 

highway workers were fired, when in fact not a single front-line 

highway worker was fired. 

 

So just to review, the Leader of the Opposition talks about 47 

patients in the hallways that didn’t exist. The NDP Highways 

critic talks about 90 fired highways workers that don’t exist. It 

kind of reminds me of Dwain Lingenfelter’s 1,100 phony NDP 

memberships that didn’t exist. Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite may have a different leader, but they’re still the same 

old NDP. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is International 

Workers’ Day, and the contributions of working men and 

women are being celebrated with holidays and parades all over 

the world. 

 

Here at home, Mr. Speaker, the opposition would like to 

celebrate International Workers’ Day by seizing an opportunity 

to be co-operative and productive in the interests of maintaining 

a balanced labour environment that benefits everyone. The 

opposition is prepared to put our values into action by reaching 

out and offering co-operation in building fair labour laws. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he direct his cabinet to be 

constructive in resolving the flaws in the essential services Act 

and the proposed Saskatchewan employment Act and join the 

opposition in concrete discussions on how to fix these laws? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the new 

leader of the NDP has yet to ask a question in question period 

on Bill 85, and we were expecting some questions on that. 

Maybe there is one to come. He wants to touch rather on some 

other pieces of labour legislation, specifically essential services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course we’ve just had a ruling from the Court 

of Appeal, a ruling that the government welcomes, Mr. Speaker, 

both with respect to the right to strike and specifically on the 

essential services legislation. That ruling notwithstanding, the 

minister has been working on some adjustments and 

improvements with partners on that particular piece of 

legislation. 

 

In the last election, that member campaigned on a platform of 

eliminating, tearing apart any essential services legislation in 

the province. Is that still his position? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this issue matters to us a great 

deal. In this session, Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked questions 11 

times. We’ve had over seven hours of time spent in adjourned 

debates, petitions, every day, Mr. Speaker, because this issue 

matters to all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the government’s essential services 

Act could be challenged in the Supreme Court of Canada and a 

decision could be years away. We also know that the 

government has been pushing through Bill 85 before fully 

considering the consequences The Saskatchewan Employment 

Act could have on working people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today is a chance to commit to co-operatively 

work on both laws using common sense alternatives that will 

benefit everyone. And that’s why we’re coming forward, Mr. 

Speaker, in a constructive way. My question to the Premier: 

will he delay passage of Bill 85 in order to allow the Minister of 

Labour and the opposition Labour critic to sit down to address 

problems with Bill 85 while working in a fair and reasonable 

essential services section? 

 



3418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is very good news. 

This is very good news. That member, that Leader of the 

Opposition helped write the NDP platform for the last election. 

He wrote the tree booklet. We all have a copy of it. Now that’s 

gone from their website. It’s like they’ve purged everything that 

has to do with Mr. Lingenfelter. It’s like even if they mention 

his name, he might apparate in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The bottom line though is this. That member ran on a platform 

that we don’t need essential services legislation, that we should 

repeal this government’s efforts with respect to exchange of 

information in the workplace or a secret ballot. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I do welcome this because now, today, the leader of 

the NDP is saying, in principle they do support essential 

services legislation. Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member that 

notwithstanding the ruling by the Court of Appeal that our 

legislation is frankly fine the way it is, we’re working to make 

those improvements. 

 

With respect to Bill 85, Mr. Speaker, for well over a year we’ve 

been listening to both sides of the equation, employers, Mr. 

Speaker, and union leaders. There was a discussion paper 

released, then legislation tabled, Mr. Speaker. There’s already 

been many adjustments. There are more to come in terms of 

amendments because we have been listening, Mr. Speaker. So 

we welcome now the NDP’s position in favour of essential 

services legislation and assure them that all sides have been 

heard and their interests will be reflected in the new bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the Sask Party’s 

approach to labour legislation here in the province. It’s been an 

approach that has been predetermined. It’s been an approach 

that hasn’t been about proper consultation with working people 

with the entire province. And, Mr. Speaker, we believe in the 

opposition that there is a better, there is a constructive, and 

there is a co-operative way forward in dealing with issues like 

the labour legislation we’ve seen the Sask Party bring forward. 

 

We see, Mr. Speaker, that the essential services legislation may 

end up in the Supreme Court of Canada, a decision that is years 

away. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, there’s a responsibility to 

address the flawed legislation that has been brought forward by 

the Sask Party government through Bill 85 and through the 

previous essential services legislation. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we offer to work co-operatively and 

constructively with the government. The suggestion is that the 

Labour minister and the Labour critic can sit down and talk 

about ways to fix the legislation, something that all working 

people believe needs to happen. Will the Premier, will the 

Premier respond to this constructive suggestion of finding a 

solution that benefits all Saskatchewan people? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It’s interesting — 53 days into his 

leadership that he asks the first question on Bill 85 or, frankly, 

on labour legislation. Mr. Speaker, it’s also interesting that he 

references the hours they spent in debate on this. Mr. Speaker, 

they have up to 20 hours to spend on debate, to suggest these 

constructive alternatives. They had up to 20. What did they 

take? They didn’t actually take seven; they took six hours and 

40 minutes or so, according to the count of the House Leader. 

Mr. Speaker, there has been days and days and days of 

opportunity for those members to say, here are some specifics. 

We haven’t waited for them, Mr. Speaker, because they frankly 

haven’t been very interested in Bill 85. 

 

So the minister has been meeting with the stakeholders 

involved, Mr. Speaker. The discussion paper elements, some of 

the discussion paper elements have already been removed from 

the legislation because of the feedback we received — 

thousands of submissions received to the government, Mr. 

Speaker, over a year of consultations. More adjustments to 

come to clarify, for example, overtime; to clarify the workweek 

that’s reflected in other provinces that we want for the province, 

Mr. Speaker; to maintain stat holidays. There’s a long list of 

changes already made, adjustments made. Mr. Speaker, we 

welcome this new-found interest of the Leader of the 

Opposition, but much of the work is already under way. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier should check 

his facts. We know the Leader of the Opposition has given a 

second reading speech on Bill 85 just shortly after being elected 

the leader. So check your facts. 

 

But we know, Mr. Speaker, we know no one asked for Bill 85’s 

massive overhaul of workplace and employment laws. And the 

reason no one asked for it is because the laws in place today are 

largely working, as the Minister of Labour acknowledged 

earlier today. They’re productive; our workplaces are 

productive. We have general labour peace and co-operation 

between employers and working women and men. But 

following the limited feedback period with no public 

consultations, the Sask Party unveiled the draft of Bill 85 on the 

final days of the legislative session in December. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m willing to work on a fair solution. My 

question to the minister is: will he use today, May Day, 

International Workers’ Day, to commit to put Bill 85 on hold 

and work with me and stakeholders on a better set of labour 

laws that will benefit everyone? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to wait for 

May Day. The hon. member references the fact that there is 

labour peace in the province today. This notwithstanding the 

fact that every other labour legislation suggestion that had been 

brought forward by this side of the House has been met by that 

side of the House with predictions of the dire consequences, 

that the labour relations in the province would self-destruct if 

we brought in construction labour relations reform — they were 

wrong; that the labour relations of the province would sour if 

we simply brought in secret ballot certification — they were 

wrong. Mr. Speaker, we have labour peace. They predicted a 

disaster if we allowed for freedom of expression in the 

workplace for workers or for the employers. They were wrong, 



May 1, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3419 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have labour peace in Saskatchewan. And even more 

importantly, in terms of the wealth of working people in the 

province, there are 25,700 more working people in 

Saskatchewan today, 50,600 since we took office; a 3.9 per cent 

unemployment rate, the lowest in the country; average weekly 

earnings up over $700 a month, 24 per cent since our 

government took office, Mr. Speaker. That is the best measure 

of all in terms of the health of working families in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan stand 

to lose protections in this bill that are very important to our way 

of life here that we enjoy in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there 

were 60, 60 lives lost in workplace deaths last year. And one is 

too many, and one is tragic. And the record number of deaths 

should point to a need to review the occupational health and 

safety laws. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what Bill 85 will 

accomplish. As has been raised by so many people, Bill 85 does 

not address the serious concerns workers have about OH & S 

[occupational health and safety], about their own safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that Bill 85 needs much more work, and 

how can the Sask Party plow ahead with passing Bill 85 when 

there’s so much that is not understood about its implications on 

the workplace? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we take very seriously the 

issue of workplace safety in this province, and the minister 

responsible has laid out plans through the various mechanisms 

of government, the pieces of legislation, to seek those 

improvements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the hon. member refers to changes that the Act will bring 

that are going to hurt workers. Doesn’t get into any specifics. I 

kind of think I know what he’s talking about because there’s 

some misinformation going around the province today about 

what Bill 85 is and isn’t. For example, Mr. Speaker, there is a 

concern that there’ll be no more lunch breaks because, under 

this particular bill, a break can be refused in the case of an 

emergency, which is exactly the case today in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the minister’s advisory committee 

have asked for the definition to go back into the Act, and so 

amendments are going to take care of that particular issue, if 

that’s what he’s talking about. 

 

With respect to hours of work, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the four 

days of 10-hour shifts, Mr. Speaker, hundreds of agreements 

have been in existence for years of four days, 10-hour shifts 

approved by permit by those members opposite when they were 

in government. In fact our information was that they never 

turned one down, Mr. Speaker. These kinds of shift 

organizations occur today in Alberta, in New Brunswick, Nova 

Scotia, Ontario, and PEI [Prince Edward Island]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not an excuse not to pay overtime, and 

amendments will be brought forward to clarify that as well, Mr. 

Speaker. If the member wants to work through systemically the 

concerns that he has or that others have, we can do that because 

we’ve been listening and the clarifications are coming, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now one of the 

biggest flaws in the sweeping rewrite of the province’s labour 

laws is how much is left out of law, left to regulation to be 

dictated by the government when it suits them. 

 

Six months after the Sask Party government tabled its labour 

bill, they still haven’t revealed what’s in the regulations. And, 

Mr. Speaker, with so much left to be determined by regulation, 

it’s clear the provisions in the bill just don’t cut it. And that’s 

exactly why this legislature should not be passing this bill. We 

do not know all the consequences that could result from those 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, workplace safety and workplace rights are at 

stake. Will the Sask Party government do the right thing and 

delay the passage of Bill 85 until all of the work, including the 

consideration of its regulations, have been completed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in all honesty we heard 

similar concerns presented by the NDP in advance of the 

passage of the construction labour relations legislation of this 

government. In advance of the labour amendments we made, 

we heard their predictions of peril and destruction if we were to 

pass those legislations, and the harm they would cause to the 

labour environment of the province. And now by their own 

admission, by the admission of the Leader of the Opposition 

and the critic, there is labour peace in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We have a growing economy. We have more families working 

today. We have higher wages being paid to those families, Mr. 

Speaker. I would also say to the member this, that the measure 

of what’s going to happen in regulations or in other parts of the 

bill might be found in actions we’ve taken at the behest of 

union leaders who asked that this province index minimum 

wage — we’re doing it, Mr. Speaker; that we would provide 

unpaid leave to attend citizenship ceremonies — we’re going to 

do it; unpaid leave to donate an organ — we’re going to do it; 

standardization and reduction of qualifying periods for parental, 

maternity, and adoption leave — we’re doing all those things, 

Mr. Speaker, not because business asked for them, but because 

labour did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Health Care Staffing and Capacity 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We continue to hear 

more and more troubling stories here in Saskatchewan about the 

level and quality of care for seniors in our province. We’ve 

heard about calls for help, Mr. Speaker, from seniors that have 

gone unanswered. We’ve heard about seniors being left on 

toilets unattended for hours because the right amount of staff 

were not present. We’ve heard about seniors not receiving baths 



3420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2013 

for weeks at a time all because of chronic understaffing in care 

facilities here in the province. These are alarming stories, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s not the level and quality of care that our 

parents, that our grandparents deserve in this province. 

 

Lynne Seaborne has joined us in the gallery today to add her 

voice to the many voices we’ve been hearing. Her husband, 

Adrian, has been in a care home for almost 12 years and she has 

seen both the decline in the quality of care offered to other 

residents and a significant decline in staff morale. My question 

to the Premier: does he agree with Lynne that chronic 

understaffing in care facilities is a problem that needs to be 

addressed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we take very 

seriously the individual cases that are brought forward by 

members of this Assembly wherever they sit, whether they’re 

brought forward in terms of constituent work by MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] on this side or on the 

floor of the legislature. Mr. Speaker, we would want to look 

into the particular concerns that have been referenced here now 

by the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can go over the fact that there is a greater 

complement of health care workers now in the province than 

there ever has been, with the admission that there needs to be 

more work done on the issue. The minister has taken steps with 

respect to long-term care. 

 

I would also say this though, Mr. Speaker. It would help, for 

example, in the cases being raised by that member, by the 

Leader of the Opposition, if he would ensure that his facts are 

correct. And I’m sure they are in this case; they are in this case. 

But just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker, he stood in his place and 

said there were 47 patients at St. Paul’s Hospital in the hallway 

waiting for care when he knew — I would assume, because he 

was a health care researcher prior to politics — that the number 

was four to five, Mr. Speaker. He’s had a chance to apologize. 

He’s had a chance to do the right thing. He’s not done that, Mr. 

Speaker. I hope he will because the cases that are raised, the 

situations he raises are serious and we want to look at them in a 

very serious way. He needs to commit that the facts are 

presented to the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these situations are serious. The 

situation that Lynne brings forward today is serious, and that’s 

why it’s so concerning, Mr. Speaker, to have the Health 

minister, to have members of the front bench say there is no 

cause for alarm when these issues have been brought forward to 

the floor of the Legislative Assembly. That has indeed been 

said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Understaffing, Mr. Speaker, is a huge problem in our care 

facilities, specifically the staffing ratios. Lynne says she knows 

of a situation where two staff were responsible for 33 residents 

on the morning shift. She has met with administration and 

management to raise concerns four times in just the last year. 

She’s come here today, Mr. Speaker, because she is seeing a 

growing concern, a decline in morale of the health care workers 

who want to provide the very best possible care and a decline in 

the morale of the residents, Mr. Speaker, who deserve the very 

best care here in the province. 

 

My question to the Premier: is he satisfied with a situation 

where there are just two staff members responsible for 33 

residents on a morning shift? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as the Premier has indicated, as I have indicated in the 

past, Mr. Speaker, first of all we want to thank those individuals 

that work in long-term care facilities all across this province, 

Mr. Speaker, who do a tremendous job for our residents, Mr. 

Speaker, knowing that for these residents this is in fact their 

home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any time that there are concerns that are raised, I 

take those concerns very seriously, Mr. Speaker. I had an 

opportunity to meet with the board Chairs of all of our health 

regions just two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve indicated in 

the past, what I want to see happen, Mr. Speaker, is I want our 

front-line staff to see the CEOs [chief executive officer] and the 

senior management of our health regions who make the 

determination on staffing levels, Mr. Speaker — knowing that 

they’ve received record levels of funding from the provincial 

government over the last six years, Mr. Speaker — that they 

actually go to the floor and see first-hand the conditions. As 

well, Mr. Speaker, to meet with our resident family councils, 

Mr. Speaker, and where we have long-term care facilities 

without a resident council, Mr. Speaker, that we have one 

created in every single facility so that we can address these 

problems head-on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from Lynne 

Seaborne. We’ve heard from Carrie Klassen. We’ve heard from 

other family members that have come forward with the 

concerns that they have experienced because of the care of their 

loved ones. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from front-line 

health workers, workers who want to provide the very best 

possible care to residents but they are put in a situation where 

they know they’re not providing the best possible care that they 

could be because the staffing ratios are not adequate. 

 

We’ve heard from the Provincial Auditor who has said that 

there are concerns and the proper level, proper regulations are 

not there. We’ve heard from Carrie. We’ve heard from Lynne. 

We’ve heard from many families. But we do not see the 

response from the Sask Party government that this deserves. We 

see them, Mr. Speaker, suggesting that CEOs should tour 

facilities. Well that might be an okay step, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 

hardly a solution for the problem of poor staffing ratios. This 

requires leadership, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to care for our 

seniors in the province. 

 

My question to the Premier: is he satisfied with the staffing 

ratios in care facilities for seniors here in Saskatchewan? 

 

[14:15] 

 



May 1, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3421 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, frankly I’m surprised that 

the Leader of the Opposition would take issue with having the 

senior management and the CEOs actually go to the floor of 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, because when we see 

work that’s being done within our health care system, on our 

quality improvement work, Mr. Speaker, that is being driven by 

front-line staff, Mr. Speaker, working in concert with the 

management, the senior leaders within the health care system, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s where we’re seeing great gains being made 

in areas of Releasing Time to Care, Mr. Speaker, and in other 

areas of quality improvement. So I find it surprising that the 

Leader of the Opposition would see so little value in this step. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from that though what we want to see coming 

back through the Ministry of Health from the review of our 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, are recommendations on 

how we do assessments within long-term care facilities, Mr. 

Speaker, whether or not the assessment tools that were put in 

place by the members opposite are in fact adequate to what the 

needs are of our residents, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to 

having that input from our CEOs. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we see here is the Sask 

Party’s unwillingness to accept the situation that families are 

experiencing. When people come forward with concerns, when 

family members come forward and talk about the situation that 

their loved ones are in, we see a dismissive attitude, Mr. 

Speaker, where we’re not tackling the issue in the way that it 

needs to be addressed. 

 

We know that staffing ratios are a concern, so why ignore the 

reality, Mr. Speaker? In the same way, at St. Paul’s Hospital, 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a hospital printout showing overcapacity in 

the hospital by 47 individuals. That is a report, Mr. Speaker, 

and why is it simply dismissed? 

 

My question to the Premier: does he really think that the CEO 

tours — the CEO tours, senior executives going to a facility — 

does he really think that is a solution compared to fixing the 

staffing ratios that affect the care of seniors here in the 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, on the issue of St. Paul’s 

that the Leader of the Opposition raised a number of days ago, 

if the Leader of the Opposition would only go to the very same 

spreadsheet that he referenced and actually add up the 

over-under column that he’s referencing, he would see the 47 

. . . It doesn’t even add up to 47, Mr. Speaker. So first of all, 

he’s wrong on the facts on that measure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well what St. Paul’s has indicated is that there 

was hallway care for four to five residents for a very brief 

period of time because of a Norwalk outbreak, Mr. Speaker, 

that closed one unit, Mr. Speaker. But there were beds 

available, Mr. Speaker, in other areas that don’t show up on the 

census, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition does have a responsibility to hold 

the government to account, Mr. Speaker. He also has a 

responsibility to provide the facts when he does so in the 

premise of his questions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Technology Organizations 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that government’s been 

embroiled in its IPAC [International Performance Assessment 

Centre for geologic storage of CO2] affair, conflict that possibly 

shows corruption, Mr. Speaker, since going back to 2008. It 

relates to CVI [Climate Ventures Inc.] and ClimbIT, Mr. 

Speaker, and we know that the issues were presented to 

government members of the board back in 2009. We know that 

the CEO of IPAC started an investigation in 2010, and we know 

that they’ve had a report for over two years that condemned 

those companies’ business practices. It says to be vigilant with 

these companies and all players because of their inappropriate 

actions. Yet despite the condemning reports, dollars continued 

to flow, including through sole-sourced contracts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hundreds of thousands of dollars flowed through 

the Public Service Commission, through Energy and Resources, 

through SaskTel and SaskPower. At least one of those contracts 

was in the last fiscal year. With so many red flags, why would 

the Sask Party continue to dole out taxpayers’ bucks to these 

companies with an obvious conflict? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 

member opposite pointed out, there was an issue that happened 

with a contract that was sole sourced. There was a conflict of 

interest. It happened under the management of the U of R and 

that was four to five years ago now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was no board at that time, but when the 

board was informed that steps had been taken by the U of R that 

were not acceptable by government, there was then steps taken 

by the board. Those steps was to sever the contract, Mr. 

Speaker, to move the control of the funding from the U of R to 

the IPAC agency. Then there was a forensic investigation 

ordered to follow the money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have identified that, yes indeed, there was a 

sole-source contract, that there was a conflict of interest, and 

that the contract was higher dollars than what should have been 

paid, Mr. Speaker. But going forward, IPAC has done some 

great work and they have had clean audits ever since. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister references the 

very deal with CVI, the IPAC affair. But she didn’t reference, 

as the question related, to the hundreds of thousands of dollars 

doled out by that government after they knew of the concerns as 

it related to these contractors. And the language couldn’t be 

more clear and condemning. Those contractors, in the very 

report back to this government . . . This is CVI of course, Mr. 

Speaker, that was funded with taxpayers’ dollars by that 



3422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2013 

government back in 2008, Mr. Speaker; ClimbIT with its direct 

relationship. 

 

But the dollars didn’t just stop there, Mr. Speaker. One of the 

key players in the noted conflict of interest from CVI in the 

IPAC affair went over to the PTRC [Petroleum Technology 

Research Centre] and did the exact same thing in 2011, with the 

Sask Party shipping over another 250,000 bucks of taxpayers’ 

dollars back to the same players in the same companies. How, 

with all the allegations of waste, with the years of battling with 

these companies, the same ones started by that very 

government, would that government dole out . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member please place his question. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — With all of those circumstances, why 

would that government continue to dole out more money? And 

why won’t that the government finally come clean in its IPAC 

affair, lay the information on the table, and clean up its mess? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that every time 

the member opposite gets on his feet to ask a question, we have 

to separate the wheat from the chaff before we get down to the 

question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As we’ve laid out several times, Mr. Speaker, CVI was a 

company, Mr. Speaker. It’s a private sector company. It is not a 

company related to the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. We, as the government, supported the university in 

their attempts to commercialize their research, Mr. Speaker. 

They did a report. They moved forward with it. It is not related 

to us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As far as the member’s further assertion about PTRC, Mr. 

Speaker, we are a funder of the PTRC. We have one member on 

the board, Mr. Speaker. It’s a private . . . It’s a non-profit that 

was established in 1999, Mr. Speaker. We expect that all 

funding that we put through the PTRC, Mr. Speaker, is handled 

with the responsibility that we would expect of any tax dollars 

we give to any organization, Mr. Speaker. And we ensure that 

that is in fact the case. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to raise a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — Would the member please state his point of 

order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. In the recent question period 

exchange, the Premier stated that the Leader of the Opposition 

intentionally misled the House, and I would ask the Premier to 

stand up and apologize for that statement. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I believe if you review 

the Hansard transcript, the Premier made no such comment as 

indicated by the Deputy Opposition House Leader. 

 

The Speaker: — I will take the point of order under 

advisement and review Hansard for a determination tomorrow. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 70, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) without amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

bill and that the bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 70, The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) and that 

the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 70 — The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 70, The Education Amendment Act, 

2012 (No. 2) be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of Human Services 



May 1, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3423 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 58, The 

Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 with amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill, and this 

bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 58, The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 and that the bill 

and its amendments be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It is moved by the Minister of Advanced 

Education that the amendments be now read a first and second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Third reading of this bill. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question on third reading? Is the Assembly in 

agreement with the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 46, The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this bill and that the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

and that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

the bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 



3424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2013 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 82, The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this bill and that the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 and 

that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

[14:30] 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 91, The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this bill, and this bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

91, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

(No. 2) and that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 91 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I move that this bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 91, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 94, The Tobacco 

Tax Amendment Act, 2013 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill now be 

read the third time. 

 



May 1, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3425 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

94, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 and that the bill be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 94 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I move that this bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 94, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 

make a personal statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to make a 

personal statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Apology 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t recall the exact words 

I used in question period when we were discussing the issue of 

some of the comments made by the Leader of the Opposition on 

St. Paul’s Hospital. However, I say this unequivocally: if 

inappropriate language was used, deliberately or knowingly 

being two options, I withdraw those and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this afternoon and this 

evening, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. 

Thursday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:33.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3413 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3413 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3413 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3414 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3414 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3414 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3414 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3414 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3414 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3414 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3415 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3415 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Day to End Bullying 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3415 

 May Day 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3415 

 Opening of New Mounted Police Detachment 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3416 

 Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3416 

 Support for Multiple Sclerosis Research 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3416 

 Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of Hearing Services 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3416 

 Statements by New Democratic Party Members 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3417 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Labour Legislation 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3417 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3417 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3418 

 Health Care Staffing and Capacity 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3419 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3420 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3420 

 Funding for Technology Organizations 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3421 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3421 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3422 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3422 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3422 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3422 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3422 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3423 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 70 — The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3422 

 Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3423 

 Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3423 

 Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3424 

 Bill No. 91 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3424 



 

 Bill No. 94 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3425 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3423 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Apology 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3425 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


