




















































Hansard: March 19, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 35A  TUESDAY, MARCH 19, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2787 

 March 19, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the House 

some very important guests in the east gallery, and there are 48 

English as an additional language adult learners from the 

Saskatoon Open Door Society. So if they could give a wave to 

us, that would be great. Thank you. 

 

I was telling them about how important newcomers to our 

province are, and we sure welcome them here. I’d like to 

introduce their teachers: Don Campbell, Vicki Gerwing, Laurel 

O’Hanley, and Kim Pratt. I’d like to ask all members in joining 

me in welcoming them to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite in welcoming these people to the 

Assembly today. We’re hoping that all the members will be on 

their best behaviour so we’re able to demonstrate that we are 

always productive and always very respectful, as I’m sure the 

members opposite wish to present today as well. And it’s an 

interesting piece of democracy for these people. Many of them 

are new residents here. So on behalf of all members, I think we 

should welcome them and wish them a good day. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’m 

pleased to introduce two guests that are joining us in your 

gallery. Today this afternoon with us is Dr. Robin Evans, the 

associate dean of the Faculty of Nursing at the University of 

Regina, and as well Dr. David Gregory, the dean of Faculty of 

Nursing at the University of Regina. 

 

Dr. Evans is in attendance today to be recognized for a 

significant accomplishment, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll hear 

shortly through a member’s statement, but I would invite all 

members to welcome our two guests to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too, on behalf of the 

opposition, want to welcome the senior people from the school 

of nursing here in Regina. And we very much appreciate their 

work that they’ve done right across the province, and we will 

continue to support the work that they’re doing. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased this afternoon to introduce to you and through you 

individuals from the community of Grenfell. We have with us 

today Mayor Lloyd Gwilliam, along with councillors Gib 

Heinemann and Phil Peter. I’m looking forward to joining them 

as we meet with the Minister for Rural Health later this 

afternoon. And I would ask my colleagues and members of this 

Assembly to join with me in welcoming them to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to you and through 

you, seated in the west gallery, I am pleased to introduce Mr. 

Luke Annand who is here today. Mr. Annand is a film producer 

and writer. Born and raised here in the province from 

Mossbank, he’s currently residing in Regina. Unfortunately he’s 

moving in a couple of weeks to Winnipeg to pursue his career. 

He does hope to come back to Saskatchewan. Mr. Annand has 

shared with me a quote that he’d like me to share: “What is 

dead may never die.” 

 

And certainly as we look towards tomorrow’s budget and the 

Saskatchewan film employment tax credit and the film industry 

as a whole, this is an area that we certainly continue to hope to 

be resurrected, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members of this Assembly 

to welcome Mr. Luke Annand to his Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to the rest of the Assembly, sitting in your 

gallery I wish to introduce a few guests from my constituency 

this morning: Amaima Noor; her mother, Iram; father; and the 

other children. Give us a wave. 

 

Amaima and her family came here to Canada last year from 

Pakistan and have been actively engaged in the community and 

are getting used to Saskatchewan’s winters, to say the least. 

Amaima attends grade 7 at Regina Coronation Park and I’ll be 

speaking about Amaima’s accomplishments a little later in a 

member’s statement. But I’d like all members to please join me 

in welcoming Amaima and her family, Iram and the rest of 

them, to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

happy and pleased and proud to present a petition today in 

support of bringing cellphone coverage to northern 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, along with 

the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 



2788 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

First Nation and the community of Turnor Lake, 

including the neighbouring communities in each of these 

areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the people that have signed this petition and 

other petitions that we have presented day after day here have 

signed them from all throughout Saskatchewan, and we’re very 

proud of that, Mr. Speaker. And the people that have signed the 

petition here today are primarily from Turnor Lake. And I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know since the Act was introduced in December, literally 

hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been carried 

out in the interest of due diligence. 

 

And if Bill 85 does become the new consolidation of labour 

laws in the province, working people, particularly young 

workers, immigrant workers, and other vulnerable workers will 

suffer from a hasty watering down of our current labour 

standards which set the mandatory minimums for all 

Saskatchewan workers. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Weyburn, Maple Creek, Saskatoon, Regina, Melville, 

throughout the province. I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Northerner Celebrates 90th Birthday 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I had the honour and privilege 

of attending the 90th birthday celebration of Joseph William 

Charles, held in Stanley Mission in late December 2012. The 

honour feast was attended by over 150 family and friends, and 

it included traditional dancing and sharing of stories. 

 

Mr. Charles was born and raised on a trapline near Fish River in 

northern Saskatchewan and also raised five of his 18 children 

there. The rest of his family was raised in Stanley Mission. Mr. 

Charles is blessed with numerous grandchildren and 

great-grandchildren, most of whom were in attendance at his 

honour feast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, northerners place great value on traditions and 

culture. Most of Joseph William Charles’s life was spent living 

and handing down the traditional lifestyle to his family and 

community. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me in congratulating Joseph William Charles on celebrating his 

90th birthday and wish Mr. Charles many, many more years to 

come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Z99 Radiothon 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise in the House today to share an important event that 

happened in Regina last week. Mr. Speaker, there are few 

things as exciting as waiting for the arrival of a newborn baby. 

Parenthood is a journey that has many joyful moments, but 

unfortunately unexpected complications can arise and lead to 

young babies needing special care. These moments are what 

make the annual Z99 radiothon such an important event in our 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last Thursday and Friday Z99 radio personalities 

CC, Lorie, and Buzz broadcast live from the Cornwall Centre 

for 36 straight hours to help raise money for the neonatal 

intensive care unit in the newly opened Rawlco centre for 

mother baby care at the Regina General Hospital. This unit 

houses on average 21 fragile newborns and sick babies daily. 

This year’s radiothon raised a record-breaking $742,343 which 

will go toward enhancing services within the unit. Throughout 

its 26-year history, the fundraiser has raised over $5 million for 

the neonatal intensive care unit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join me in 

recognizing the outstanding efforts of the event organizers and 

volunteers, CC, Lorie, and Buzz, and the generous contributors 

within our community who helped make this year’s Z99 

radiothon a phenomenal success. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Craik Wins Award for Greenest Town 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

congratulate Craik, Saskatchewan on receiving the Reader’s 

Digest award for the greenest town. This award was a 

reader-nominated award with the judging panel receiving over 

400 entries across seven categories. 

 

Last September, Reader’s Digest launched a contest asking 

Canadians to send in stories explaining why their city, town, or 

village was the most artistic, healthiest, greenest, and all around 

greatest place in the country. Quebec City took the top prize, 

being named the most interesting city. But Craik, as the 

greenest town in Canada, receives a $1,000 prize and bragging 

rights. All the winners will be featured in April’s Reader’s 

Digest.  

 

The Craik ecovillage was conceived as a joint venture between 

the town of Craik and the RM [rural municipality] of Craik No. 

222. The two parties worked closely together to make the 

ecovillage a reality. Craik’s ecovillage has been working at 

educating the public on the benefits of green living since 2004. 

Residents are warm, inviting, and willing to share their 

knowledge with visitors to the ecocentre. 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2789 

Mr. Speaker, the town may appear eclectic with solar panels, 

wind turbines, straw bale and clay houses, but they are also 

living proof that it is possible to live in an environmentally 

sustainable way. Craik’s community sustainable living project 

is an inspiration to anyone who wants to reduce their carbon 

footprint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating Craik on their Greenest Town Award. I look 

forward to watching the community grow and explore what it 

means to be a sustainable community. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Nursing Leader Receives Award 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour to 

recognize Dr. Robin Evans who is seated in your gallery today. 

Every year the Canadian Association of Perinatal and Women’s 

Health Nurses recognizes a nurse who has shown excellence in 

leadership, caring for women, newborns, and families. 

 

Last fall the organization announced its 2012 selection for its 

Excellence in Leadership Award. This prestigious award winner 

is Dr. Robin Evans, associate dean of Faculty of Nursing at the 

University of Regina. A nurse for 37 years, Dr. Evans has 

worked in numerous areas including long-term care and 

obstetrics at the Pasqua and Regina General Hospital. She was a 

consultant with the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 

Association and has taught at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] and at the University of 

Saskatchewan. And she is now serving as the associate dean in 

the Faculty of Nursing at the University of Regina. 

 

We are very fortunate that Saskatchewan is able to draw on the 

expertise and experience of such a skilled nursing leader such as 

Dr. Evans. We are thankful for their outstanding contribution, 

leadership, and maternal and child nursing as well as in nursing 

education. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 

recognizing Dr. Robin Evans on her outstanding achievement as 

the recipient of this national award in nursing leadership. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Grade 7 Student Mayor For a Day 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

in the House today to recognize one of my constituents, 

Amaima Noor who is sitting in your gallery. Amaima and her 

family came here to Canada last year from Pakistan and since 

then have been actively engaged in life here in Saskatchewan. 

Amaima attends grade 7 at Regina Coronation Park School, and 

recently wrote an essay that was chosen as the February winner 

of the Mayor For a Day contest. 

 

Her submission spoke of the amusement park she had close to 

her home in Pakistan as well as the traffic jams experienced 

here in Regina, and was selected based on her keen interest in 

civic politics. Amaima’s artwork has been selected twice to be 

displayed in the Regina School Board art show and has 

dominated track and field, taking second place in the city track 

meet. 

 

I had the privilege of attending other accomplishments of 

Amaima’s, including her victory at the regional Canspell 

spelling bee as well as her reading of “Exercise is Good” at the 

2012 young authors night. This year Amaima and her sister 

Nabeera have both been chosen as two of three young authors 

to have their writings published in the South Saskatchewan 

Reading Council’s 2012 publication. 

 

I’m honoured to have Amaima and her family as residents of 

Regina Coronation Park and I look forward to following their 

future achievements. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities’ 

Annual Convention 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I had the 

pleasure of attending the 2013 SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] annual convention. I 

would like to congratulate Saskatchewan’s rural leaders on yet 

another successful event with over 2,100 people attending. Mr. 

Speaker, SARM has always been a gracious host to MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and last week’s event 

was no different. It’s important that we continue with a positive 

working relationship with our municipal partners. 

 

At last week’s convention, the Premier announced that our 

government will hold the line on education property taxes in 

2013. This maintains the historical education property tax 

decrease that reduced the education portion of property taxes on 

agricultural land by approximately 80 per cent. Our government 

has also recently announced an increase to the funding for the 

municipal roads for the economy program as well as a new 

municipal revenue-sharing agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this funding allocation strikes a balance that 

provides funding to address both population growth, the 

demands that an expanding economy place on our rural roads, 

all the while recognizing challenges facing northern 

communities. We are committed to building a strong 

Saskatchewan. Conventions like SARM are an important 

avenue for government and communities to connect, consult, 

and move Saskatchewan forward together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members of this 

Assembly to join me in congratulating SARM on yet another 

successful convention. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Regina Trades & Skills Centre Opens New Facility 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

recognize that the Regina Trades & Skills Centre announced 

today that it has officially opened a brand new facility. The 



2790 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

RTSC [Regina Trades & Skills Centre] is a not-for-profit 

organization which was established in 2007 and works with 

industries to develop and deliver short-term trades and skills 

training to high school students and adults leading to entry-level 

jobs in industries where workers are in high demand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the centre offers courses in trade and skill areas 

such as culinary arts, plumbing, electrical framing, residential 

roofing, commercial construction, and commercial flooring. 

This new building will provide 20,000 square feet of training 

space and the ability to expand the number of courses provided 

in Regina. The centre has an impressive 90 per cent completion 

rate and a self-declared Aboriginal participation rate of 30 per 

cent, and all of the programs are industry-verified for 

employment outcomes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been a privilege for our government to support 

the great work of the Regina Trades and Skills Centre. It is 

through partnerships like these that our province will continue 

moving forward. 

 

We know that to sustain economic growth for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan people, we need to ensure we have a skilled 

workforce to meet existing and future labour demand. Mr. 

Speaker, the new facility will greatly expand the opportunities 

of training and employment and is yet another example of 

innovative partnership to meet industry and community needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing the 

great work being done by the Regina Trades and Skills Centre 

in providing opportunity for training and employment. Thank 

you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Home Care Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is now 

musing about the importance of investing in home care in order 

to allow seniors to stay in their homes and their home 

communities as long as possible. We’ve been pushing for this 

for some time, Mr. Speaker, because we think and we know it is 

a common sense approach. That’s why we’re pleased, Mr. 

Speaker, that the government may have a stronger focus on 

improving home care, especially since the Sask Party’s last 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, made no reference to improving 

home care for Saskatchewan families. 

 

My question to the Premier: how many more home care nurses, 

how many more home care staff will be on the ground working, 

helping Saskatchewan families, and when will this happen? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to thank my honourable friend for the question. This 

government has made seniors’ issues a priority since coming to 

office. That priority has been manifest in things like the seniors’ 

income assistance program which has been increased 

significantly by the government. Perhaps, perhaps we’ll be able 

to make more progress on that tomorrow when the budget is 

tabled, Mr. Speaker. It has manifested itself in, for the first time 

in a very long time, actual long-term care beds being built in 

Saskatchewan after 16 years of neglect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With respect to home care, the hon. member is on point. This is 

also a priority of our government. It’s part of the continuum of 

care for seniors we want to ensure exists. There may be some 

information in the budget coming up. We invite the hon. 

member to stay tuned. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Home care is 

important and that’s why it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that 

there was no reference about improving home care in the last 

Throne Speech. If the Premier spoke with families, front-line 

care workers, Mr. Speaker, they would know that support for 

caregivers is very important here in Saskatchewan. It needs to 

be more of a priority. Better home care services obviously 

would help to alleviate some of the pressure on caregivers, but 

it’s only one component. And we can think of the many baby 

boomers who are caring for aging parents, and we can think of 

the many seniors in the province, Mr. Speaker, who are doing 

their best to care for their aging spouse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: will his government 

be improving support for caregivers and, if so, how? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the government has moved to 

improve care for seniors at every level. That involves those who 

are the family of seniors, of those who need care. That has 

involved those who are on the front line in the profession of not 

just seniors’ care, of health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we took office, there were some very acute pressures 

with respect to the number, the complement of health care 

professionals, that do affect not just seniors’ care but care for all 

in the health care system, Mr. Speaker. I can think significantly 

of the shortage of nurses that this province inherited from the 

previous administration, the goal we set to hire the correct 

complement of nurses in our view — 800 of them. I think we 

exceeded that goal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve moved, as we’ve said, on the seniors’ income assistance 

plan. There may be more progress on that to be had. We’ve 

implemented the personal care home benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s also very important for seniors who are involved in those 

kinds of care facilities around the province. There’s more work 

to be done in home care, there’s no question about it. The 

country’s acknowledging it. It’s going to be a priority of the 

work of Premier Ghiz and I in the health care working group. 

We invite the Leader of the Opposition to stay tuned for 

developments in this regard. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More needs to be 

done to help the caregivers here in our province. One program 

that I’ve repeatedly called for better assistance for, Mr. Speaker, 

is the Alzheimer Society First Link program. This program, 

currently the Sask Party government only provides $50,000 to 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2791 

this program.  

 

We know that dementia is a growing challenge for this 

province. There are 18,000 people in Saskatchewan who have 

dementia and the CBC’s [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 

Taking the Pulse survey identified that 44 per cent of 

Saskatchewan families identified dementia as a challenge and a 

problem for their family. And we know that if families have the 

proper support, they can on average keep their loved one out of 

a long-term care facility 557 days on average, as opposed to 

those who do not have the proper support. So it’s the right thing 

to do for families and it’s the right thing to do for our health 

care system. 

 

My question to the Premier: will his Sask Party government be 

improving supports for the First Link program and have specific 

programs to help caregivers here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Alzheimer’s is a disease that 

does impact many, many families in the province, including my 

own. Mr. Speaker, the question that the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition puts forward goes directly to budget. He will know 

that the budget’s going to be released tomorrow, and details will 

be pretty evident about the spending priorities for the 

Government of Saskatchewan. He will be able to see whether or 

not we are making progress with respect to the specific area 

he’s just raised. And if we are, I hope he will acknowledge that 

progress. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Children and Youth in Care 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last June, the 

province claimed in a news release it was moving ahead on 

child welfare transformation. What they call transformation, 

Mr. Speaker, is the pending closure of Dales House here in 

Regina, along with other facilities operated by the province. 

 

Recently staff members at Dales House have been asked to go 

above and beyond their normal duties. While they normally 

assist high-risk youth, the Ministry of Social Services asked 

Dales House to care for infants as young as nine months old. 

Will the minister confirm that babies in her care have been 

housed at Dales House, a facility designed for youth with some 

of the most complex needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the number of children that 

are in our care is actually declining, but the number of children 

that have medical needs and are fragile are ones that we’re 

looking at right across the piece. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of any children at nine months old 

being in Dales House, but I do know that we are supporting the 

foster homes and the therapeutic foster homes to ensure that our 

children get the very best care possible. I also know that the 

employees that we have working in Dales House and in other 

government-run organizations where we’re looking after our 

children are doing their very best and working very hard with 

us. 

 

The most important and valuable asset we have in the province 

is also our most vulnerable asset. So we know as a government 

that we continue to look at supporting not only the children but 

their families in every way we can. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The staff at Dales 

House does incredible work every day. They do this because 

they love their work, and they are committed to helping these 

kids create brighter futures. 

 

Dales House is designed to support young people with serious 

challenges who are falling through the cracks of the foster 

system. But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, the staff have been 

forced to care for babies in a portable classroom. Let’s be clear: 

Dales House was designed for high-risk youth, not infants and 

toddlers. How could the minister possibly accept housing and 

caring for babies in this way? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I’m going to 

acknowledge that everyone that we have working with us in the 

child care area are doing a fabulous job, and they do that job 

because they care about our children and the responsibility that 

we have as a province. We know that the best job we can do is 

supporting families to ensure that they can keep their children. 

But if we can’t do that, we have to rely on, and we do rely on, 

the people that are trained in the various areas. 

 

Again I’ll say to the hon. member that I’m not aware of children 

being in Dales House. I will definitely look into it. But I also 

know that the people that are looking after our children right 

across the province, whether it be in Dales House or the foster 

homes or any of the other facilities that we have, are doing their 

very best every day. We also know that the number of children 

that are in foster homes is declining, and I believe that there’s a 

60 per cent reduction in the children living in overcrowded 

foster homes. And it’s an issue that I take very, very seriously. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I’m wondering what her contingency plan is 

going to be when she actually closes Dales House. 

 

We’ve heard this isn’t the first time young children have been 

placed in these situations. Facilities like Dales House do such 

important work, but they are constantly under pressure beyond 

their mandate to help close the gaps in the system. This should 

never happen, Mr. Speaker. There should never be a moment 

when the province is scrambling to find a safe and healthy 

alternative for children, especially of this young age. 

 

Instead of closing facilities and failing to support foster families 

and persons of sufficient interest, the minister needs a 

thoughtful and well-resourced approach, well-resourced 

approach. What is the minister doing to ensure vulnerable 



2792 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

children are properly housed and cared for and this situation 

never happens again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the member 

opposite is well aware that we have increased the funding to 

child and family services by 133 per cent since we became 

government. I also know that the member opposite is aware that 

we’ve got 30 new front-line workers on staff. I think the 

member also knows that we put additional money into the 

wages for front-line workers last December, which means 4 to 

$6,000 a year more for the workers that are in that area. We’ve 

invested $74 million in the child and youth agenda so far, 

waiting for next year . . . next budget, the one that’s coming 

tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know we have a new case management file. 

We have a Linkin system set up so we can track our children, 

and that there is always more work to do when we have 

vulnerable children involved. But to know that the children are 

the most important part of what we’re doing, why we have a 

growth agenda, and why we have all of the ministries working 

together to ensure that our children are safe and have a valuable 

future, are what we’re doing as a government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The most recent 

Children’s Advocate report shows there is a drop in the number 

of foster families in our province. On the Sask Party 

government’s watch, there are 20 per cent fewer foster families 

here. The province is relying more and more on persons of 

sufficient interest, who are often family and close friends, to 

care for children, but the reality is the resources there aren’t 

there to support caregivers. We see this when babies are housed 

in a classroom in a facility designed for high-risk youth. 

Without proper support for caregivers, children will continue to 

lose out. This is not acceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year’s budget cut 100 positions in Social 

Services. Can we expect this again from the Sask Party? Will 

tomorrow’s budget make further cuts to supports for vulnerable 

children and youth? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

refuses to talk about the other money that we’re putting into the 

system, and that’s for the child and youth agenda. Mr. Speaker, 

jurisdictions right across Canada are having trouble attracting 

foster families, and that’s why we have developed 440 new 

out-of-home spaces for children in the province. We have a 19 

per cent reduction in the number of children coming into care in 

the last four years because we are working with persons of 

significant interest. We know that someone who knows that 

child or understands the family are in a better position to ensure 

that child is safe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that when it comes to children there’s 

always more work to be done. That’s why we’ve got the 

committee on child and youth. And that’s why all the ministers 

that are dealing with human services work together and talk 

about children in care — not just in Social Services, but 

Education and Health — knowing that together we can make a 

better province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — We’ve been talking about the IPAC 

[International Performance Assessment Centre for geologic 

storage of CO2] affair for the past three weeks in this session 

and we’ve been pushing for answers for the better part of a 

year, and yet we can’t seem to get any straight answers from 

that minister or that government without another investigative 

report that’s exposed in the media. The minister has tossed 

around blame to many, pointed her finger, but has accepted no 

accountability and hasn’t answered the questions. The 

government simply hasn’t come clean with its IPAC affair. 

 

The government has three Sask Party-appointed members on 

the IPAC board. They’ve had them there right from the start. 

They’ve seen the audits. They’ve read the legal advice. And I 

expect they’ve fully briefed that minister, that Premier, that 

government, a long, long time ago. To the minister: what have 

those three trusted advisors told the minister about who has 

benefited from the wasted taxpayers’ dollars in the IPAC affair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, time and time again I’ve 

identified the issues that happened when the IPAC was being 

managed by the U of R [University of Regina]. And when the 

board was formed with the three members that the member 

opposite identified, yes indeed, problems were identified and 

steps were taken. 

 

So what has happened, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, IPAC then 

proceeded to do the research and the work that the government 

was expecting them to do. They developed the world’s first 

carbon capturing storage standards, both nationally and 

internationally recognized standards, which is extremely 

important, Mr. Speaker, for enhanced oil recovery projects. 

 

They developed a Carbon Commons web portal, Mr. Speaker, 

which links scientists around the world so they can share 

information on carbon capture and storage. And they completed 

a comprehensive study and identified the potential areas within 

our province that we can use carbon capture storage, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister didn’t 

understand the question. It’s pretty straightforward though: who 

has benefited from the misuse of taxpayers’ dollars, something 

that’s been described, as the current CEO [chief executive 

officer] of IPAC, as mostly waste. And she’s referenced inflated 

contracts, computers that aren’t used, a $600,000 computer, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s been claimed by a private company that has 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2793 

conflicts all around it. Saskatchewan people have lost money, 

and someone or some people have benefited.  

 

To the minister: why can’t she be straight with the public and 

tell them where those wasted taxpayer dollars have gone, and 

what’s she doing to get them back? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 

audited the relationship between the University of Regina and 

IPAC, their relationship with CVI [Climate Ventures Inc.]. So, 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has read that report, and I 

encourage the public to read it as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite also has the Meyers Norris 

Penny forensic audit which, quite frankly, points out the issues 

that occurred when it was under the management of the U of R. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it identifies that nobody that they could find 

personally benefited from what happened. And I repeat: in the 

Meyers Norris Penny report, it points out that they cannot 

identify anybody that personally benefited. 

 

Also there was a third party review of the value of the assets 

that are in the hands of IPAC, the new agency, Mr. Speaker. 

And it said, although a premium price was paid, the assets do 

what they’re supposed to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Lawsuit Regarding Technology Contract  

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. 

She says there’s wasted dollars, but somehow no one’s 

benefited. Where did those dollars go? Have they been 

sequestered in the way that the carbon was supposed to, Mr. 

Speaker? We’re not sure on this side of the Assembly. 

 

But that’s not the only minister, Mr. Speaker, that’s been having 

troubles on that side of the House. There’s a disturbing slow 

leak of information that was brought forward yesterday, a $1 

million lawsuit by the university and countersuits by private 

companies. Millions of taxpayers’ dollars is on the line and 

involved, and many of the same players are involved that are 

also involved in the IPAC affair. 

 

Yet yesterday somehow the minister astonishingly shared he 

had only learned of the lawsuit, that had been launched in 

November, yesterday through media reports, despite the fact 

that it involves taxpayers’ money and is a major project in his 

portfolio. Question to the minister: was yesterday really the first 

time you learned of these lawsuits in this debacle? If so, do you 

call that a ministerial responsibility or what exactly is that, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, to the member’s 

question, very similar to the question yesterday, the people . . . 

the Government of Saskatchewan has funded the university, 

Mr. Speaker, starting in the year 2000-2001. We were one of 14 

funders of this research, Mr. Speaker. The research was done at 

the university that we funded. As far as the commercialization 

that the university then undertook, that is the responsibility of 

the university. All universities, Mr. Speaker, enter into 

agreements with the private sector to commercialize research 

and in fact, Mr. Speaker, that is what they did. 

 

This one, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately has ended up in a lawsuit 

between the university and the private sector. The Government 

of Saskatchewan is not named, is not a party of this lawsuit, Mr. 

Speaker. It is purely a conflict between the private sector and 

the university, Mr. Speaker. I have reported that to the member 

opposite yesterday and will look forward to his next question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly more than 

strange for that minister to not be aware of a $1 million lawsuit 

in his own portfolio. It’s absolutely irresponsible for that 

minister not to be doing his work. This is a major provincial and 

national project, one that involves millions of taxpayers’ 

dollars. 

 

But it gets worse. Despite the fact that this debacle involves 

millions of taxpayers’ dollars; money from sponsors, including 

companies and other governments; a technology with huge 

potential; reputations of a Saskatchewan company, our 

university, and this government itself, Mr. Speaker, that 

minister dismisses any concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, honestly, how can that minister brush this off as 

not as his concern and not a big deal to the people of our 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, again this is a lawsuit 

not with the Government of Saskatchewan as a party of it. It’s 

between the private sector and the university. As far as the 

research, Mr. Speaker, we were a funder, one of 14 for this 

research. We think this is important research and, Mr. Speaker, 

that is why it was funded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the research was concluded. And the 

commercialization, Mr. Speaker, that is something that all 

universities do. They endeavour to commercialize the 

technologies that are developed at the universities. They enter 

into multiple different types of agreements — some specific, 

Mr. Speaker, that are proprietary, some that aren’t. This one, 

Mr. Speaker, there is a conflict and it has ended up in the 

courts. The university and the private sector, Mr. Speaker, have 

been unable to resolve it, and I think that the appropriate place 

for this to be decided at this point, Mr. Speaker, is in fact where 

it is today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Northern Roads and Investment in the North 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

week the Premier told the media that tomorrow’s budget would 

finally deal with the North. And he said, “I think you’re going 



2794 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

to see a theme, by the way, in the budget around northern 

development, northern mining and specifically around 

uranium.” 

 

The development of the North, in terms of economic and social 

growth, needs the infrastructure to deliver, and part of that 

includes roads. Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the first time northerners 

have heard that there will be commitments for them, only to see 

the Sask Party once again turn their back on the North. 

 

To the minister: you have said there’s no commitments for the 

roads in northern Saskatchewan despite the Premier’s assurance 

that there is. Who is right, you or the Premier? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve already touched on the 

fact that in the growth plan, Highway 914 — a very important 

northern road, a very important piece of infrastructure in the 

North — is going to be a priority of this government. In fact 

we’ve developed a partnership with Cameco, the world’s largest 

uranium mining company, happily located in Saskatoon: $30 

million each to build the road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there may be other things in that budget with 

respect to the uranium industry. Because we know that when it 

comes to major sectors of the economy in this country, there are 

few that have the record that our uranium mining sector has in 

terms of employing northerners, in terms of employing First 

Nations and Métis people: 40, 44 per cent of their workforce in 

the front line, good jobs, are First Nations and Métis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve worked hard as a government to expand 

uranium markets around the world through a federal 

government that’s co-operated. We’ve done so without much 

noise or help, frankly, from the NDP [New Democratic Party]. 

 

In this budget we will focus again on uranium. And the question 

for members opposite: are they now comfortable with 

expanding uranium mining with the uranium industry in this 

province that’s creating opportunity for northerners, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has to get with the 

program. The people of the North are asking this government to 

fix the roads, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question in our mind that 

the Sask Party government has been in power for 2,000 days, 

and that answer looks plain silly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the day after the CAA [Canadian Automobile Association] 

announce their competition for the province’s worst roads, I 

know many people in the North will be nominating their moose 

trails up there, Mr. Speaker. The people are very, very angry 

with this government and with this Premier and with this 

minister. And the worst part is our corporate friends that want 

to invest in the North are beginning to feel that anger. Does that 

not make . . . Does that make smart growth, Mr. Speaker? 

Absolutely not. 

 

So once again, to the Premier or to the minister: can you guys 

both get with the program and put the money back that you took 

out that the NDP committed to the North? And will you finally 

commit to the North, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m relying on the 

Minister of the Economy, who tells me it was 5,840 long days 

that members opposite were in government, Mr. Speaker, when 

infrastructure not just in the North was ignored but highways all 

over the province were ignored, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we’ve seen from this government, what we’ve seen from 

this government are five successive record investments in 

highways. And what did members opposite do? They voted 

against every single one of those budgets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after tomorrow, people in this province will want 

to know where that new Leader of the Opposition stands and 

where the NDP stand on the uranium industry in this province, 

on the importance of increasing investment into the uranium 

industry, on the importance of expanding uranium mining to 

take advantage of the Chinese market and the Indian market. 

That party has been very uncomfortable with uranium in the 

past. We hope they get comfortable with it pretty soon because 

it is essential to the North. It is essential to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP — news flash for the 

Premier — we support northern development 100 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. But what we want to know and what we want this 

government to do, Mr. Speaker, is start investing back in the 

North. This government, this Sask Party government has sucked 

every penny it can from all the northern resources, and there’s 

nothing going back to the North, Mr. Speaker, especially for our 

roads. 

 

The roads we’re talking about here today, Mr. Speaker, are 

between two mines. And while we appreciate the mining sector 

and what it does for northern people, we want to ask the 

questions of the Premier and the Minister of Highways, how 

about Patuanak’s road? How about Cumberland House’s road? 

Wollaston Lake’s road? Dillon’s road? Turnor Lake’s road? 

Canoe Lake’s road? You’re taking millions and billions of 

dollars out of the northern economy. Why don’t you put 

something back? Mr. Speaker, when will this government stop 

taking resources out of the North and finally commit to northern 

roads, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just a few months ago in the 

growth plan, Highway 914 announced by the government. It’s 

being executed now by the Minister of Highways, $30 million 

worth of investment. I didn’t hear the hon. member eloquently 

supporting the growth plan because it’s identified that important 

road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday — now maybe the hon. critic wasn’t 

paying attention; I’m not sure he was for the 5,840 days he was 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2795 

in government, Mr. Speaker, long, long days — but yesterday 

new revenue sharing was announced for municipalities. And 

what did this government do with respect to northern 

municipalities? What did the minister announce? A $3.1 million 

increase to northern revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Tomorrow in the budget, tomorrow in the budget members 

opposite will be able to note the fact that this government places 

a high priority on mining opportunities in the North for 

northerners, a high priority on uranium. That party has a hard 

time agreeing on something as basic as Keystone. Will they be 

able to agree on the importance of expanding uranium 

opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Standing 

Committee on Private Bills met earlier today and considered 

compliance of the rules for the petitions for private Bill No. 901 

and private Bill No. 902. Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills to present its first report. I 

move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chairman of the 

Private Bills Committee: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried and pursuant to rule 98, 

private Bill No. 901, The Orange Benevolent Society Repeal 

Act, 2013 and private Bill No. 902, The Lutheran Sunset Home 

of Saskatoon Amendment Act, 2013 are deemed to be read the 

first time and are ordered for the second reading on the next 

private members’ day. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 49 — The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise today and join in debate on Bill No. 49, The Forestry 

Professions Act — good to join in the debate. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, in this vast, beautiful province we have certainly, 

certainly the boreal forest, the North, the parklands. Forestry is 

a huge part of the province that may not be apparent here in the 

city of Regina where indeed, you know, every tree we have 

today including those in throughout the beautiful Wascana 

Parkway and my home neighbourhood of North Central, a lot of 

beautiful elms, all of which were planted by hand down here on 

the great plains. 

 

But certainly in the central and northern parts of this great 

province, the boreal forest, the parklands, there’s a tremendous, 

tremendous opportunity there in terms of forestry, an industry 

that’s had its ups and downs certainly, but that potential that is 

some days more realized than others. But it’s good to see a 

piece of legislation coming forward like this, as with other 

pieces of legislation brought forward by this government to . . . 

What the member from Moose Jaw North, what I’m talking 

about, it certainly could be perhaps not characterized as 

housekeeping precisely, but perhaps, you know, good, good 

profession keeping. 

 

The legislation itself coming forward in response to requests 

from the industry itself . . . And I guess one of the things that 

we will be looking for, Mr. Speaker, is further confirmation of 

that — the needs from the industry — but just the way that the 

terminology in this legislation is keeping up with the modern 

practice and what is required by the industry itself. 

 

In the minister’s second reading speech, the minister had 

referenced the way that this legislation will concur with labour 

mobility concerns, the way that the Saskatchewan Forestry 

Professionals, the association, have been consulted with in this 

development of this legislation. I’m interested to note that the 

First Nations and Métis communities have been consulted with 

as well, but again we’ll be looking to confirm that for ourselves, 

Mr. Speaker, because of course, as is sometimes the case with 

this government, consultation proclaimed is not the same as 

consultation actually carried out. 

 

So in terms of the actual legislation itself, one of the first 

changes in provision has to relate to the professional practice of 

forestry, the existing provision wherein different subclauses 

will be deleted, such as teaching and research in the definition 

of the professional practice of forestry, it being considered that 

forestry experts practising these activities are not offering 

professional forestry services in Saskatchewan but are engaged 

in the broader science of forestry. So again, you know, perhaps 

not splitting hairs as much as splitting logs, Mr. Speaker, but 

not exactly earth-shattering. But again, we’ll see how that plays 

out on the ground. 

 

The next provision in the legislation to be changed regards the 

existing provision 22(1) wherein “Every professional forester is 

entitled, in accordance with the bylaws, to sign and seal all 

finals plans, reports and other documents relating to the practice 

of professional forestry that are prepared, issued or approved by 

that person.” 



2796 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

The explanation that is attached in the notes states that “This 

amendment will expand the use of the professional seal to other 

categories of membership and makes the use of the seal an 

obligation of professional practice rather than simply a right.” 

 

So again, a bit of a change in the onus there, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

glad to see you’re still with us, Mr. Speaker. But again, not 

exactly something to turn the forest upside down over. 

 

The next change proposed in the legislation is 22(3). Existing 

provision states, “A professional forester who is expelled or 

suspended shall return his or her seal to the association for the 

period of the suspension or expulsion.” 

 

The explanation states that “This amendment will add 

professional forest technologists and restricted members as they 

will be issued professional seals.” 

 

Again as you expand the scope of those being issued seals, it 

only follows that the disciplinary actions that attach to that seal 

and who can or cannot use that seal in good conscience. Again, 

it would seem to only make sense. 

 

The next change proposed is a new provision, 23.01(1), stating 

in the explanation that “This amendment prohibits persons not 

registered as a member of the association from engaging in the 

professional practice of forestry.” 

 

Again, with the regulations for self-governing bodies in a 

variety of professions, this is largely a matter of course in terms 

of, you know, they possess that right to sign off on who is and 

who is not a professional forester. So keeping the regulations up 

to date with what is being proposed in the legislation, change of 

scope only makes sense. 

 

Next new provision, 23.01(2). The explanation states that: 

 

This amendment recognizes individuals or classes of 

persons that may engage in activities falling under the 

definition of the professional practice of forestry without 

being registered as a professional forester, professional 

forest technologist or restricted member.  

 

Again better calibrating that definition of practice and who does 

and does not fall under the aegis of the legislation. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to keep the regulations 

and the guidelines, the bylaws by which foresters conducting 

their business in this province. This legislation seems to be in 

and of itself fairly straightforward in responding to the needs of 

the industry to better respond to concerns arising around labour 

mobility practice and the evolution of the guidelines and 

regulations themselves, and we look forward to talking further 

about this particular piece of legislation in committee. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, for Bill No. 49, I would urge that 

we move this bill on to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of the Environment that Bill No. 49, The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 67 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 67 — The 

Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 67, An 

Act respecting Professional Community Planning in 

Saskatchewan which is a very, very important piece of 

legislation and one that will meet the needs I understand of 

community planners in Saskatchewan and some of the updates. 

And I’d like to review that in a minute. 

 

But I do think that it’s important for us to take a minute and 

think about the good work that community planning does and 

community planners do in Saskatchewan. You know, in fact I 

just . . . It’s interesting how important this really is, you know. I 

was at a meeting last week at the Bessborough in the city of 

Saskatoon. They were talking about infill housing and the 

impacts that all could have while we try to have the very best 

communities that we could possibly have throughout the 

province, in our cities, in our towns. But it’s important that we 

have people who are properly trained, understand the 

challenges, understand the complexity of good community 

planning. And these are professionals; this isn’t something hit 

or miss or something we do on the back of a notebook or a 

napkin. You really take some time to figure this out. And so it’s 

really important that we have a community that has the respect 

for planners who build our towns and our cities and our 

province, you know. 

 

And so this talks about that, and it meets their needs as a 

profession with integrity, that’s self-regulating and has those 

challenges, but yet has both a national and a regional 

perspective so that they can practise their trade in other 

provinces, but also speaks to national membership in the 

Canadian Institute of Planners. So this is no small thing. 

 

In fact, actually it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. This bill is quite 

lengthy. It’s some 22 pages and has quite a lot of details as it’s 

played out. But as I was saying, you know, it was funny. Last 

Thursday night after we had spent quite a week here in debate, I 

went back to Saskatoon. We had a public meeting about infill 

housing and the challenges of that, and whether garage suites or 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2797 

garden suites, granny suites . . . And I was amazed actually at 

the turnout, the number of people who came out to have this 

discussion. There was probably 100, 150 people out at the 

Bessborough to hear what the city of Saskatoon had come out 

with. And of course, you know, it’s a challenge when trying to 

develop new housing and new ideas in our communities. And 

there were lots of really good questions. 

 

So planning isn’t something that we should take for granted or 

always assume that whatever somebody comes up with will be 

accepted. It was interesting too. The planners were very 

welcoming in terms of ideas or things they hadn’t thought of. 

But that’s what makes planning the kind of profession it is. 

They are embracing ideas but applying their professional 

knowledge, and making sure that they don’t become remote 

because in many ways it’s a bit of an architectural type of 

design where you’re dealing with a lot of numbers and a lot of 

guidelines, a lot of bylaws, and applying those in circumstances 

that you may not be familiar with. But it’s something that we 

really need to appreciate. And when it goes wrong, it can go 

horribly wrong. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And we know of communities that have that barren, dull, 

stagnant feel because there hasn’t been good planning in it. But 

we also know of communities that feel like they’re vibrant and 

alive and that good work has gone into that. You know, again if 

you travel throughout the province, you see signs of that. I see 

signs of that in Saskatoon when I think about Riversdale and the 

kind of work that’s gone into that in terms of planning and how 

to revive a community. And you can really see that while it’s a 

slow growth, it’s a definite growth. People are moving back 

there. Businesses are moving back there, and there’s real hope 

in the community. 

 

I can see it in Caswell where we hope the bus barns will be 

moved out to the suburbs and not in the inner city. They come 

with all sorts of problems where there’s idling diesel or 

congestion around that two or three blocks. Come 7 o’clock, it’s 

hard to even drive by because they’re waiting to park the buses, 

or especially on cold winter mornings where they’re warming 

the buses up. People are looking forward to seeing that those 

go. But what takes their place? And of course there’s been a lot 

of community talk, a lot of community planning about what 

kind of developments do we want to see at the bottom of 

Caswell Hill. And of course it looks like it’ll be a nice park, and 

of course there are challenges with that though because, you 

know, we have some real issues around making sure that it’s a 

safe, healthy environment to build or to do new things. And so 

this is where the kind of work of a good community planner can 

come and do their stuff and work their trade. 

 

And so we’re very happy to see this kind of bill come forward 

because we think it’s important in terms of developing the kind 

of professionalism we need in this province as it goes forward. 

 

I’m going to take a minute and just review what the minister 

had to say. Of course it was introduced back in mid-November. 

He talks about repealing and replacing the old professional Act 

to update it with standards consistent with other self-regulated 

professions legislation in Saskatchewan. So that’s important 

that we have these standards are consistent right across the 

board. And this is very important, especially when it talks about 

consequential amendments to The Planning and Development 

Act, 2007, The Engineering and Geoscience Professions Act, 

Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Act. So that’s 

important. 

 

So what they’re really doing is replacing the term professional 

community planner with registered professional planner. So 

they’re taking out the word community and adding the word 

registered. 

 

So other ones that the Association of Professional Community 

Planners called for include changing the name of the association 

to the Saskatchewan Professional Planners Institute. Again the 

word community is being lost, which is too bad, but also putting 

in the word registered, and creating a new image in terms of 

being an institute. So that’s very, very good. 

 

And it talks about — and apparently this is consistent with other 

associations across Canada — clarifies the composition and role 

of the association professional conduct and discipline 

committees. And I know that’s critical when you’re talking 

about a professional, self-regulating organization. There must 

be a way of having some way to maintain professional conduct. 

And if there’s things when they do go wrong, that they will 

have a way of correcting them, and that’s hugely important, and 

as well a way to discipline. So that’s very, very important. 

 

And it also talks about a requirement that the majority of 

members of the professional conduct and discipline committees 

are licensed members and enhance the disciplinary authority by 

allowing the committee to inform the employer found guilty of 

the professional misconduct or incompetence. I guess that 

makes a lot of sense and I think hopefully that’s been well 

thought out, and maybe we’d ask about the circumstance of that 

in committee. If they hadn’t told the employer before about the 

misconduct, that would be a huge oversight, I would assume, 

because clearly if you could think of some of the scenarios that 

might evolve if the employer didn’t know of the misconduct . . . 

Then this is the work that they do and their work is very public. 

It’s not an internal type of thing. So that’s a huge thing. 

 

So and again the Act fully complies with the labour mobility 

obligations under the Internal Trade and New West Partnership 

Agreement. Apparently, though, it had already done that. 

 

And then a bit of a change with the members’ association 

through the national association, CIP [Canadian Institute of 

Planners], instead of the University of Saskatchewan. And 

apparently the University of Saskatchewan agrees with that and 

feels that it’s quite good. So that’s good. 

 

Now it does not establish the scope of practice of planners or 

restricting persons from calling themselves planners or requires 

that only members can do planning. It recognizes association or 

institute once the new Act is proclaimed. So that’s an 

interesting part, the scope of practice of planners or people 

calling themselves planners or requiring that only members can 

do planning. So perhaps not quite as strong as some of the other 

professional organizations. I think that social workers are one 

that have that scope of practice. Teachers I believe also have 

scope of practice. So I think that’s hugely important. So I think 

that’s critical. So we’ll be asking more about that, if that’s 



2798 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

something that they see that we will at some point go back to. 

 

So as they say, we’ll continue to “. . . the government’s practice 

to consult with . . . professions to refine and update legislation, 

ensuring it meets the needs of the profession, the association, 

and the public.” So that’s good. 

 

So as I go through the bill, I do have some questions about this 

because it does talk about, for example, that there will be two 

members of the public, so there’s a public interest being served. 

And I think that’s important. Of course you have to live in the 

. . . To belong to the council, you have to be a member who 

resides in Saskatchewan. 

 

So public appointees: “The Lieutenant Governor in Council 

may appoint two persons who reside in Saskatchewan as 

members of the council.” That’s very important. And these 

people cannot be members. Their term is not longer than three 

years. And I think that makes some sense. And at least one of 

the members who are from the public will be part of the 

discipline committee. That’s important because there’s always 

this idea that it’s a closed shop. And so I think that’s important, 

maybe not so much in terms of the professionals conduct, but in 

terms of discipline, that’s very significant. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that in many ways it’s a good piece of 

legislation that we can support in general right now. I think we 

have questions for committee, and we would like to see it go to 

committee where we can actually do more questions and find 

out more details. I know members have spoke at length on this. 

And I think at this point I would move that we would move Bill 

No. 67, An Act respecting Professional Community Planning in 

Saskatchewan to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 67, The 

Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the bill be referred? 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 82 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 82 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, joining the debate on Bill 

82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012. I 

just want to talk a little bit about pensions in general. And some 

individuals who work for government, work for certain 

corporations, organizations, they do have pension plans. And as 

an employee, you pay a portion of your earnings into a pension 

plan. And sometimes the plan, whether it’s a government one or 

it’s an organization, some of the bigger companies, they will 

match you or they will give you a percentage that will go into a 

retirement saving plan or a pension plan so that some day 

you’ve served years and you’ve worked hard and you have 

something in your retirement to assist you with the cost of 

living and to enjoy a retirement. 

 

And even those individuals right now that we know have 

pension plans — some of them are on fixed income — they’re 

having struggles. And you talk to some of our seniors and 

individuals and they talk about the struggles that they’re having 

— the cost of living, and once you’re at age 65 you don’t have a 

drug plan, so that has to come out of your pocket. I mean you 

might have had a plan. Whether you work for an organization 

or a government, you have coverage — prescription drug cost, 

dental cost, eye. So there’s provisions in there. But once you get 

to retirement and you’re 65, if you don’t have a private 

insurance that you carry, whether it’s with one of the companies 

that provide private insurance for eye care, dental, medications, 

prescriptions, the cost to seniors . . . And I’ve talked to some of 

the seniors. They have so many different medications that 

sometime when you get up there, the challenges, and we see 

those challenges that are out there facing a lot of seniors, and 

they express their concern. 

 

But that’s an opportunity for them, for individuals, and some 

people have done well. And they’ve taken their pension plan 

and they actually have a fixed income and they’re living quite 

comfortable. And they’re happy, and they’re saying that their 

pension plan was good. When they were working, for whatever 

reason, their employer matched their contribution, and they 

invested that. 

 

And some plans — it’s my understanding, and I’m not an 

expert in the area — some individuals will manage their own 

investments. Some have a company who . . . administrator, and 

they have nothing to it. Some plans have trustees, and they 

manage the affairs. When we look at this Bill 82, it talks about 

that. And I’m going to get into a few of the amendments that 

they’ve talked about. 

 

But Bill 82, when you look at the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, 

in general when you look at it, developed I believe in 1988 or 

’86 it came into light. It’s grown to about 32,000 members now 

with assets about $318 million, and there is trustees that look 

after the money. And I think those individuals that pay into that 

would be individuals that maybe don’t have a pension plan, 

whether it’s working with governments, whether it’s an 

organization, so these are for individuals who maybe work 

part-time, seasonal. They get an opportunity to put a little bit of 

money at certain times into a Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

Clearly some of the notes, looking through the file, show that 

Saskatchewan is the only province I believe that has this plan to 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2799 

provide for retirement for individuals. And if that’s the case — 

and that’s what I’ve kind of got from it — that’s really good, 

and I think that’s wise. It gives some provision for a little bit of 

money when they retire. And I mean some might invest a little 

bit, and at least they’re having a little bit of an income coming 

in when they do retire, in that stage of their life when they’re 

ready to retire and want to. So there is a little bit of a provision 

for them. 

 

And it might be some of, you know, rural farm and small-farm 

family who invest into this, you know. There’s years where 

they have a little extra money, so maybe they put a little bit 

away for themselves. 

 

But I’m going to get into some of the amendments that they’re 

asking. And one of the areas the minister is asking . . . And I 

know there must be reasons. And I know in committee we’ll 

ask some of these questions — we’ll do this. But clearly their 

survivor benefits are some of the amendments are being 

proposed. And we’re going to look at those, and I know in 

committee we’ll ask about them. And these could be simple 

things within compliance with the rest of Canada. And there 

might be a good reason why government is making these 

amendments. And we don’t have any . . . And myself 

personally, there might be a reason. Maybe survivor benefits, it 

would benefit them better. They’re going to move things 

around. That’s one area. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The other area — where members would be allowed to transfer 

funds from registered pension plans, locked-in retirement 

accounts and into their Saskatchewan Pension Plan. So they 

would be able to transfer some dollars is what I’m getting from 

this. And they would be able to transfer some dollars. So there 

must be a reason why — there’s been a request or they ran into 

a situation where this provision, amendment, would allow 

somebody to transfer some of their dollars into Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan when you’re locked into another plan or 

something. So there is some provisions there. It sounds like 

moving some dollars around. And that, you know, that sounds 

pretty straightforward. They’re asking for it. 

 

Now those are areas where I guess this pension program, it’s 

maybe housekeeping items or requests by individuals who are 

in the plan. And maybe it’s the trustees that are requesting this. 

Maybe they found some problems with clients and they want to 

make sure that the clients don’t run into problems. And there’s 

the trustees. They’re looking after the assets and making sure 

that individuals that are in the program, and the members — 

there’s 32,000 members — that there are services to make it 

cost-efficient for them, also to make sure there are services. 

 

This program also talks a little about the service that those 

members are provided. And it sounds like they’re . . . You can 

get hold of the administrators. They’re easy to get hold of. 

They’re willing to work with you if you have questions. They 

want to work through. And this is good. So this is a good 

program where you have individuals who might have some 

questions or they’re close to retirement or individuals who want 

to start investing. There’s provisions and, of course, 

administrators who look after this. And they come forward with 

giving the advice to the clients, which is good. So we want to 

make sure that happens at all costs, that that is done. So those 

individuals . . . And it’s minor cost, is what it’s talking about. 

 

And that was the one thing, I think, when you have a pension 

plan and you’re not putting a lot of money away, you don’t 

want it to be eaten up in costs from your administrator or cost of 

running the organization. So I think it states in here, from my 

understanding, that the costs are low cost to the members, and 

that is a good plan. 

 

And so as they invest and the program grows, and when we 

have good years of investment, those investments grow and 

people are prepared and ready for retirement. You have years 

where investments are not doing so well and you can see these 

programs suffer. So where someone’s ready to retire, there 

could be some challenges. But that’s areas where we see this 

going on. 

 

And at this point, you know, I guess some of the language 

they’re talking about changing is modernizing some of the 

language, and that’s fine. And I mean times change and some of 

the wording from ’86 needs to change, and that’s what they’re 

talking about. So they’re making those changes to the wording 

of some of the legislation in here and some of the documents — 

that are probably used to deal with the clients — the 

administrators use. 

 

So I think that’s just housekeeping items that they’re going to 

deal. So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I think I’m prepared to move 

Bill 82 to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 82, The Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 84 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 84 — The 

Common Business Identifiers Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise to 

speak to Bill No. 84, An Act respecting Common Business 

Identifiers. As identified by the Minister of Justice when this 

bill was introduced in December, this legislation is part of a 



2800 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

broader Canadian plan to have business identifier numbers 

which can be used in many places to make it simpler for 

corporations to share business information. 

 

And this is a project obviously that every province and territory 

has been participating in along with the federal government. 

And I think that it’s one that takes some time to get it into place, 

but what we see is that other provinces have introduced similar 

bills, whether it’s in New Brunswick or British Columbia. And 

obviously the wording is pretty well the same as what we have 

here in Saskatchewan, and the whole purpose is to make it 

easier for corporations when they are registering documents. 

 

We have a similar system right now that is part of our land titles 

system, which is at the Information Services Corporation, 

where businesses, banks, individuals all have a number. And 

when that number shows up, then it reflects the fact that it’s the 

particular business, and it makes it much simpler for the 

software that handles all of the information to deal with that 

particular information. 

 

But what happens is that the whole legislation has as its core 

then this establishment of a business number. Now I think that 

probably the key part of the legislation relates to the definitions 

that are in the legislation, and so those definitions obviously 

match with other corporate and financial legislation we have in 

the legal system here in Saskatchewan. 

 

But, for example, business information that is going to be part 

of the identifier is crucial but also clearly laid out, and this is 

helpful. So for a business, it would have to have the name 

obviously. What’s the legal structure? Is it a corporation? Is it a 

co-operative? Is it a partnership? It has to have a mailing 

address or street address. And if it’s an incorporation, they have 

to have the information there that’s around the date of 

incorporation, which jurisdiction was the corporation 

incorporated in, and then the incorporation number from that 

jurisdiction. Also if it’s registered in Saskatchewan, it would 

have to have the registration number, and it would also have to 

have the names of the directors of the corporation. And then 

obviously, you would have the business number, which is what 

we’re talking about here, and the program account number, 

which would relate to whatever programs it was interested in 

being part of, and then further identification numbers that are 

there — telephone number, fax number, the email address. And 

also the status of the number — is this an active business that’s 

operating, or is it closed, and why. And also information on 

how this status is changed. 

 

Now also if it’s a partnership, it has to have the name of at least 

two partners. And as a former law partner, we had many 

partners in the law firm, and so you’d probably just pick the two 

most senior people or three and have them listed in this 

information. But clearly the information is there and laid out in 

a very straightforward fashion so that others can see who 

they’re doing business with, or a government department can 

see exactly which business is applying for a particular grant or 

applying for a particular type of licence. 

 

But when you go through the legislation itself, it’s pretty 

straightforward. But much of the Act actually delegates the 

actual structure to the Lieutenant Governor in Council so they 

can make regulations. And so the actual structure of what we’re 

going to have will be identified once the legislation is passed 

and presumably when it’s negotiated on a national basis 

because this is something that’s going to be dealt with 

interprovincially. 

 

And so then what we end up is giving the government the 

power and the minister the power to enter into agreements 

around how this system is to be used. And it looks like it 

contemplates the development of a public body or some 

organization to actually be in charge of these business numbers. 

I don’t think that’s quite clear yet how that’s going to be done. I 

think the way the minister described it is that there would be an 

establishment of a hub which would allow this information to 

be shared. But we’re not entirely clear what it is that will be the 

public body that shares all of this information. 

 

So when we have section 5, this may be an area where we can 

ask some questions in committee because we can then get a 

better sense of the types of regulations that the government will 

be presenting to put this system in place. Normally when you 

do something like this, you don’t like to have so many, so much 

of the substance of the Act in the regulations. But I can 

understand why this particular legislation is designed that way 

because of the fact that you’re dealing with provinces and 

territories and the federal government in attempting to design 

what the system will actually look like. 

 

So when the system is in place, it’ll be held in place obviously 

in Saskatchewan with this particular bill or the law when it’s 

enacted and then all of the regulations. And I’m certain that the 

minister or the officials will have more information at some 

point that will be able to answer some of these questions. 

 

Now one of the powers in this legislation in section 7 is that 

there may be a requirement by this public body that the minister 

effectively sets up or I guess — what do they call it? — enters 

into an agreement with, so contracts with to run the system, 

there may be a requirement by that public body that a business 

has to use the common business identifier in any transactions 

that are designated to have that use. 

 

So effectively, I’m sure what that means is that if any business 

wants to deal with the Government of Saskatchewan or any of 

the Crown corporations or other agencies within the purview of 

the government, they will be required to get a common business 

identifier so that it makes it simpler for the government to deal 

with them. This is not necessarily a bad thing. But I think the 

public needs to know that this initial time period of the common 

business identifier system being set up may include some extra 

work for some businesses and may require them to file more 

information than they have to date to make sure that they 

comply with this law. 

 

To date I haven’t heard any specific concerns about this here in 

Saskatchewan, but it is a possibility that there may be some 

businesses that don’t want to give all of the information that’s 

been identified in the legislation or the further information 

which may be required in the regulations. 

 

Now section 8 sets out that the public body that’s going to 

obtain the information, and we’re not quite certain which public 

body this is, will basically provide the information to the 

minister. And so that the Minister of Justice will manage an 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2801 

information system for the purpose of receiving and storing all 

this information. 

 

Now it’s a bit interesting that this legislation itself is so 

noncommittal on which public body will be getting this 

information. A couple years ago or last year, I would have said 

almost for certain that the information would be going to the 

Information Services Corporation because that’s the publicly 

owned operation of government that does this kind of work. But 

given the recent information in this legislature and the bill that’s 

before the House to privatize the Information Services 

Corporation, it begs the question whether this information will 

be going to that private corporation and beyond the total control 

of the government. We don’t know that. 

 

[15:00] 

 

But I think this legislation itself is drafted in a way that doesn’t 

clarify what public body will have all of this public information. 

So that raises a further line of questions that we’ll be asking 

about when we get in committee because I think there are many 

businesses that would be quite curious where their information 

is being stored, in the same way that many individuals become 

very concerned about where their information is stored. 

 

Now I don’t know if the similar concerns from the Information 

and Privacy Commissioner are being registered about this 

particular legislation. And it may be that that is also something 

that we will have to ask the minister when we get into 

committee is whether there’s been a sign-off by the Information 

and Privacy Commissioner on this particular legislation because 

the way it’s drafted, it’s not totally clear where this information 

will go, which public body will have it, and whether it will also 

be under the purview of the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner. 

 

What it does do is it does provide immunity for the minister and 

for employees and others as it relates to the use of this 

information, and that’s interesting. I think we’ll need to know 

why that particular clause is there, but clearly there can be 

damages when sensitive information is not used in an 

appropriate fashion. 

 

So going through the Act, you get through all the sections, you 

get finally to section 13 which is the regulatory Act. And 

there’s a page and a half of different regulations and powers 

that are given to the cabinet and the Premier to set out what the 

rules are for this legislation. And it’s lots of very simple, 

detailed information, but also it has some of the crucial points 

around who is going to manage this information, where it’s 

going to be stored, how it’s going to be used in the long term. 

And quite often when we have legislation that deals with 

information, those kinds of definitions are right in the 

legislation because then we will have better protection for the 

information. So right on the face of this one it does have some 

particular challenges. 

 

Now what we know, as I said at the start, the legislation is 

across Canada and has been developed with other provinces and 

territories and the federal government, and sometimes the way 

the regulations are set out are to deal with all the varieties of 

traditions in each jurisdiction on how they deal with particular 

information. And so it may be that only a few of the regulatory 

clauses in this section 13 apply to Saskatchewan, but that’s 

something that we maybe will need a better explanation about 

when we continue looking at this particular bill. 

 

Now the other issues that are dealt with in the regulations relate 

to things like fees and licence fees which are effectively a form 

of taxation. It’s I guess more common that these kinds of 

taxation powers are dealt with in this kind of unknown way 

recently. It used to be that something like that had to be very 

clearly set out in legislation so everybody knew exactly what 

the costs were going to be for a particular process or a 

procedure. 

 

Now I think that in this legislation it also has a section 14 which 

says that the Act and regulations prevail, so: 

 

Subject to the regulations, this Act and the regulations 

prevail in the case of any conflict . . . 

 

[of] this Act and the regulations; and 

 

any provision of a designated enactment. 

 

It’s not a very common phrase to see in legislation and so we 

will obviously need an explanation of why this is put into this 

particular legislation as opposed to maybe some of the other 

legislation we have. So it’s a little bit different, this legislation 

compared to some others that we get in the Saskatchewan 

legislature, but I think much of that can be attributed to the fact 

that it’s across Canada or provinces, territories, and federal 

government that are involved with the drafting of the 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the legislation is to make the lives 

of businesses easier, to make the lives of civil servants working 

in the system easier when they deal with corporations. And so it 

has a good purpose, which we support, but we want to make 

sure that it’s done in a way that protects crucial information to 

businesses and that it’s done in a way that doesn’t cause 

problems between jurisdictions across Canada. 

 

We will have a chance to ask a number of these questions of the 

minister and the officials in the committee. So I’ll end my 

comments now. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the committee is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 84, The 

Common Business Identifiers Act be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader . . . [inaudible] . . . To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 



2802 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

The Deputy Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 62 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 62 — The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

today to enter the discussion on Bill No. 62, the parks 

amendment Act, 2012. I’ll talk a little bit about what the 

minister has proposed here in this Act, but I think it’s important 

to talk about the importance of provincial parks, particularly 

here in Saskatchewan, what they mean to so many families and 

to so many people here in the province. 

 

I know my own experience . . . I referenced this a little bit when 

I spoke to The Regional Parks Act. But camping and provincial 

parks or camping and parks here in Saskatchewan, I know, are 

often a more affordable holiday for many, many families. My 

own family growing up actually spent a great deal of time going 

to provincial parks. I’m the youngest of seven kids, and my 

mom was home, and so we spent a great deal of time on the 

road when we had holidays, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

talk about some . . . And actually as an adult too, camping for 

me in provincial parks has been a big part of some more 

formative experiences, both in my own life and in my kids’ 

lives. 

 

And some of the parks, my own experiences . . . But the first 

time actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ever water-skied was at 

Blackstrap Provincial Park which is not too far outside of 

Saskatoon, about 40 minutes. I have fond memories of being 

about nine years old and going out to Blackstrap with some 

friends actually and their parents, and being absolutely terrified 

and trying water skiing and thinking that somehow a fish was 

going to bite me. So I have to say my first water skiing 

experience was not stellar. But Blackstrap for me, that was a 

place that I remember trying water skiing. 

 

It was actually Blackstrap Provincial Park when the ski hill was 

still open, was the first place many of us . . . I tried downhill 

skiing there for the first time, and I know many people here in 

Saskatchewan, that was their first experience as well. So I think 

it’s a shame that the province has gotten out of the ski hill 

business, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know that it was a popular 

activity for lots of young people and lots of people I knew 

growing up. But for me it was again Blackstrap the first time I 

went skiing. 

 

And I can remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, actually a friend that 

you’d know, Celeste — my good friend Celeste from Cupar — 

and I were at Blackstrap. And I’d never skied before, and she 

and I . . . She told me, whatever you do, Danielle, don’t sit 

down on the T-bar. So I took her advice; she was giving me 

good advice. And so we’re sitting next to each other on the 

T-bar and she told me to look back at the moon. It was a 

beautiful Thursday night ski, a night ski. I looked back, and 

apparently sat down on the T-bar while I was doing it. And I 

was fine, but poor Celeste went rolling down Blackstrap. So she 

was not very happy with me, I can tell you that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So skiing, I never really did pick up downhill skiing, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m much more of the cross-country 

skiing kind of athlete, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So Blackstrap has had fond . . . I’ve got fond memories of 

Blackstrap, and I know many people in Saskatchewan, 

especially in the Saskatoon area, do as well. Growing up, going 

to Candle Lake, those childhood memories when you’re under 

two or three, you don’t remember them very well, but I do 

remember car trips, riding in the big, red station wagon. And 

my mom will tell stories about me being an infant and she 

would heat my baby bottle on the campfire at Candle Lake, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I remember actually we had a huge 

military-style tent because there were seven of us. And the girls 

slept in the car and the boys slept in one tent and my mom and 

dad and some of the kids were in the military-style tent. But I 

can remember my sister Cathrine and my sister Michelle 

believing that there was a bear and it was a great commotion. 

And I would have only been about one or two years old, but 

those vague memories of Candle Lake are still with me today, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Cypress Hills too, in Cypress Hills Interprovincial Park . . . As I 

said, we did a lot of travelling. Camping for my family was one 

of the most affordable ways for our family to take some time 

off. And I know it remains the case today that if you want a 

vacation, that is one of the ways families do that today. So 

Cypress Hills for my family, I remember going to Fort Walsh as 

a child. Again I would have been under five when we were 

taking lots of these trips. And I think the neat thing about 

Cypress Hills Interprovincial Park is it is actually, it was the 

first park in Saskatchewan and Alberta to become recognized as 

a dark sky preserve. And it’s one of the largest dark sky 

preserves in North America, preserving 39 600 hectares, or 

97,850 football fields. I know I have a friend in Saskatoon who 

is a huge dark sky advocate and is very appreciative of 

particularly Cypress Hills. And I have yet to . . . I haven’t had a 

chance as an adult to make my way down to Cypress Hills, but 

that’s one of my summer travel plans, hopefully in the next few 

years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Danielson Provincial Park, that was my daughter Hennessey’s 

first camping trip ever, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that I was a 

little over . . . We did sleep in a tent, and she would have been 

about four months old. And that was the first and only time, I 

think, for the first couple of years where she slept overnight, 

slept through the night sandwiched between her mom and dad 

on an air mattress in the tent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

Danielson Provincial Park was, like I said, the first camping trip 

for my four-month-old, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I know I’m relaying some of my experiences of provincial 

parks, but I know that there are very fond memories for so 

many people here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

it’s absolutely imperative that we preserve them and ensure that 

there’s not only recreational opportunities for people but the 

unique ecosystems in Saskatchewan are preserved and well 

taken care of as well. 

 

Emma Lake recreational site — which is actually what this bill 

is about, and I will get to that in a bit — two of my siblings, two 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2803 

of my brothers actually have cabins at Emma Lake, so we spend 

a great deal of time up there as well. And one of the big 

activities at Emma Lake is boating. And I’m not such a big 

boater, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I know that my kids really love 

that. 

 

[15:15] 

 

I think one of the things that families really appreciate about 

camping is, when you’re a 12-year-old or a 13-year-old, those 

early teen years, camping trips are one of the first times where 

you have a little bit of independence or freedom from your 

parents. There’s something about camping and being in that 

setting that kids just tend to have a little bit more freedom. I 

know with my own daughters, both of them — not so much my 

five-year-old but . . . You let them out just a little bit longer or 

allow them to do things just a little bit later than you would just 

because there’s something very secure about camping with a 

group of people. And it’s very different than obviously living in 

the city, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is what I think so many of 

us appreciate about the opportunity who’ve grown up in urban 

settings. 

 

You know, I’ve never been to Makwa Lake Provincial Park. It 

is on my list. But my dad actually grew up not far from there at 

Rapid View. He spent the first 12 years of his life on a 

homestead at Rapid View, which is near Loon Lake and Loon 

Lake is adjacent to Makwa Provincial Park. And I’ve heard 

really wonderful things about it, but I’ve not had an opportunity 

to go visit my dad’s old homestead site. And I think that that’s 

definitely one of the things on my own list, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And I couldn’t talk about provincial parks without talking about 

Pike Lake. For me as a young child, we would go to Pike Lake 

on occasion or school trips actually out to Pike Lake because it 

was only 25 minutes from our school. But I know with my own 

kids, that has been . . . When I was home, particularly with my 

oldest daughter, that was a great way to spend a day and even a 

weekend. I had never gone so close to home and spent a 

weekend until just a few years ago. And it was nice actually to 

only drive 25 minutes and set up. We have a little Boler trailer, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’d set up our little Boler trailer and had 

a great time at Pike Lake. It’s a nice little getaway, close 

enough to the city that you’re not driving for hours and hours 

which any of us, any people who have children, know it’s nice 

to save on a drive if you can, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

St. Victor Petroglyphs Provincial Historic Park . . . Actually 

believe it or not but on my honeymoon my husband and I drove 

down to St. Victor Petroglyphs Provincial Historic Park. The 

petroglyphs at St. Victor are a prehistoric mystery. There’s 

more than 300 petroglyphs at the site, and it’s the only place on 

the Canadian Prairies where you can see the horizontal 

petroglyphs. And no one really knows who did the carvings or 

when they were done, but most experts believe that the carvings 

were created between 500 and 1700 AD [Anno Domini]. I don’t 

know what inspired us on our honeymoon to drive down to St. 

Victor Petroglyphs Provincial Historic Park, but we thought that 

that would be a pretty neat trip to see part of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I know for me, the provincial parks hold a place near and 

dear, both as my own experience as a child and my own start of 

my adult life and with my own kids. 

 

So I’d like to talk a little bit more about the bill specifically, 

Bill No. 62, An Act to amend The Parks Act. So what is this Act 

proposing? What is the minister proposing doing here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? 

 

The first amendment establishes a new provincial park in the 

area of Anglin and Emma lakes. That will result in an additional 

12 821 hectares of Crown lands being protected in a park that 

will absorb the existing Anglin Lake and Emma Lake 

recreational sites, resulting in a total park area of about 16 010 

hectares. So that’s the first thing this bill will be doing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is establishing this new provincial park. 

 

And I remember a couple years ago when this announcement 

was first made on the consultation process. And I’m glad to see 

that the minister has said that he’s held two open houses, three 

trade show events, consulted with 25 various interest groups, 

consulted with five local First Nations and Métis groups as well 

as the respective provincial agencies, and consulted with local 

jurisdictions. He also did an online survey to reach a broader 

cross-section of the population. And apparently 5,500 surveys 

were distributed with 721 completed surveys specific to Anglin 

and Emma lakes. 

 

This government has not made consultation its strong suit, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but I’m glad to see in this case that there has 

been some more serious consultation undertaken. We had 

flagged that as a concern, I believe it was two years ago, when 

they announced that they had this plan under way. And 

apparently overall support for the proposed park at Anglin and 

Emma lakes among the general public was high, at 87 per cent, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Secondly, the minister has introduced an amendment that will 

remove 31 hectares of land from the Coteau Bay area and 

Danielson Provincial Park for the purposes of making this land 

available for cottage lot development. We always have concerns 

when land is no longer being protected, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There are some very precious ecosystems in Saskatchewan, and 

it is important that we ensure Crown lands, that we ensure that 

we keep some of these lands under protection because if we 

don’t protect them, many others won’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But the minister does say, “The land being removed has a low 

ecological integrity due to impact from the construction of 

Gardiner Dam.” But he also said that the bill will offset the 

reduction to Danielson Provincial Park. The amendment adds 

65 hectares of other land which contain native prairie grassland 

to the park. 

 

So it was just a few years ago actually that this government 

removed I think it was 2 million hectares — a lot of land, a lot 

of land, a lot of land; I’m sorry, I can’t recall the exact number 

right now but a great deal of the land — from provincial 

protection. Under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, land was 

removed from protection. So that was a huge concern a few 

years ago not only from the opposition but many, many 

organizations across the province, who by the way had said that 

the minister had said she had consulted with them, which had 

turned out not to be the case. So even though the minister has 

said here consultation was fairly thorough, it always raises a 



2804 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

flag for us, the consultation piece for us, when this government 

talks about consultation. The reason we talk about it a great deal 

is because this government does not have a stellar track record. 

 

So the third amendment, the minister says: 

 

. . . improves visitor safety while they are in the parks and 

reduces risk to our park wildlife by reducing the potential 

for dangerous wildlife encounters through visitor 

education on the proper management of dangerous 

wildlife attractants. 

 

He goes on to say that “Over the past five years, our 

[provincial] parks have experienced record growth in visitation 

numbers.” So even though that’s been good news for the parks, 

it’s not always . . . It increases the encounters with wildlife 

within the parks. 

 

He mentioned the dangerous wildlife within the parks, and 

some of those dangerous wildlife attractants can include things 

like improperly stored food, greasy pots left for later cleaning, 

or waste improperly disposed of. I think we’ve all been at 

campsites where we see people who come from urban centres 

who are not always respectful of moving into the wilds. We talk 

about potentially dangerous wildlife, but I’d argue that that 

wildlife is only potentially dangerous because we’ve created a 

situation that we’re not always playing fair when we go and 

camp and invite those creatures to our campsite by leaving a 

toothbrush in your tent or a cooler out or not washing your 

dishes or wiping things down properly. 

 

So the minister has said that “Education of park users is 

foremost in minimizing wildlife encounters, but sometimes 

patrons refuse to become compliant with park regulations . . .” 

So the minister is saying that: 

 

. . . enforcement officers need the ability to exercise 

stronger authority for those few instances. The 

amendment will allow park officers to remove dangerous 

wildlife attractants and the container they are found in 

from campsites to a secure storage area when the owner 

cannot be located . . . 

 

And which I would agree with the minister on that, that my 

experience again with camping, that we have to be respectful. 

And it’s the people who are ignorant of rules or ignorant of the 

habitat to which they’re entering that create problems not just 

for themselves, and create dangers for their own, perhaps their 

own children but others in the area. But they’re also creating 

problems for the wildlife who were there first, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So I think this is a very good move, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

 . . . the fourth amendment deals with the Steele Narrows 

Provincial Park where the description of the park is being 

adjusted to improve mapping of the park, confirm that 

shore lands currently shown between the waters of Makwa 

Lake and the current boundary of the park are part of the 

provincial park, and to remove a sliver of land separated 

from the main park area by Highway 699 so it may be 

transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture. 

 

The minister says his ministry has worked with the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Information Services Corporation to ensure 

agreement with the legal description and that the mapping of 

Steele Narrows Provincial Park meets with their approval, and 

they’ve assisted with the amendment. 

 

As I said, I’ve never been up to the Makwa Lake area, so I can’t 

picture in my head this particular area, but as I said, my dad 

grew up not very far from there, was raised on the homestead at 

Rapid View and so this is an area that is on my to-do list to visit 

at some point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I think the bottom line is Bill No. 62, the parks amendment 

Act is doing some good things. The consultation piece I’ve 

raised, it sounds like the minister has done due diligence, but 

we always have some concerns. I think it’s important again to 

mention provincial parks as places of recreation for us, a good 

opportunity to get out of the city or our towns or just an 

opportunity to escape with our families, whether it’s just with 

our individual family or gathering for family reunions, or 

whether it’s fishing, swimming, canoeing, hiking, boating — all 

kinds of things that people love to do here in Saskatchewan. 

 

But aside from the recreation piece, the conservation piece is 

absolutely imperative where within these provincial parks 

we’ve got some provincially significant ecosystems, 

landscapes, and cultural areas that need to be protected, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And that I think is what provincial parks are 

all about. 

 

So with that, I do know I’ve got colleagues who are interested 

in speaking to Bill No. 62. And with that, I would like move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 62, The 

Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 63 — The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 63, An Act respecting Regional Parks 

and making consequential amendments to other Acts. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this legislation appears to be a consolidation of 

the legislative changes over quite a number of years. I think it’s 

important to note that it’s over 50 years now since the first 

regional parks legislation was introduced in this legislature. 

 

And all of us in Saskatchewan are proud of the regional parks 

that have been developed. They provide a nice complement to 

the provincial park system, and there’s no question that every 

one of us has our favourite regional parks because they’re the 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2805 

parks from those parts of the province where we have our 

families and share events at the parks. 

 

And so it’s important that the legislation deal with the particular 

issues that arise right now. Now I think when you look at the 

legislation, it does some good things. It identifies the powers of 

the minister, where I think that there have been some situations 

over the last few years where it’s not entirely clear of the direct 

responsibility of the minister. And what this legislation tries to 

do is to set up a process for that. We want to make sure that that 

process is something that is not heavy-handed or it doesn’t 

diminish the role of the regional parks associations. And it 

appears that further changes in the legislation actually will 

provide some help that way. 

 

How it does that is that when powers are given to the minister, 

it’s going to give the ability of the minister to transfer those 

powers to the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association. And 

as a former minister of Parks, I know that that organization does 

a very excellent job in organizing and lobbying but more 

importantly accrediting and marketing and actually helping the 

other boards for various regional parks across the province 

when they run into particular jams that they’re having a hard 

time dealing with. And so I think that the way the legislation 

has outlined the powers for the minister and the ability to work 

with the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association will assist in 

providing good advice, good management for the parks. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And it’s interesting, when the parks were originally created, 

there was a sense of the local area really having control as 

opposed to the provincial park system where it was run from the 

Saskatchewan government side. And because of that, many 

different ways of managing the parks developed, depending 

which part of the province that you were in. And so the 

Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association has provided a good 

job of educating the boards and the people involved in the 

regional parks, and they have I think developed systems and 

methods of using best practices right across the province, and 

we want to thank them for that kind of work. 

 

One of the anomalies or one of the problems that needed to be 

dealt with is that originally regional parks were set up with 

representation from rural municipalities and towns, sometimes 

cities but more often it was the towns and villages and rural 

municipalities that would work together to build regional parks. 

This legislation recognizes that often there are community 

organizations, non-profit organizations that are involved in the 

management of the parks. And I think that’s a good thing to 

recognize, how the support for parks has evolved. 

 

The other piece of this, which I think is helpful as well, relates 

to the boundaries of parks and the ability to expand or delete 

parts of the parks, and it sets out some procedures for doing 

that. And obviously we’ll have questions about how some of 

these things will work, but it appears that the legislation has 

been prepared working in consultation with the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association. So a number of the questions I 

think will be answered as we understand the particular problems 

that they’re addressing and how they’re being dealt with. 

 

On a final note, I would just say that I enjoy going to regional 

parks right across the province. I encourage people to buy the 

book that my brother edited in his series Discover 

Saskatchewan. Dr. Ralph Nilson has the Discover 

Saskatchewan series, and there is a specific book on regional 

parks, one on provincial parks. And now the most recent edition 

has both those parks together. It’s a very good source for all 

Saskatchewan people, to go and see parks that they don’t 

necessarily know about because you can get a little bit of a 

description of the park and the services that are there. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll adjourn debate because I know 

some other colleagues want to comment on this bill as well. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 63, The Regional 

Parks Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 64 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 64 — The 

Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012/Loi de 

2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, glad to rise as ever to 

join debate on Bill No. 64, An Act to make consequential 

amendments resulting from the enactment of The Regional 

Parks Act, 2012. These remarks may not seem to be of great 

consequence, Mr. Speaker, but I assure you they’ll be on topic 

and consequential if anything. 

 

The bill itself arises from the changes made in the legislation 

just discussed by my colleague, the member from Lakeview, 

and relate to the overall regional parks Act, changes that have 

been proposed in front of this House as relates to The Regional 

Parks Consequential Amendments Act and The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act. 

 

From the explanatory notes brought forward with the 

legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the existing provision, in terms 

of the changes proposed in these consequential amendments, 

the first existing provision states: 

 

Where prohibited 

 

48(1) Subject to subsection (2) and section 50, the 

authority shall not consider any application for any type 

of permit, other than a permit allowing the sale and 

consumption of beverage alcohol at a special occasion, 

for any premises located in a municipality that has passed 

a bylaw prohibiting the operation of permitted premises in 

that municipality pursuant to section 49. 

 



2806 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

48(2) then goes on to state: 

 

The authority, on any terms it considers advisable, may 

issue or renew a permit respecting any premises situated 

in: 

 

(a) the Northern Saskatchewan Administration District; 

(b) a provincial park or regional park established 

pursuant to The Parks Act or The Regional Parks Act, 

1979; 

(c) an area that, in the opinion of the authority, is a 

summer of winter resort area; or 

(d) a national park of Canada, subject to any regulations 

made pursuant to the National Parks Act (Canada). 

 

Relatively straightforward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the 

intent of the way that these changes ripple out through the 

consequential amendments and that the updates and the 

consequential amendments then need to made. 

 

The next existing provision affected in this legislation is: 

 

Establishment where no vote necessary 

 

100 The authority, on any terms it considers advisable, 

and without conducting a vote of the electors as 

required by this section, may establish a store in: 

(a) the Northern Saskatchewan Administration 

District; 

(b) a provincial park established pursuant to The 

Parks Act or a regional park pursuant to The 

Regional Parks Act, 1979; 

(c) an area that, in the opinion of the authority, is a 

summer or winter resort area; or 

(d) a national park of Canada, subject to any 

regulations made pursuant to the National Parks Act 

(Canada). 

 

Again you make the change in the legislation under The 

Regional Parks Act and it ripples forth into this and the 

proposed consequential amendments that are necessary. 

 

The next provision up for change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

section 5 in the — I’m just referring to the notes here — 

wherein the existing provision deals with beverage alcohol bans 

in campgrounds. Section 107.1(1), in this section: 

 

“campground” means: 

 

(a) an area of park land designated as a public 

campground pursuant to The Parks Regulations, 1991; 

or 

(b) an area of a regional park designated as a public 

campground in a park bylaw made pursuant to clause 

9(2)(c) of The Regional Parks Act, 1979; [wherein] 

 

“minister” means: 

 

(a) with respect to a provincial park or a recreation site, 

the member of the Executive Council to whom for the 

time being the administration of The Parks Act is 

assigned; and 

(b) with respect to a regional park, the member of the 

Executive Council to whom for the time being the 

administration of The Regional Parks Act, 1979 is 

assigned. 

 

“park land” means park land as defined in the . . . Act. 

 

“provincial park” means a provincial park as defined in 

The Parks Act; 

 

“recreation site” . . . [same thing, but] constituted pursuant 

to section 6 of The Parks Act; 

 

“regional park” means a regional park established pursuant 

to The Regional Parks Act, 1979; 

 

“regional park authority” means a regional park authority 

that operates a regional park pursuant to The Regional 

Parks Act, 1979. 

 

Again, these changes are consequential arising from the 

changes discussed earlier by my colleague, the member from 

Regina Lakeview, under The Regional Parks Act, 2012, and the 

appropriate updates therein. Next provision, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, with the existing provision concerning penalties: 

 

139(1)A person who contravenes any provision of this Act 

or of the regulations or who contravenes an order made by 

the minister, the authority or the commission pursuant to 

this Act and for which no other penalty is specifically 

provided is guilty of an offense and liable on summary 

conviction to: 

 

(a) a fine of not more that $10,000 for an individual and 

not more than $50,000 for a corporation; 

 

(b) imprisonment for a term of not more than six 

months; or 

 

(c) both the fine and imprisonment. 

 

Again, for the purposes of (1), (2): 

 

“minister” means: 

 

(a) the member of the Executive Council to whom for 

the time being the administration of The Parks Act is 

assigned; and 

 

(b) the member of the Executive Council to whom for 

the time being the administration of The Regional Parks 

Act, 1979 is assigned; 

 

“other penalty” does not include a penalty that has been or 

may be imposed by the authority or the commission 

pursuant to this Act. 

 

So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those changes are consequential 

to the proposed enactment of The Regional Parks Act, 2012 and 

update references to the new Act. That’s about it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in terms of what I’d like to say about the consequential 

amendments resulting from the enactment of The Regional 

Parks Act, 2012. Again, consequential amendments, you put the 

main legislative pebble in the water and the changes ripple forth 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2807 

and they are manifest here today in these consequential 

amendments. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 64, An Act to make consequential 

amendments resulting from the enactment of The Regional 

Parks Act, 2012. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 53 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise and speak on this bill, you know, Bill No. 

53, the miscellaneous statutes repeal Act, 2012. 

 

You know it’s always interesting when we put these up, and we 

think these bills are dead, and they’re from a bygone era, and 

we’ve not any need for them. And it’s like cleaning out a 

basement, and you don’t even look in the box, you know. And 

maybe you should look in the box, you know. And I think that 

when I look at some of these, I all of a sudden start to have lots 

of questions. And I think this’ll be a very interesting one when 

we get to committee because I think that we should be careful. 

 

Now there’s some new bills that I’d like to see repealed. Like 

Bill 85, that might be a good one we could start with. I’d like to 

see that one. Or there was another one, Bill 43 from a few years 

ago, trespass. I’d bet that’s never been used. And I don’t know 

why it’s on the books, so it’ll be soon ready for the trash heap. 

 

But that’s not the issue before us today, and we will have plenty 

of time to talk about that in the future. But I do have some 

questions about the things that are in front of us today. And I 

know that in many ways it seems, as I said, really 

straightforward and, you know, it’s like when we clean out the 

basement, don’t look in the box. And then you start to find 

things you kind of like and move it back in. But we really 

should be a little careful about this. 

 

So one of the things as I go through the minister’s speech, he 

starts to talk about The Crown Foundations Act. The bill will 

repeal The Crown Foundations Act: 

 

That Act was introduced in 1994 to allow universities to 

take advantage of a difference in the income tax treatment 

of donations made to charitable organizations and to the 

Crown. At that time the income tax deduction for 

donations made to charitable organizations could not 

exceed 20 per cent of a taxpayer’s income whereas 

donations to the Crown could be . . . 100 per cent of the 

taxpayer’s income.  

 

And so this Act had: 

 

permitted Crown foundations to be established for . . . 

[our] two universities to act as a conduit for donations to 

those universities. This allowed donors to take advantage 

of a larger tax benefit [particularly, I would imagine, when 

there was significant amounts of money involved]. 

 

And so that seems relatively straightforward. 

 

[15:45] 

 

In 1996 the tax credit distinction between the donations to 

charitable organizations and donations to the Crown was 

eliminated. The new limit of 75 per cent of a taxpayer’s 

income is the same for either type of donation. As there is 

no longer any tax advantage gained from establishing a 

foundation, there is no need for this Act to continue. The 

Crown foundations at both universities have had no 

activity in the past several years, and both universities 

support the elimination of the foundations. 

 

Now I just want to stop there for a minute because I know the U 

of S [University of Saskatchewan] has run into some interesting 

issues in the last year or so, and I’m wondering what the 

implications are for that. And one of them is particularly around 

the Kenderdine area, which was a gift from the Kenderdine 

family I think, if I’m correct, from a family to the university for 

biology research. And from what I can recall, and I’m not 100 

per cent sure on this but this will be questioned in committee, is 

what happened . . . the idea was that at a time when you were to 

give land or give gifts to the university, they were to be used for 

the purpose the gift had stated. 

 

So in this case, now the Kenderdine campus had two real 

purposes. One was for biology students to learn a lot about 

biology in a field setting. And so they would go up every 

summer, and it was a big deal because everybody knew the lay 

of the land in that area and it was a major part of their field 

experience. The other part was an artistic part where 

Kenderdine and others had painted. And so this was very 

specific about what the intent of that gift was. 

 

Now we’re hearing lots of talk about what may actually happen 

to that land because ironically it’s right on the fringe of the new 

park, and it’s pretty prime real estate. Now that was a gift. Now 

I don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all I’m just saying is there is 

lots of questions here. When you get rid of a foundation, was 

this the foundation through which that land had been given? I 

don’t know, but I’d sure like to know. 

 

And gifts that were given through this foundation, now maybe it 

was straight financial gifts and that was the only kind of gift 

that was accepted. But I would bet and I would not be surprised, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there were other kinds of gifts that were 

given and then valued for a certain amount of money, at a price, 

and said this was worth 50,000 or this was worth 100,000, and 

then they got a tax credit based on that. 



2808 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to know more about that 

Act than just say it’s all about the tax donation deduction. 

Maybe it is; maybe that’s the only thing it’s about. But I know 

particularly at the University of Saskatchewan, this is becoming 

a big, big issue about what’s going to happen to gifts that were 

given to the university but may actually be used for other 

purposes. But when they were given, the legislation was very 

clear that they were to be used for the purpose for which they 

were given or returned. Now if you get rid of this legislation, 

does that have an impact on that? I don’t know, but we’ll have 

to find out more when we go to committee to say, so what is the 

whole legislation? What is the whole thing? 

 

Because right now both universities are under . . . And we’ll 

hear more about this tomorrow. We’ll hear a lot about this 

tomorrow, about the stress of what’s happening to the 

universities. And if they can have fewer strings on some of the 

things that they would like to do, I’m sure they would not have 

a problem with that, and if they have to deal with maintaining 

some of their older properties when they have an option of 

doing something. 

 

We saw that with the Kenderdine Campus, that here was, for 

actually a very small amount of money, but that was their first 

thing on the cutting block — very symbolic when they got rid 

of the Kenderdine Campus. And it was a real sad day for not 

only the biology students but for the art students. Many had 

really actually come to think of that as what they saw the 

University of Saskatchewan as a much bigger campus, much 

bigger than what is on the banks of the South Saskatchewan 

River, that in fact the University of Saskatchewan represented 

all of the province. And we start to see these changes. We have 

some questions. 

 

And so this is not a simple thing. I don’t know, maybe it is a 

simple thing, but of course the minister in his speech tends to 

make it a very simple thing, and so we will have questions 

about that. And as I said, I don’t know when they just say that 

they’ve written the letters to the universities and both have 

supported it. We’ve seen what that really means in terms of 

consultation and what this government does in terms of 

consultation. They get a letter and they say, bingo. We’ve done 

it. We got the job done and we can do whatever we want. It’s a 

licence to do whatever they want, and actually I’m not sure that 

people fully understand that. 

 

So we’ll have questions. And so this is a kind of thing when I 

say that we should move cautiously when we’re repealing old 

pieces of legislation. 

 

The next one — and it also is kind of interesting because I 

know it seemed to have got a few laughs when I was reading 

Hansard — over on the other side, the minister was talking 

about repealing The Vegetable, Fruit and Honey Sales Act, and 

there seems to be an inaudible interjection. Now I don’t know if 

anybody was so mad they swore and left here — I don’t know if 

that happened — or maybe they were laughing. But something 

happened, you know. I don’t know what happened when that 

happened over there. 

 

But it’s been in place since 1947, and it permits inspectors 

appointed pursuant to the Act to certify that vegetables, fruits, 

and honey for sale in Saskatchewan meet the standards and 

regulations. And he goes on to say, however, since the Act was 

first introduced, changes have occurred in the industries . . . to 

federal regulations have rendered the Act irrelevant and 

cumbersome. 

 

And I just have to say, Mr. Speaker, am I wrong? Maybe I’m 

not . . . Maybe I’m wrong here . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Now the member from Moose Jaw, he seems to know it all. He 

seems to know it all. Right away he’s on it and this is great. But 

are we not debating another bill that’s called The Animal 

Products Amendment Act because of what the federal people 

did two years ago, off-loading? Now maybe the member from 

Moose Jaw North knows more about this, and he’s the expert. 

That’s the inaudible interjection over there. I think he’s the 

inaudible interjection. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What are you talking about? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — What are you talking about? What are you 

talking about? What are you talking about? 

 

I’ve got to say I find it very interesting that we have a Minister 

of Agriculture bringing forward The Animal Products 

Amendment Act, 2012 because the federal government is 

walking away from its responsibilities. They’ve given notice 

two years ago because they’re not going to do the inspections 

that they had always committed to. 

 

But yet we are now repealing The Vegetable, Fruit and Honey 

Sales Act. Maybe it’s a little premature with the government in 

Ottawa that maybe you should just take a little time here 

because, you know, maybe next year we’re going to be bringing 

this back because the Harper government on Thursday, 

Harper’s government on Thursday is going to be cutting more 

inspectors, and all of a sudden we’re going to have to be 

inspecting our own honey, fruits, and vegetables. I think maybe 

we’re a little premature here. I don’t know because on one hand 

we’re . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Hey, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

if he’s talking about immature fruit, that’s when you need an 

inspector to tell you when your fruit is immature or not. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I think this is an issue. And I 

think on one hand we can laugh about it, but you know we see 

. . . And we see this more and more, particularly . . . I know in 

Saskatoon we have a very active farmers’ market. Regina has a 

very active farmers’ market. And we know across the province 

there are many, many very active farmers’ markets. 

 

And I think that, I’m not sure what the point of repealing this 

. . . And we’ll have questions about that too because I’m not 

sure if, what, they go into farmers’ markets, whether it’s federal 

inspectors who watch the honey sales there . . . And it’s in my 

riding, the farmers’ market, so I go down there very often on a 

Saturday morning and I see the people, you know, selling honey 

and, you know, I think this is a very important issue and I think 

that this is a critical piece. And I think we may be premature or 

it may be immature of the government to ask for the repeal of 

this at this stage. I don’t know. But I think we need to think this 

through. 

 

And I also think, you know, it’s interesting in 1947 . . . This bill 

was introduced in 1947. And sometimes we think of that as the 

good old days, you know. And I think, and I’m not sure who 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2809 

was with me on that trip to Toronto . . . Midwest legislators 

conference . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . What’s that? 

 

An Hon. Member: — You were on a trip in 1947? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — No, it was just a few years ago, a few years 

ago. I’m glad the folks are listening over there. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there was a Midwest legislators conference in Toronto 

just a couple of years ago and we were on a tour of the Toronto 

food exchange. And I don’t know if you’ve ever heard of this. It 

has got to be the neatest thing I’ve seen in a long time. It’s the 

third largest fresh food exchange in North America. New York 

has the biggest one, I think Los Angeles, and then Toronto. 

 

And what it is . . . And it was built in response to all the major 

highways that were being built, you know, where the interstate 

system that was being built in the States after World War II. 

And what was going to happen was there was going to affect 

the farmers in southern Ontario who were used to selling their 

fresh fruit and vegetables into Toronto, and they had to set up a 

system so that it would be protected. And the government of the 

day said yes, we’re going to support it. It’s like the co-op, large 

co-op. The farmers, the fresh fruit and vegetable farmers every 

day . . . We went for that tour. Our tour started like at five in the 

morning and it was late; he said the day’s already over. What 

you did . . . All these trucks, they’d be loaded up about 

midnight, driven into Toronto with potatoes, all sorts of 

vegetables, and then you would see . . . then they’d be out in 

this parking lot, essentially, and people would come and buy 

them for the restaurants and the grocery stores of Toronto. You 

know, when you go to a fancy restaurant in Toronto and they 

say we bought our vegetables locally, they really did. They 

went down to the back market in the morning and bought their 

vegetables. 

 

And it was very interesting as you go in there. And you would 

see these restaurateurs pull out their wallets and they would 

have hundred dollar . . . They would have a whack of cash. 

Very few people actually paid with cheques, but rolls of money. 

They’d buy their vegetables for the day that they needed that 

night in the restaurant, and they’d be back the next morning, 

you know, about 5 or 6 in the morning to buy the best 

vegetables. It was really interesting. It was not a farmers’ 

market, like ordinary people couldn’t go and buy the groceries 

there, but it was for restaurateurs and small grocery stores. And 

it was phenomenal. 

 

So I think there was some interesting things that were 

happening in the late 1940s to protect, you know, the people 

who did this kind of thing. So I think when we talk about that, 

these kind of things, it brings back a hope that maybe we could 

do things better. I know in Saskatoon, we’re trying to think of 

how can we have more local produce in our city. And that’s a 

real challenge. It’s not just, you know, a pipe dream. We talk 

about some real food issues and food security, food security, 

and I think that this is an important thing. So we should look 

back at these things and not dismiss them so out of hand, 

because there were some really interesting things happening. 

 

In Toronto this food exchange has been attempted to be bought 

out by the big grocery stores, but they have fought hard to 

remain independent because it’s all about being independent, 

and it’s a phenomenal thing. And if you ever get a chance, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to see it, you should. It’s really pretty neat. 

And actually many of us actually see it every time we go to 

Toronto. If you’re at the airport and you’re going downtown, 

it’s under the freeway. And Mr. Nilson, the member from 

Lakeview and I were there a while ago, and I pointed it out to 

him. I said look down there; it’s underneath the freeway. And 

there it was, all the trucks and stuff, but very interesting. I think 

farmers could appreciate the fact that people make a living, but 

it’s just, you know, a different way of doing things. And I think 

we need to think more about it. 

 

So when I see this kind of bill and when I see the era it’s from, I 

think . . . And that’s the same era, the late ’40s, early ’50s, 

when we were talking about independence and, you know, the 

local markets and supporting the local producers and supporting 

our local restaurants and local grocery stores. We can do things 

to make it a little bit better. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going 

to be very curious to ask about that too. I want to know about 

the farmers’ markets. I want to know . . . Like maybe this is 

something we should’ve been doing. Maybe this is something 

we should’ve been doing. And what will happen with the 

federal producers? 

 

[16:00] 

 

And as I know and it’s seen from yesterday, you know, the 

minister actually had some difficulty following the discussion 

around C-52. Not sure what that was about. And he said the 

government seemed to be on the right track, doing a better job. 

I’m not sure that many people would agree with that, but he 

seemed to think it was okay. 

 

Are we setting ourselves up to seeing a bill in two or three years 

calling for a bill similar to what we’re looking at in Bill No. 60 

where we say, hey, the federal government business . . . Well 

they seem to be in the habit of doing it. So maybe we should 

keep what we’ve got and not throw this out as quickly as some 

in . . . I don’t know what department would be asking for this 

kind of thing. 

 

Anyways, so I have some real concerns about that. So those are 

the first two bills that we have. I do want to just say that, you 

know, it’s also interesting that, you know, how this government, 

how the minister framed this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He talks 

about, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, The NewGrade Energy Inc. Act 

will also be repealed. This Act was enacted to facilitate the 

financing, construction, development of the heavy oil upgrader 

in Regina. In 2007, the Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan sold its interest in NewGrade Energy Inc. and as 

such the Act is no longer required. End of story. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think he might have mentioned 

that, that of course the government realized a profit I think of 

$300 million. And I think that the new government of the day 

that came into power in the fall of 2007, the Premier of the day 

said, the new Premier of the day said, the cupboard was bare; it 

was stark, I think, was the actual word. He couldn’t believe it. 

Then all of a sudden he realized, no, actually there was about 

200 million or 300 million there, and it was from the sale of 

NewGrade. 

 

We had set . . . This government on this side had set it aside for 

some very exciting work when it came to environmental 



2810 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

projects. And we were really hoping for some new . . . a new 

way of how we did things in Saskatchewan. And we were 

excited about our green strategy. And I know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you would actually come out to many of the meetings. 

You were the environmental critic at the time and you had 

followed that work, and this was going to be a big part of that, a 

big part of that. And a big part actually of even curbside 

recycling, all sorts of things that we were going to be able to do 

and this was going to finance it. But somehow that money went 

some other places and we’re not sure where it went. 

 

But in all now, we just have sort of a sad footnote that 

NewGrade, that Act is no longer with us. End of story. But for 

us it was a great story because it did help this province along. It 

really did achieve some great things. And I think that we need 

to see more of that kind of stuff happening where we see some 

bold initiatives of the government to really invest and support 

its people in the kind of things we can be doing. And what you 

can do with $300 million is amazing, is truly amazing. We 

would hope that they would have used it on some green 

initiatives. 

 

And of course as the government, the Premier of the day, now I 

don’t know what he was thinking when he said the cupboard 

was stark; it was bare. And really it was not at all that. I mean 

that was quite a thing when he said that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s so many other things here that 

I know that we’ll have questions about, particularly around the 

municipal funding and different things like that. I know that we 

have many questions of that. Of course now that they’re relying 

on the Municipal Board for much of the financing . . . And I 

know and I realize that sometimes these things are created in 

response to federal initiatives and then the initiative goes away 

and you might as well let the bill go, you know. But I think that 

there were some things in here that I’m not sure that are ready 

for the trash heap. 

 

I’d be interested, for example, The Subdivisions Act. Now it 

says they haven’t used it in the last 25 years or haven’t received 

an application for it, but I mean I would say that about the 

trespass bill this government passed five years ago. I’d bet a 

dollar that there’s not been one charge under that bill. I don’t 

think . . . I bet there hasn’t been one, but if . . . And it sounds 

like the material for a written question. That’s what it’ll have to 

be, a written question. Who knows? It might end up in QP 

[question period]. How many times under the trespass bill has it 

been enforced? 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, we will have 

questions about the university part because I do think that we 

need to be careful in these times that universities are very 

stressed, that nothing untoward is happening, unintentional or 

intentional. I think that it’s important that people understand 

that this is straightforward, as the minister says. And if it is, 

then that’s very good, and if there are any questions then we 

need to ask them. 

 

And I know particularly in my riding, in my constituency, they 

are asking a lot about the Kenderdine. What’s going to happen 

to it? And because it was a gift and it was a donation to the 

University of Saskatchewan, they expect it to stay the same. But 

you know, the university’s giving all sorts of signals because 

essentially it’s closing it down. 

 

And if we see the university . . . We don’t know what’s going to 

happen this summer because that really becomes a problem 

because, you know, winter right now would slow down any 

mischief that might happen on the campus. But as soon as 

spring comes it’s going to be tough to maintain the buildings 

and property. And so we have some real concerns about that, 

and we don’t want to see that campus abandoned for a long 

time. And in fact we would hope that it would return to the 

original use that it was meant for in terms of a biology camp 

and an art camp because that’s really, really critical. So we have 

that. 

 

And as well you know, I know that, as I say, I still don’t know 

what this inaudible interjection . . . It might have been the 

member from Moose Jaw North yelling, what are you talking 

about? That could have been it. I don’t know, because I know 

he often has to chirp that in. 

 

But anyways we will be asking questions about The Vegetable, 

Fruit and Honey Sales Act as well because I think, as I said, 

that’s an important thing when we talk about food security and 

if we’re relying totally on the federal government when they 

have seemed to be not very reliable, not reliable at all. And in 

fact we’ve had to put in new legislation, and it’s just a wise 

thing to do. It might be time to repeal this repeal. 

 

And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know many of my 

colleagues will have comments to make as well. I’d like to 

move adjournment of this bill. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 53, the miscellaneous 

statutes repeal Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 58 — The 

Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise today to speak to Bill No. 58, The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, 2012. This is a very significant rewrite of 

the existing workers’ compensation Act. And the minister in his 

comments has indicated that this came about as a result of a 

committee of review that did some work in 2010. And this is a 

review that happens in regular periods, and this is part of the 

process that’s involved when workers’ compensation is being 

reviewed. The executive summary of the report of the 

committee indicates that it’s “. . . a guaranteed periodic forum 

for persons and organizations to describe their experiences with 

workers compensation in Saskatchewan.” And this has been 

going on since 1945 when we had Premier Douglas here in the 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2811 

Legislative Assembly working for workers’ rights and for 

employers as well, making sure that there’s a fair balance in the 

workplace. And certainly when it comes to workers’ health and 

safety, that’s something that is very important to a modern 

workplace. 

 

Now just a few comments initially on my experiences with 

workers’ compensation. And I think this is probably the 

experience of most young people in Saskatchewan when they 

start out in the workforce. Quite often they’re involved in 

physical labour positions. I was working as an assistant for my 

hometown one summer. These are summer jobs during 

university. I also worked out at our local regional park. And 

these are physical jobs where quite often injuries are prevalent. 

But more significantly, I worked for about six summers in 

northern Saskatchewan, Alberta, and BC [British Columbia] as 

a tree planter. 

 

And one of the things you’ll know when people are doing this 

kind of seasonal work, it’s very, very physical work, and it’s 

work where there are a lot of physical injuries. And certainly 

tree planting was no exception. 

 

A number of people were often injured. There was different 

things that happened. First of all there was a regular occurrence 

of tendinitis in the wrists because the physical labour that 

you’re doing as a tree planter is lifting heavy shovels with mud 

and all kinds of things associated with working in the soil. And 

then also just some people would get — because they were 

planting so fast — would get tendinitis from pulling the trees 

out of the bag, just from that repetitive action. And there were 

significant injuries where the swelling was visible on people’s 

wrists either from the use of the shovel or the use of their wrist 

removing trees from the tree planting bag. 

 

Falling, you know, hurting yourself climbing over trash and 

slash on the forest floor from the clear-cut, there’s all kinds of 

ways people could be injured. And certainly I always was 

surprised that there weren’t worse injuries because you’re 

riding out in equipment, rough equipment with quad trailers, 

and all kinds of things could go wrong. 

 

But generally anyone who was injured, because the company I 

worked for had the proper workers’ compensation procedures in 

place and certainly safety was number one for the companies, 

you know, people were able to heal properly, get some time to 

make sure that their tendinitis was dealt with before going back 

to work. And it’s something I think that without those 

programs, a number of people would simply be worse, much 

worse off. And as I say, much of this physical work is done by 

young people, university students, people that are probably in 

menial tasks and maybe not highly paid tasks. So the 

importance of the workers’ compensation regime in our 

province and I think across the world is something that needs to 

be commended and recommended and lauded as a sign of a 

modern workplace. 

 

I also have experience through running a company in northern 

Saskatchewan, where we run a campground in a cultural 

recreational site, and we often hire workers. And I was always, 

whenever paying the bills, a bit, you know, grumpy about 

having to pay the workers’ compensation premiums because 

employers pay a significant amount of money into the scheme. 

And understandably, you know, you collect as you’re doing 

payroll. You would collect the workers’ portion and then you 

would remit your portion as the employer. And you can see 

where it’s a balance, you know. Both sides are paying for this 

insurance. And it’s a form of insurance that assures a number of 

things in the workplace. So I’ve experienced it from both sides 

in the workplace, and I think it’s something that’s very 

valuable. 

 

I was curious to know a little bit more about the history of 

workers’ compensation, and when I looked it up I found out the 

origins of workers’ compensation actually started in Germany. 

And this is back in the days when we were having the Riel 

Rebellion. The chancellor, Otto Von Bismarck, introduced a 

compulsory, state-run accident compensation system in 

Germany — so I found that to be very interesting — in 1884 to 

1886. 

 

So this is not new, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s certainly 

something that reflects the importance of this kind of program 

in the workplace. And as I was able to find on a website that 

describes the history of workers’ compensation, the initial 

system was financed by workers and employers. So that seems 

to be something that’s been very successful and is continued. 

 

It moved then in the United States. It was introduced during . . . 

well just before World War I. So as this building was being 

built, it was introduced in the United States. And several states 

enacted this type of legislation, and then it moved into Canada. 

It started in Canada around 1910, at the same time. And in that 

case there was a judge, Mr. Justice William Meredith was 

appointed, and there was a Royal Commission established to 

study workers’ compensation in Ontario. 

 

And there’s a well-known report that came out of that called the 

Meredith report. And you will see that referenced very early in 

the committee’s report that came from the most recent review. 

In fact they talk about it on page 1 of chapter 1, and that’s the 

Meredith principle. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So the Meredith report, it sort of outlines . . . This was a very 

important stage in workers’ compensation where there was a 

trade-off. And it’s much like we saw in no-fault insurance here 

in the 1990s in Saskatchewan. In this case, workers were 

relinquishing their right to sue their employer in exchange for 

compensation benefits. 

 

So it’s much like no-fault when we come to automobile 

insurance. And he advocated for that, this judge. He advocated 

for no-fault insurance, collective liability, independent 

administration, and exclusive jurisdiction. So the other thing 

that was important was that the system exists at arm’s length 

from the government and is shielded from political influence, 

allowing only limited powers to the minister responsible. 

 

And in the Meredith report he established five basic principles 

or cornerstones to the original laws, and this page indicates that 

indeed these cornerstones have remained intact over the last 100 

years. 

 

First of all, as I indicated, no-fault compensation. So no matter 



2812 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

what, if you’re injured at the workplace, you are compensated 

even if you . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . We’ll get to 

collective liability. That’s the second one on the list. The 

minister is asking . . . I’m glad the minister is interested in the 

history of workers’ compensation. First of all, to finish off on 

no-fault compensation, the important point here is both the 

worker and the employer waive the right to sue. And perhaps 

he’s got his laptop open and can follow along with me as we go 

through this. 

 

So that’s the first principle, is no-fault compensation. There’s 

no argument about who caused the injury or how it happened. If 

you’re hurt, you’re hurt, and fault becomes irrelevant. Providing 

compensation becomes the focus. So I think that’s a healthy 

approach and one that deals with a lot of the issues that can 

arise when you’re trying to prove fault. 

 

So, as the minister pre-empted me, the second principle or 

cornerstone to workers’ compensation is collective liability. 

And in that case the total cost of the compensation system is 

shared by all employers and they all contribute to a common 

fund. So this is something that becomes collective, and we 

know that collective is a good way of doing things. So it helps 

out the individual and it . . . You know, a single employer could 

be put out of business if he had an individual injured that 

required a lifetime of, say, wage replacement. So that was 

something very risky for an individual employer, but by 

working together collectively and putting your resources 

together collectively, you’re able to reduce that risk by sharing 

it across the employers’ realm. 

 

The third one, the third cornerstone of the workers’ 

compensation program is security of payment. So in this case 

the fund is established to guarantee that compensation monies 

will be available. So there’s no threat of it being depleted. And 

that’s why, I think, the Workers’ Compensation Board always 

checks their revenues, makes sure that the premiums are there 

to sustain the workers’ claims as they come in. 

 

So again, there’s security of payment. We know that employers 

aren’t going to be put out of business in case of a catastrophic 

injury to one of their workers, and that fault is not something 

that has to be argued about. If you’re injured, you’re injured. 

 

The fourth cornerstone is exclusive jurisdiction. So there’s a 

board that’s established and they’re responsible for all the 

claims. They’re the decision maker. They’re the final authority 

and they’re not bound by precedent. They have power and 

authority to judge each case on its individual merits. Again it 

removes a lot of the ability for disputes, and if disputes are 

available then you know lawyers are going to be available, and 

lawsuits, and all the complications that arise from that. So this 

is a simplified system that helps make payments quickly to 

people who are injured, which they will need, and then also the 

future benefits that are required. 

 

And the fifth basic cornerstone to the Meredith proposal was 

that there be an independent board, and this has been preserved 

as well in most regimes. The governing board will be 

autonomous and non-political and financially independent of 

government or any special interest group. 

 

So with those five basic cornerstones: no-fault compensation, 

collective liability, security of payment, exclusive jurisdiction, 

and an independent board, we now have in our province a very 

modern and sustainable Workers’ Compensation Board. In fact 

I had the pleasure of attending a ceremony last fall in Saskatoon 

for Saskatchewan’s top 100 businesses. And interestingly 

enough, a large number of the most successful businesses in 

Saskatchewan are either co-operatives or state-owned 

organizations or some form of community-based organization 

where people pool their resources together and actually work 

together to build strong businesses. 

 

We know the importance of the co-operative regime in this 

province, and one that sadly we don’t see reflected in the 

current government’s assignment to mandates. But we know the 

strength of the co-operative sector in Saskatchewan. It’s 

incredibly important. And in fact the workmen’s compensation 

board, Workers’ Compensation Board, in terms of the top 

businesses in Saskatchewan, has been in the top 25 of 

Saskatchewan businesses over the past six years at least. I 

didn’t look any further beyond that. But certainly the presence 

of the Workers’ Compensation Board, the people that it’s hired 

to work for it, the amount of money that it handles and deals 

with, and its independence as a business but still one that’s 

based on the collective rights of employers and workers, is one 

that can’t be underestimated, nor can of course the influence of 

most co-operatives, credit unions, and groups that came from 

co-operative organizations like Viterra and businesses like that. 

 

So just a little aside there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the 

importance of these types of businesses in our economy, and 

certainly the Workers’ Compensation Board is no exception to 

that. 

 

So I wanted to take a minute at this point to talk a little bit about 

the minister’s comments and the types of the things that he has 

indicated will be found in this bill. The bill itself is quite 

extensive. It’s one of the larger bills that’s being introduced in 

this session, and it actually has over a hundred . . . almost 200 

sections to it, 201 sections in the bill. It’s a comprehensive bill 

that comes out of the final report of The Workers’ 

Compensation Act committee of review. 

 

The minister has indicated that there’s a number of changes that 

have come out of the review. And the ones . . . The review, I 

think, made quite a few recommendations: just over 55 of them, 

57 recommendations came out of the review. And the minister 

indicated that the ones that required legislative amendments are 

included in The Workers’ Compensation Act. And I haven’t 

been able to verify whether every one of these 

recommendations were actually taken into account and included 

in the legislation, but that certainly is something that we’ll be 

looking at when this bill moves to the committee stage, is to 

ensure that all of these recommendations have been considered 

and incorporated into this rather significant piece of legislation. 

 

He’s also indicated that the Act has been modernized and 

restructured to improve its readability and ease of use. And 

again, kudos to the good people in the ministry and in the 

Department of Justice who are responsible for the legislative 

drafting work that takes place within the Government of 

Saskatchewan. And I’m certain that the modernization and 

restructuring is something that will certainly assist the users of 

the legislation. 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2813 

He’s indicated that the bill will increase benefit levels for 

injured workers, and I know that’s certainly some of the 

recommendations coming out of the report. Some of these 

levels have been stagnant for quite some time, and indeed we 

are still hearing from people who are concerned about, you 

know, the freeze, basically on the levels of support and benefit 

levels, because they’re not reflective of the cost of living 

increases that these injured workers are subject to. You know, 

we see a serious increase in rents these days and cost of food 

and everything else, and for those who are injured and unable to 

work for an extended period of time, it’s clear that they simply 

will not receive the increase in benefits that are adjusted 

accordingly. 

 

The minister goes on to say that there’s now a system of 

indexation to ensure that the benefits are going to be adjusted 

annually, and then workers can choose between either an 

annuity or receiving a lump sum payment. He indicated, 

though, there have been no increase to the workers’ 

compensation benefit levels since 2005. And sadly there was a 

review done in 2006 that had made some recommendations, but 

this government has not been able to respond to that until 2013. 

So it’s been a long haul for a lot of people that have been stuck 

at the 2005 levels. That’s eight years ago. 

 

So the 2006 review was done, but the board has indicated that 

they had to . . . nothing was acted on at that time. So the current 

review, the committee of review indicates on page 7 of their 

report in chapter 1 that they took into account the 

recommendations of the 2006 committee of review, especially 

the ones that had not been implemented. So those are now being 

reflected again in this 2011 report that came out in 2011. 

 

There’s other changes that he’s indicated. He indicates that the 

bill addresses the compensation benefit levels in a manner that 

is fair and fiscally responsible. The test, I think, will be once the 

bill is implemented and the workers themselves are subjected to 

the new regime. We’ll be able to see more whether it is indeed 

fair and fiscally responsible. 

 

The minimum wage rate was going to be increased up to 59,000 

for workers injured after the bill comes into force. And the 

board is then going to increase the maximum wage range 

incrementally over the next four years until it reaches, he says, 

165 per cent of the average weekly range. So without any more 

detail, that’s something that we’ll have to look at in committee, 

as we have questions on this extensive bill. 

 

He indicated that the bill also has a benefit formula that will 

ensure future changes to benefits be done in a fair, transparent, 

and predictable manner. And that would be a welcome change 

to what we have been seeing in some areas of the work this 

government does. So that is something else we’ll look at in 

committee and make sure that the legislation describes what the 

minister is promising. 

 

He’s talking about fines that can be implied. And some 

administrative penalties are now being introduced, and it’s also 

increasing the borrowing limit for the WCB, for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board, to $25 million. And I’m not sure why the 

board needs that kind of flexibility for borrowing, but I assume 

that if there’s situations where they’re short on cash, they need 

to do this. And that certainly is appropriate to bring it up to a 

level of other provinces. 

 

There is another obligation that’s being placed on employers 

here to help with an employee’s Return to Work program. And 

these programs, as he indicated, assist in maintaining an 

employee’s connection with the workplace. And I imagine most 

members here have been in workplaces where there have been 

people coming back to work after being injured or off work for 

whatever reason, and I’ve seen those work very successfully for 

people where they’re gradually reintroduced to the workplace 

and then become fully integrated if their injuries allow, as their 

injuries allow. 

 

So there’s a number of clarifications and codifications to the 

internal processes of the board. They have a fair practice office 

that’s now codified within the legislation, and the appeal 

process is apparently being clarified. So the fair practices office 

has been around since 2003. It will continue to operate now, but 

he is describing it more as an internal ombudsman. So we will 

take a look at that as well and make sure that this is fair and 

transparent as he’s promising. 

 

And his final comments indicate about the removal of 

gender-specific language, using consistent terms, improving 

clarity and ease of use. And those are the kinds of changes, Mr. 

Speaker, that I think are, you know, the basic ongoing work of 

the good public servants over in the legislative branch who are 

responsible for ensuring that the wishes of the government are 

properly reflected and the rights of the people are reflected as 

well in the drafting of legislation. 

 

So as I indicated, the committee of review submitted its final 

report in 2011 and the bill itself has taken its guidance from that 

bill. There’s a few things that I think are of great importance to 

workers. As I indicated, the Meredith principle itself is one that 

guides the thinking behind this. 

 

There are other principles that are indicated and different 

themes which guided the committee in their work. One of them 

is prevention, and again I think this is something that we have 

seen significant advancements in the workplace. And I would 

presume it’s been ongoing right since the day a workplace 

existed. We don’t want injuries; we want safe practices. And I 

know certainly in the field of tree planting, for example, the 

safety practices have evolved incredibly from the early ’80s, 

mid ’70s when this type of work became more prevalent in the 

Saskatchewan forestry industry anyways. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And certainly safety first has become the theme for a lot of 

these companies. And I see significant changes in sort of the 

types of first aid equipment that are available and the care that’s 

being taken to ensure that the workers are safe. So prevention is 

very much, I think, at the forefront of most employers’ thinking. 

And that’s something that guides not only employers and 

workers, but it’s obviously guided the work of this commission. 

 

The other principles that they’re working on are things like 

inclusion, the service to stakeholders because the board itself 

knows that it’s the stakeholders that are at their best interests. 

So they’re making sure that the board’s ability to provide good 

service to the stakeholders is important. 



2814 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

The other notion that’s guided the review was the notion of 

fairness. And obviously this board has to be seen as fair in all 

aspects of the work that it does to all its stakeholders, not only 

the employers but the workers. And you know, people need to 

feel that the claims are being fairly adjudicated and that 

payments are reasonable. So that’s one of the principles that the 

committee of review was interested in. 

 

The improvement of the work, operations of the board itself, 

obviously something that’s important. And finally 

accountability, which is something people really look for in any 

kind of organization that’s handling premiums, or funds, or 

workers’ funds and things like that. 

 

I won’t go through all of the 59, or 57 recommendations. 

They’re certainly located within the report itself, and there’s a 

good summary and costing section at the end of the report if 

people are interested in looking at it. There’s a summary of 

recommendations by chapter, and the final section shows a 

bunch of figures and rates based on the claims that the WCB 

has been receiving. So you can see some very interesting 

history and information about the types of work that the WCB 

has been doing. 

 

Just with respect to the bill itself, I’ll make some final 

comments about how the bill is structured. And you can see, 

through these comments, the extent of the legislation and the 

extent of the work that this very important board does. 

 

So the first section of the Act is, of course, just the preliminary 

matters. And the second section of the Act talks about the 

scope. I believe most workers in Saskatchewan are covered by 

this bill. I think some agricultural workers and self-employed 

people are not, although I believe there are provisions for 

people to buy in if they’re self-employed. Teachers are not 

covered by . . . My colleague from Saskatoon Centre indicates 

teachers are not covered by the workmen’s compensation and 

I’m sure there are other workers’ groups that aren’t included, 

but that’s one of the recommendations. In fact I think the very 

first recommendation is that all workers be included. And I’m 

just going to verify that that is the case . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . We’re getting lots of help from members 

opposite. 

 

But recommendation no. 1 of the 2011 report is that The 

Workers’ Compensation Act apply to all employees in 

Saskatchewan with no exclusions. So if that recommendation is 

being taken into account, maybe we’ll have that question in 

committee and make sure that that recommendation is indeed 

being applied. Historically, self-employed people, it was more 

difficult to establish what the correct replacement would be for 

their wages. So that’s one of the concerns that I think the board 

has struggled with over the years. 

 

The third part of the Act deals with the board itself. So the first 

division in the third part talks about how the board is 

established, what the terms are, the vacancies, what the 

remuneration is, head office, all those kinds of things, CEOs. 

The second division in that section talks about the duties and 

jurisdiction of the board, so that is administrative stuff. 

 

The meat of the bill is found in part IV of the bill and it’s split 

into a number of divisions. Let’s see, we have 11 divisions. The 

first division is eligibility, so that’s always a question is whether 

if someone’s injured they’re actually eligible. And obviously 

one of the presumptions of the application of this bill is that the 

injury would be presumed out of and in the course of 

employment. So that’s one of the basic premises we’re talking 

about here. 

 

Certain occupational diseases regarding firefighters, and this is 

a presumption for those people who are often forced to breathe 

in dangerous fumes. Certainly we’ve heard lots about 

asbestos-related cancer recently which is a work-related form of 

cancer, that mesothelioma and those kinds of things where 

people actually become gravely and critically ill and often end 

up with a fatal illness, you know, as they’re not able to work as 

their illness progresses. This is the type of bill that would 

provide them with at least some financial assistance when 

they’re no longer able to work because of a workplace acquired 

injury. 

 

So the first division of this compensation part deals with 

eligibility. The second division is the right of action respecting 

injury. So this is, I believe, the section where there’s no ability 

to bring a lawsuit but you can go to the board for your right of 

action. 

 

The third is the division, division 3 in this section is the claims 

for compensation. So it talks about how to apply for 

compensation, what happens if there’s a pre-existing condition, 

what happens if you’re a worker in training. And I would think 

for young people that are seriously injured in their course of 

being trained, this could have a significant impact on them for 

the rest of their work life. So there has to be ability for those 

types of people to be looked after as well. 

 

Division 4, it talks about the duties — duties of the worker, 

duties of the employer to notify the board. And indeed some of 

the comments that you find in the committee of review indicate 

that there’s a tendency for employers to discourage their 

employees from reporting their illness, and there may be 

tendencies for certain employees to overemphasize their illness 

or fabricate it. So there’s duties listed in the division 4 of this 

section that talk to that. 

 

Division 5 is regarding the medical examination claimant, the 

process the claimant needs to go for medical examination. 

 

Division 6 talks about the compensation to workers. This is 

probably the most important part of the bill and one that 

requires close review. But certainly what happens if 

somebody’s 63 years of age and gets injured? How long do 

their payments apply? What percentage of your compensation 

will be set aside for an annuity when you turn 65 and would 

normally retire if you weren’t working? Those of us who are 

working have to put aside our own, some of us more than 

others. But if you are injured and not able to work, then there 

are provisions for an annuity or a retirement fund. 

 

There’s all kinds of things that are really important in this: the 

formulas used for minimum compensation, the formulas used 

for maximum compensation, and how those are dealt with in the 

former Act. Because this Act is replacing the former Act, the 

1977 workers’ compensation Act. So all those things are 

factored into that division. 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2815 

Division 7 talks about compensation to dependants, and this is 

in the case of the death of a worker. And I know here in this 

Assembly we take time every year to acknowledge the tragedies 

when people are killed in the workplace. This bill provides for 

compensation for the dependants of the people who are killed in 

the workplace. 

 

Division 8 is a general division. 

 

Division 9 is a review of compensation and levies so that a 

worker can request a review or they can be cut off of 

compensation in certain circumstances. 

 

Division 10 talks about medical and surgical aid and all the 

rehabilitation that needs to take place when a worker is injured. 

And I have known of many people who have benefited from the 

workmen’s compensation board. I know there are some 

frustrations, and indeed I think as MLAs we often get calls with 

people who are struggling with the process and with the 

decisions that are made by the board. And it’s like any 

insurance scheme, you know. People aren’t always going to be 

happy with the levels that they get. And there may be some 

fairness issues, and that’s our role as MLAs to ensure that the 

people who are struggling with the board are fairly treated. 

 

Part V talks about the fund itself. So obviously the board 

manages some significant amounts of money in order to make 

the payouts that they need to do and collect the premiums. So 

there’s several . . . That’s also a large part of the Act. There’s a 

number of divisions in there. It talks about the fund itself, how 

statements need to be made by employers, inspections and 

inquiries, how the employers and the principals and the 

contractors are worked with. And then part VI is a very long 

part of this section and it deals with assessments. And those are 

the ones, the forms that I remember filling out as an employer, 

where you had to report on how many employees you had, what 

kind of payroll you had, and then your assessments would be 

calculated accordingly. 

 

There’s a number of other parts. Part VII is the “Other Matters” 

part. It talks about advocates and committees of review. And I 

know the minister referred to the committee of review in his 

comments when he introduced the bill. And then there’s the 

miscellaneous and the regulations. 

 

So as I indicated at the outset, Mr. Speaker, this is a fairly 

comprehensive process. It’s a very comprehensive replacement 

of the . . . I think it was the 1977 workers’ compensation Act 

. . . 1979. And we’ll have questions when we get to committee. 

And certainly we’ll watch this, if and when the bill gets passed, 

as to whether it’s accomplishing the goals that the minister 

identified in his comments on November 6. So at that point, I 

know other of my colleagues want to speak to this bill, and I 

will move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 58, The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 58, The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 61 — The 

Railway Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I’m glad . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I’m glad . . . It must be the topic, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re anxious to hear about The Railway Act. It’s not because 

of me. I’m sure it’s not me they’re clapping for. It’s The 

Railway Act, and it’s a fine piece of legislation. I just have a 

few questions about it, though. But I do have a few comments 

to make, so I won’t disappoint the crowd. I won’t disappoint the 

crowd, because it is . . . As you know and I would know, we all 

appreciate how important the railways are in this province, this 

fine province. And so as I was looking through this, I thought I 

do have, I do have some things to say about this. And I know 

. . . I do appreciate the warm welcome, though, I must say. I 

must . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That’s right. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I often do, I like to refer and reflect 

on what the minister says because quite often it’s helpful. 

Sometimes not as much as other times, but most often it is 

helpful. And I know that the minister really was quite quick to 

the point here, and he talks about how The Railway Amendment 

Act, Bill 61, 2012, outlines the railway abandonment process 

which requires railway owners to offer to sell their railway lines 

to interested parties before being allowed to permanently 

abandon their railway. 

 

And I think this is an important thing, you know, Mr. Speaker. I 

think that as . . . And I don’t know if this has much to do with 

downtown Saskatoon. My riding in the heart of Saskatoon is a 

very urban riding. We don’t often think about abandoned rail 

lines, but we do, and in fact we wish that sometimes those rail 

lines were a little bit more abandoned, how busy they are, and 

what we can do about rail lines. 

 

So this is an issue that I think . . . I can’t think of a single person 

in Saskatchewan who may not have some comments to make 

about railway lines and what we should be doing about this. So 

I think this is an important topic. 

 

And he talks about how the abandonment process requires that 

a railway owner first advertise their intentions to either sell or 

abandon the line and invite any expressions of interest from 

buyers. And so he talks about how currently the Highway 

Traffic Board doesn’t have sufficient authority to remedy this 

situation when perhaps the buyer or the sellers are negotiating 

in bad faith. 

 

So in this case they want to set the stage a little bit more 

constructively, so we can actually see these things dealt with 

appropriately. In the government purchase phase, the municipal 

government is required to either decline or accept the offer to 

purchase the net salvage value within 60 days. And that’s an 

important thing. So what is net salvage value? Well that’s the 



2816 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2013 

cost of the steel of the lines. And that’s no small thing. That’s 

no small thing, but it’s important. And so they can go from 

there. 

 

[16:45] 

 

It’s proposed that The Railway Act be amended to adopt the 

following provisions to address the bad faith negotiation 

allegations against the seller during the sell phase. They’re 

proposing the Highway Traffic Board has a way to evaluate the 

dispute and if necessary issue an order to the parties to enter an 

agreement which the board believes is fair and reasonable. So in 

fact it sounds like a bit of arbitration and I think that’s fair 

enough. And so I think that’s good. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

In order to give municipal governments more comfort in 

their decision to accept the offer to purchase, we are 

proposing the amendment that will allow . . . [them] the 

opportunity to request a net salvage value cost estimate 

before accepting the offer. 

 

I think that’s only fair. They know how much the estimate is 

and how much it would take to reach a fair agreement. So that’s 

straightforward and I think that’s important. 

 

But I just want to take a few minutes to talk about how 

important our railways are in Saskatchewan. And of course we 

often think about that, you know, particularly when it came to 

the pioneers and the settlement of Western Canada and how 

important the rail lines were in building our farming 

communities, but also our urban communities and what that 

meant, and interestingly actually in terms of building a healthy 

middle class in Western Canada. 

 

Interestingly I was reading last night, as I was preparing for 

some other bills, how important the rail line was to establishing 

some income for both the local people but also bring 

tradespeople out here, and it was essentially our first major 

industrial projects. It was our first major capital investments, 

and it was significant. So our railway lines are important. 

 

And as I understand and we’ve done some research on this 

actually, it’s very interesting that we have now 13 short line 

railways. That’s pretty . . . I would not have known that. I think 

that’s impressive. Some own their own operating equipment, 

their units. Others do not. Some actually, it’s interesting what 

they . . . we often think that they just ship grain. But actually 

Long Creek Railway, it’s a short line railroad that runs from 

Estevan to Tribune, about 41 miles, and they’re starting with 

shipping oil and there will be grain traffic to haul once the 

harvest is on its way. So it’s oil down in the South, the 

southeast corner, but I know up in the northern central part of 

the province it’s wood, wood products that’s on these lines. So 

it’s very good. So I think that’s interesting. 

 

So we have Thunder Rail that’s out of Arborfield; Carlton Trail 

Railway out of Prince Albert; the Red Coat Road & Rail out of 

Viceroy; Southern Rails Cooperative out of Avonlea; Great 

Western Railway, Westcan Rail out of Shaunavon; Fife Lake 

Railway out of Coronach; Torch River Rail out of Choiceland; 

Wheatland Railway out of Cudworth; Great Sandhills Railway, 

Leader; Last Mountain Railway out of Regina; Stewart 

Southern out of Fillmore; Big Sky out of Regina; Long Creek 

out of Tribune. 

 

And so as well, most of these seem to be in the South. And of 

course this is a long process that many of us have been 

following for many years, the abandonment process, and what 

that meant in rural Saskatchewan. Of course we can remember 

those days when we were talking about the death of small 

communities, and of course in many ways they were because no 

longer would people be hauling grain to the local elevator. But 

also it was a major source of income for the local RMs, and 

when that kind of stuff went, it hurt in more than one way. And 

so when you see these things coming back and the initiative and 

ingenuity of local producers to do this, this is just great. This is 

absolutely excellent. 

 

But we do worry about . . . Like yesterday we raised questions. 

Bill C-52 I imagine impacts this, the willingness of the major 

rail companies to do in good faith what they’re obligated to do. 

And this is a worry because if people are investing in shortline 

railways that they want to make sure that they can actually 

work, that they can actually work. And quite often they’re 

reluctant to do this, and we see that if there can be more profit 

in hauling out of other circumstances, out of other situations, 

then that’s where the money will go. And so we have to make 

sure that legislation like C-52 — a federal bill but has huge 

implications provincially — has the teeth to do what it’s 

supposed to do. 

 

And so that’s why we were asking questions about this 

yesterday. Well what started out to be a very good idea by the 

federal NDP has seemed to have taken a bit of a U-turn on the 

rail line, and you don’t want to see them backing up on the rail 

line, and it seems to be a problem here with the major rail lines. 

And so we have some concerns about that, and we’ll be asking 

those kind of questions when this bill goes to committee. 

 

But it is interesting that it talks about 2000 kilometres of rail 

line. I’d be curious to know how that compares to how many 

kilometres of STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 

line we have. How many kilometres does the STC actually 

travel? Now if I had an iPad, I would look that up. But I don’t 

have an iPad, so I’m just, I’m thinking it would be a good 

question for a written question — STC, how many kilometres? 

It would be an interesting comparison. 

 

Also on this information it talks about amusement parks, a 

Western Development Museum shortline 101 in Moose Jaw — 

now I don’t think that’s more than 1 kilometre — the Claybank 

Historical Society, what they operate. I haven’t been. I have not 

been there, so I don’t know what kind of rail line they have. But 

also one at Hudson Bay Park. You know, I think this is 

interesting when you see the responsibility of government and 

the impact it has in different ways. I think this is important. 

 

Also industrial railways, and apparently there are 20 industrial 

railways throughout the province. And where they would be, 

I’m not sure. I would think the old Weyerhaeuser plant, IPSCO 

definitely would have, you know. But 20, that’s pretty 

significant. How many kilometres would be involved in that? 

 

Now I think that clearly this is a straightforward piece of 



March 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2817 

legislation, but we do have some questions about that and what 

the implications are. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I know time is going — 

there’s a couple points I did want to make on this. I was . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — David, that’s Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker. I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. But there 

is a couple points in here. I was surprised about this: the 

cleanup of abandoned right-of-ways. And there is no specific 

federal or provincial legislation requiring cleanup, a reclamation 

of a railway right-of-way after the operations have been 

discontinued. However the municipal governments do have 

some authority to deal with the problems as they arise. 

 

And so they talk about a couple of bills that they have, talking 

about refuse and waste control in relation to nuisances and 

untidy and unsightly premises, The Noxious Weeds Act. And 

they can also do some work under The Planning and 

Development Act. But I’m surprised that they’re not regulated 

under some environmental legislation that they would have to 

do more. I’m surprised about that. And so that’s an interesting 

thing, so we may want to explore that a little further. 

 

The other one that I thought was interesting was working with 

the Trans Canada Trail Foundation. And as many of the folks 

here would know, the Trans Canada Trail Foundation is a 

non-profit organization with the goal of developing a multi-use 

trail system across the country. Now in 1999 the foundation 

received a donation from CPR [Canadian Pacific Railway] and 

CNR [Canadian National Railways] consisting of almost 900 

kilometres of abandoned right-of-ways. Now it’d be interesting 

to know how much of this is being used to date, and it was 

being converted into trails for hiking, snowmobiling, or cycling. 

 

So what has been . . . But it says a large portion of the 

right-of-way has been left undeveloped. And so what has been 

. . . What is the state of that? And again they talk about what 

can the Trans Canada Trail or TCT be forced . . . Can they be 

forced to clean up the donated right-of-way received from the 

federal railways? And of course it’s the same three Acts that 

they talk about: The Noxious Weeds Act; The Municipalities Act 

under section 8(1)(b). And one part of it refers to waste and 

refuse and the other, nuisance — unsightly, untidy property. 

 

But again it would be interesting in terms of . . . And we’ll have 

questions about the legislation, whether or not the process could 

include the Trans Canada Trail folks and what’s the plan to . . . 

I mean, because clearly, clearly when they have 900 kilometres 

of trail or old lines and we have 2,000 they have about one-third 

of the trails, of the abandoned lines. So they’re a significant 

player I would think. They would have by far more than any 

one of the 13 shortline, but of course they’re not operating in 

the same way. But I would think that they would have some 

questions about this. 

 

And I think they’re a very worthwhile group. I think it’s a 

wonderful idea how we have developed a . . . You know, we 

want to have a more healthy lifestyle, and whether that’s hiking, 

cycling, or snowmobiling, it’s a good reuse of this land. But I’d 

be curious from the minister whether or not they have actually 

talked to the Trans Canada Trail folks and what’s the 

implication of this for them. Do they have any questions about 

this or any comments, you know? I mean right away when I 

look at the first section of the bill, dismantling of the rail line, 

section 22.1(1) it says: 

 

In this section, ‘interested person’ means a person who, 

pursuant to subsection (4), makes known his or her 

interest in buying, leasing, or acquiring a railway line or 

part of a railway line. 

 

I think the Trans Canada Trail would be part of that. 

 

But I think this is important, and I think that we would have 

questions on this. I know many of my colleagues will want to 

speak at some point on this. And as I said, railways are a huge 

part of who we are in Saskatchewan. And I think that whenever 

we can debate issues like this, it’s very important. And 

particularly in terms of the heritage aspect, particularly in terms 

of the industrial part of this, I think that there is much that we 

can be doing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that I would like to adjourn 

Bill No. 61, An Act to amend The Railway Act. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 61, The Railway Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the attendance by all members at the embargoed 

budget lock-up, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2787 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2787 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2787 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2787 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2787 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2787 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2787 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2787 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2788 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Northerner Celebrates 90th Birthday 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2788 

 Z99 Radiothon 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2788 

 Craik Wins Award for Greenest Town 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2788 

 Nursing Leader Receives Award 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2789 

 Grade 7 Student Mayor For a Day 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2789 

 Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities’ Annual Convention 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2789 

 Regina Trades & Skills Centre Opens New Facility 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2789 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Home Care Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2790 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2790 

 Children and Youth in Care 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2791 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2791 

 IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2792 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2792 

 Lawsuit Regarding Technology Contract  

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2793 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2793 

 Northern Roads and Investment in the North 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2793 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2794 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2795 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2795 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2796 

 Bill No. 67 — The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2796 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2798 

 Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2798 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2799 

 Bill No. 84 — The Common Business Identifiers Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2799 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2801 

 



 

 Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2802 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2804 

 Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2805 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2807 

 Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2810 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2815 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


