




















































Hansard: November 04, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 7A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3795 

 November 4, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly, some very special guests that have joined us and are 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery today, Mr. Speaker. We want to 

welcome from South Africa, His Excellency Membathisi 

Mdladlana, the High Commissioner of South Africa to Canada. 

Joining him is Dierdré Viljoen, the Minister Plenipotentiary, 

South African High Commission; as well as Avumile Dlakavu, 

first secretary, political, South Africa, South African High 

Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the delegation will be visiting here in Regina and 

then in Saskatoon, including with officers from the universities, 

Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Saskatoon, SaskPower, various 

representatives from the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a strong relationship with South Africa, a 

trade relationship that represents about on average 35, $38 

million worth of exports to South Africa, and lately a growing 

number of imports to about $3 million. There’s also, more 

importantly, a partnership between South Africa and the 

province of Saskatchewan, represented vitally by student 

exchanges for example. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we want to welcome the delegation. This 

is His Excellency’s first visit to the province of Saskatchewan, 

and we want to welcome him and the delegation here. We want 

to wish them well in their meetings, and we hope for continued 

good relations between the province of Saskatchewan and the 

people of South Africa. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming His Excellency and the entire 

delegation representing the Republic of South Africa. It’s 

wonderful to have you here in the Assembly with us today. And 

though there are some things we don’t have in common with 

South Africa here in Saskatchewan when we think of the 

climate and we think of some of the flora and fauna, as Mr. 

Speaker would know, what we do have in common is the fact 

that we have great people. 

 

And our motto here “from many peoples, strength” really is a 

similar notion to the idea of a rainbow nation and the strength 

through the diversity that South Africa has. So as you are here 

in the province on your first visit, Your Excellency, I wish you 

all the best and appreciate the work that you’re doing and 

congratulate you for what you’ve already accomplished. 

 

And in echoing the comments of the Premier, when it comes to 

increased economic and social ties, we’re very supportive of 

that. So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming His 

Excellency here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, joining us today in the 

legislature as well is a very special group of students from 

southwest Saskatchewan representing grades 1 through 12. 

There’s 33 of them. They represent the home schooling group 

from the southwest corner of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied by their parents, including 

from the constituency of Swift Current: Stacie Noble-Wiebe, 

Jennifer Dyck, Brenda Epp, Nicole Francis; from the 

constituency of Cypress Hills, Anne Benett, Julia Torgrimson, 

Art and Leslie McElroy; and from the constituency of Wood 

River, Doreen Smith, and Francis and Lynette Dyck.  

 

Mr. Speaker, we thank these students and the parents for 

coming. We also thank the parents for their dedication to the 

education of their kids here in Saskatchewan, especially 

considering, Mr. Speaker, the apparent and obvious advantages 

of living and learning in southwest Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In reference to 

the introduction just made by the Premier, I would like to 

welcome the students and the parents from the Cypress Hills 

constituency, but most specifically I’d like to identify Art and 

Leslie McElroy as friends of mine. I’ve known them for a 

number of years. They moved to the deep part of the Cypress 

Hills constituency from Alberta, bought a farm which they 

converted to a ranch, and have raised quite a large family down 

there very successfully. 

 

But Art was one of my first supporters when I decided to seek 

elected office, and I want to acknowledge his support over the 

years. He’s been a good friend, and I know he prays for me 

every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier and the Provincial Secretary in welcoming the 

group of students and parents from the Southwest. And while I 

extend a welcome to everyone in the group, I want to say a 

special hello to my nephew, Levin Wiebe, who is also my 

godson. And Levin is a fantastic kid. He’s bright, he’s caring, 

and he’s a lot of fun. He’s a tremendous nephew and great 

friend to his cousins, our girls. So I really want to welcome 

Levin to his very first trip to the legislature and look forward to 

many returns that he’ll have. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, I also want to say hello to Brenda 

Epp. I know she does a tremendous amount in the Swift Current 

community with her family. And I also know that their family, 

along with the boys, help produce some great honey, and we’ve 

appreciated that on our toast for many breakfasts as well. 

 

So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Levin and the 

entire group here to the Assembly here today. 



3796 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River.  

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

Premier and the member for Cypress Hills and welcome the 

group from the Southwest. And specifically I’d like to welcome 

the people from the constituency of Wood River, Doreen Smith 

and Francis and Lynette Dyck. I really want to thank you for all 

the work you do in home-schooling, and I really appreciate 

people from Wood River coming to the Assembly here. So have 

a great day and I’ll meet with you later. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it gives me great pleasure to introduce Chandra 

McIvor who is here today with Avenue Community Centre in 

Saskatoon. If Chandra can just give us a wave. Chandra is 

joined by Jason McKinnon — he could give us a wave — who 

is a substitute teacher with Saskatoon Public Schools, as well as 

a group of outstanding young leaders. Each of these students is 

a leader within the gay-straight alliance at each of their 

respective schools, working to ensure their school is a safe 

place for everyone. 

 

Today we have with us Alicia Roth, Anais Dutka-Stainbrook, 

Grietje Veltkamp, Charlene Moore, Bailey Lindsay, and Kaylee 

Smith, and Chance Briere. 

 

Avenue Community Centre provides a supportive place for all 

people in the community of Saskatoon regardless of race, 

ethnicity, nationality, family and marital status, ability, gender 

identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, age or income, 

and social status. They also work to support schools and 

school-based professionals in creating safe environments for all 

students, and have recently met with me and provided valuable 

information they have collected on the ability of gender and 

sexually diverse students to access education safely to help 

inform my upcoming report on anti-bullying. 

 

And we very much enjoyed meeting with Chandra, Jason, and 

this group of young leaders today. We know we still have much 

work to do to ensure we are leading the way when it comes to 

making sure Saskatchewan schools are safe, caring, and 

inclusive spaces for all students. And I thank them for their 

valuable input. I would ask all of you to join me in welcoming 

these guests to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with 

the member opposite and welcome Ms. Chandra McIvor here 

today from the Avenue Community Centre, along with leaders 

within our province, the student leaders that were identified, as 

well as Mr. Jason McKinnon. It was a pleasure to chat with 

each of you briefly here today, and I really appreciated sitting 

down with Ms. Chandra McIvor and working through her brief 

that she’s put forward to government. 

 

What I know about Avenue Community Centre and Chandra 

McIvor, and many other allies as well, is that these are leaders 

within our province in a significant way. I appreciate the 

recommendations you’ve brought forward to the minister. We’ll 

be tracking the inclusion of those recommendations into the 

action plan. And what I want to say about the student leaders is 

lots of times when students come here, we say these are the 

leaders of tomorrow. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say 

in the case of these student leaders, these are the leaders of 

today. 

 

So it’s my pleasure to welcome Chandra McIvor, to thank her 

for her work, along with all over at the Avenue Community 

Centre, Mr. Jason McKinnon and these leaders here today. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, I’d like to join colleagues on both sides of the 

Assembly in extending a warm welcome to Chandra McIvor, to 

Jason McKinnon, and everyone associated with the work at the 

Avenue Community Centre. We know how important that work 

is, especially as we all continue to build increasingly inclusive 

communities. And so a special thanks for your leadership on 

any number of initiatives, most especially for those that 

participated in the consultations that were led by the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview. Many came out in Saskatoon and 

gave voice to some important issues. So I would ask all 

members to join me in welcoming these really fine leaders to 

their Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House . . . or, 

excuse me, the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well it’s nice to be considered for a 

promotion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Good to present a petition today in support of replacing the gym 

at Sacred Heart Community School. This petition is brought 

forward by individuals who point out that the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School in North Central Regina is now quite 

literally falling apart, has been closed indefinitely, and is no 

longer safe for students or staff. There is a temporary 

replacement gym, the old sanctuary of Sacred Heart being 

retooled for a gym, but it is a temporary solution at best, Mr. 

Speaker, and what the citizens are calling for is a permanent 

solution. 

 

These individuals point out that Sacred Heart is the largest 

school in North Central, with 450 students, 75 per cent of whom 

are First Nations and Métis. They point out that the enrolment 

has increased by 100 students over the past four years and that 

attendance and learning outcomes are steadily improving and 

that as a matter of basic fairness and common sense, Sacred 

Heart Community School needs a gym. In the prayer that reads 

as follows:  

 

The individuals respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to 

immediately commit to the replacement of the gymnasium 

of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3797 

This petition is signed by citizens from Assiniboia, Wymark, 

and Humboldt. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Diwali Celebration  

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend marked 

the start of Diwali. For Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, and Jains, the 

festival of lights is a celebration of good overcoming evil and of 

light shining through darkness. Diwali is also a time to gather 

together with family and friends to celebrate, to dance, to eat 

delicious food, to light up the sky with fireworks, and to just 

focus on what matters most. 

 

I’ve had the pleasure of attending previous Diwali celebrations 

in Saskatoon, and I know that they are always characterized by 

a strong sense of community, faith, service to one another. And 

of course they are also characterized by a lot of joy and a lot of 

fun. 

 

Saskatchewan has been blessed with a tremendous wave of 

immigration, especially since 2005 with the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program was put in place. That means we 

have a significant community of relative newcomers from India 

and throughout Southeast Asia. These families have joined 

many others who have been established here in Saskatchewan 

for quite some time. To all Saskatchewan families celebrating 

the festival of lights, those who have been here for generations, 

and those who have just recently begun to call this great 

province home, I wish a very blessed and joyous celebration. 

Happy Diwali, Saal Mubarak. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Moustaches Appear for Movember  

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that the 

month of November is upon us, millions of moustaches around 

the world begin appearing for Movember to raise awareness and 

funds to combat prostate cancer, testicular cancer, and mental 

health challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Movember is an opportunity for men to support 

the cause and grow a moustache for 30 days. During these 30 

days the flawless, or perhaps not so flawless, moustaches will 

undoubtedly spark important conversations regarding men’s 

health while the moustache growers fundraise for the important 

causes. Last year more than 1.1 million people around the world 

participated in Movember and raised $146.6 million for the 

cause. 

 

This year I will be participating, along with the ministers of 

Justice, Advanced Education, Rural and Remote Health, as well 

as the members for Moose Jaw Wakamow and Moose Jaw 

North. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is growing and soon so will 

our facial hair for a caucus Movember team. We’re calling it 

Saskatchewan plan for growth, Movember edition. 

 

So I ask everyone’s support for this important movement that 

raises funds and awareness for causes which affect so many 

men in this province and around the world. With everyone’s 

help, we have the power to change the face of men’s health. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Olive and Grape Harvest Festival  

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all 

members of the Assembly to join me in recognizing the success 

of this weekend’s Olive and Grape Harvest Festival in Regina. 

It was a great night to celebrate Hellenic culture in Regina. 

Hundreds of people came together to celebrate the harvest 

festival and enjoy Greek cuisine, music, and dance. The event 

was held at Queensbury Centre on Saturday night, and 

Stephanie and I were pleased to attend. 

 

It was great to see the involvement of the community and 

business leaders in supporting such a wonderful evening. I’d 

like to give special thanks to Spiro Kangles, the committee 

Chair, and Co-Chair Nick Kodellas for their roles in this 

successful night. I’d also like to recognize the contribution of 

St. Paul’s Greek Orthodox Community, the Daughters of 

Penelope Hellenic dancers, and Rustie Dean and Nick Kodellas 

for their fine work as emcees. 

 

The night began with appetizers followed by a buffet of Greek 

food including roasted lamb and moussaka. The food was 

exceptional. But the highlight of the night was the ever-popular 

grape stomping where guests were invited to stomp the grapes. I 

had the opportunity to roll up my pant legs, kick off my shoes, 

and stomp grapes along with guests, our mayor, and the federal 

member for Wascana. 

 

I’d like to ask members of the Assembly to thank all those 

involved and especially leaders within our Hellenic community 

for organizing this incredibly successful event that celebrates 

culture in Saskatchewan. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Habitat for Humanity Events  

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House 

today to talk about two Habitat for Humanity events that 

occurred last Friday, November 1st in my constituency of 

Prince Albert Northcote. One was a key dedication ceremony 

and the other was a sod-turning ceremony. These two 

ceremonies enabled two families to experience home ownership 

for the first time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that this government is supporting these 

families by contributing $100,000 to create homes where they 

can put down roots and plan for our future. I’m also pleased to 

inform this Assembly that one home was completed with the 

assistance of the Carlton Comprehensive High School students 

and the other will be completed by CORCAN or Correctional 

Service Canada.  

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, each Habitat partner family does their 



3798 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

share by contributing a minimum of 500 hours to build their 

home or other Habitat homes. All this hard work is especially 

worthwhile when we can say to each family, welcome home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a key part of our government’s growth plan is to 

build a better province for all Saskatchewan people. Partnership 

with organizations such as Habitat for Humanity are critical as 

we strive to meet Saskatchewan’s housing challenges and to 

help Saskatchewan families share in the rewards of our growing 

economy. We will continue to do our best to facilitate this so 

more Saskatchewan families can come home. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Better Together Food Drive  

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last Thursday was 

Halloween and a very special evening in Moose Jaw as 

hundreds of volunteers took part in the Better Together Food 

Drive. The Better Together Food Drive was initiated eight years 

ago by the Hillcrest Apostolic Church in aid of the Moose Jaw 

Food Bank. 

 

Every year, the drive gets bigger and bigger and more 

volunteers and more donations. This year, the drop-off and the 

sorting had to be moved to the Exhibition Convention Centre to 

provide more space. I, along with the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, were proud to be part of the 460 women, men, 

students, and even young children who volunteered to be part of 

this community event. Dozens of drivers with trucks and vans 

and hundreds of door-to-door volunteers canvassed the entire 

city gathering pre-delivered paper bags that had been filled with 

non-perishable foodstuffs. 

 

While the city canvass was taking place, other volunteers at the 

Convention Centre were sorting the food into boxes, stacking it 

on pallets to be delivered to the Moose Jaw Food Bank. About 

58,500 pounds of food was collected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the food drive presents an overwhelming feeling 

of goodwill and pride in our community. Thank you to the 

organizers, the hundreds of volunteers, and all the residents of 

Moose Jaw for giving so generously. Their efforts, Mr. Speaker, 

are greatly appreciated. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Martial Arts Student Wins Gold and Bronze  

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to talk about a young constituent in the town of Davidson, 

14-year-old James Morrison. James is a martial arts student 

who represented Team Canada at the 2013 World Martial Arts 

Games in Austria this past September. 

 

Not only did he represent Canada, he represented Canada very 

well. He won a gold medal in the kata event. He was also 

awarded a bronze medal in the continuous sparring event as 

well. James was among 500 competitors of the top martial arts 

artists from 17 countries that competed in various events such 

as kick-boxing, karate, kung fu, kata, and numerous others. 

Mr. Speaker, James is a very determined young fellow. Despite 

enduring a nosebleed at the beginning of the continuous 

sparring event, he continued on and eventually won a bronze 

medal in that event. James is currently a student of the Sagayo 

School of Martial Arts. He works hard and held a fundraising 

drive this past summer to raise the $2,800 that was needed for 

the trip to Austria. James currently has his sights set on the 

2014 World Martial Arts Games which will be held in 

Richmond, BC [British Columbia]. He plans to represent 

Canada again at this competition. 

 

I ask the members to join me in congratulating James Morrison 

of Davidson on his impressive accomplishments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Position on Public-Private Partnerships  

 

Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, on October 31st, the Education 

critic wrote to the Leader-Post opposing our government’s plan 

to build nine new schools. He claimed, “The government is 

dismissing the concerns from the construction industry.” 

 

In response, Mark Cooper, the president of the Construction 

Association, wrote, “The government is listening.” Mr. 

Speaker, he said about the member from Rosemont’s 

comments: “I can say with certainty that this has not been the 

case to date.” 

 

Getting his facts wrong is nothing new for the member from 

Rosemont. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we still don’t know what his 

party position actually is. We know he opposes P3s [public–

private partnership] and bundling on ideological grounds, but 

the Education critic hasn’t come clean on what his party thinks 

of P3s all together. 

 

As early as March of this year, around budget time, we heard 

him saying things about P3s, like “They are nothing more than 

a tricky privatization financing scheme.” So it was a relief when 

on October 22nd, the day we announced nine new schools, his 

leader said, “My approach to P3s in general is not opposed 

based on ideology.” He claims they are not opposed on 

ideology, Mr. Speaker. Yet 50 minutes after the announcement, 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] rejected these new schools. 

So what is it, Mr. Speaker? Does the NDP support P3s or not? 

Because right now, Mr. Speaker, it looks like they may have a 

new leader, but it’s the same old NDP. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Relationship with Teachers 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week we learned 

that 73 per cent of our province’s teachers voted to reject the 

tentative agreement. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, teachers are very 

frustrated with this government’s approach to education. My 

question for the Premier, to the Premier: what does he regret 

about his government’s approach, government’s track record 

with teachers here in Saskatchewan? 

 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3799 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we certainly respect the 

collective bargaining process which will begin . . . which will 

resume between the government-trustee side and the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Mr. Speaker. The 

proposed deal was come to by consensus of both sides, both the 

Teachers’ Federation and the government-trustee side. It 

represented just over 6 per cent I think over four years, 6.5 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker, would have ensured that a number of 

teachers in our province would be at the high range in terms of 

Western Canadian salaries for teachers. But we respect the 

process, and so now both sides will return to the table. We’ll 

seek to solve this at the table, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I note that one element of the deal was a new partnership with 

teachers. I’ve heard anecdotally a great deal of optimism about 

the future of that particular partnership where we don’t just 

address monetary issues but the other issues that are at play, Mr. 

Speaker. And so now we need to let that process resume, the 

collective bargaining process to resume, Mr. Speaker, and we 

hope that both sides can come to an agreement in short order. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when 73 per cent of teachers vote 

no on the tentative agreement, that’s a strong indictment of this 

government’s approach to the education sector. And clearly, as 

the Premier said, dollars are part of contract negotiations. But 

what really is also part of contract negotiations is a sense of 

respect, a sense of entering into good faith, and teachers 

believing that they’re actually being listened to. And that’s why 

they’re frustrated, Mr. Speaker. And I know at the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] luncheon, that’s what I 

heard clearly around the tables, is that teachers aren’t feeling 

like they have been listened to. 

 

The president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Colin 

Keess, had this to say: “Teachers are looking for change in 

relationships and supports for teaching and learning.” A change 

in relationships, Mr. Speaker, a focus on teaching and a focus 

on better learning in the classroom. My question to the Premier: 

why has this government been so dismissive of the concerns 

that teachers have brought forward? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 

important to correct the record in the wake of the Leader of the 

Opposition’s question. This was not the government’s deal that 

was rejected by 73 per cent of teachers. This was a deal that was 

concluded by both sides, the Teachers’ Federation and the 

government-trustee side of the table, Mr. Speaker. And the 

teachers had a vote, and that’s precisely how collective 

bargaining works. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I met with teachers this spring, as did the former 

minister. The current minister has been doing the same thing 

and, Mr. Speaker, we’ve reacted to the concerns that we’ve 

heard from teachers. Just very recently, Mr. Speaker, in 

reference in the Speech from the Throne, is a historical increase 

in bandwidth in the classroom, which is a concern of teachers, 

Mr. Speaker. 

Also we heard a bit of a concern from teachers across the 

province about their exclusion from the curriculum 

development process that had been in place in this province for 

a number of years, so we’re going to correct that through the 

student-first initiative. We’re going to pause any curriculum 

changes, ensure that both teachers and parents — all the 

stakeholders — are included in developing a new curriculum 

development process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also heard from teachers about the need for 

classroom supports. That’s why, about a year ago in fact, this 

government in an unprecedented way, mid-budget, added 

resources for capital, Mr. Speaker, but also for operating, in 

terms of ESL [English as a second language] and other supports 

the classroom needs, Mr. Speaker. There ought to be no doubt 

about this government’s commitment to education, based on the 

record in terms of increased capital funding and operating 

funding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, teachers have been clear. They’ve 

been clear that they want to be treated with respect. They want 

to be engaged. They want to have sincere consultation. But 

what I’ve heard from teachers, Mr. Speaker, is that that 

approach hasn’t been coming forward, hasn’t been the 

characterization of this government’s approach with the ed 

sector and especially with teachers. 

 

So the Premier highlighted a couple of items in talking about 

what he was just stating in his response. Well my earlier 

question, Mr. Speaker, was: what does the Premier regret about 

this government’s track record as it relates to that relationship 

of trust, as it relates to honestly consulting and engaging with 

teachers here in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, is the Leader of the 

Opposition concerned about the issues teachers raised, or is he 

concerned about politics? He was at the luncheon I spoke at 

recently with the STF where I laid out precisely what this side 

of the House, what the government could have done better in 

terms of the educational . . . the relationship we have with all 

education stakeholders. We’ve been very clear about it. But 

now the Leader of the Opposition, apparently more interested in 

political points than the issues at hand, wants to take the debate 

in this direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue improving the relationship, Mr. 

Speaker, through things like the partnership that are part of the 

agreement, through things like engaging in collective 

bargaining and, more important than that, through investments 

in increased bandwidth for our schools, Mr. Speaker; to offering 

— by the way, together with the STF — deals that would put 

teachers at a comparable rate with any other Western Canadian 

teacher, through things like brand new schools right in his 

riding, Mr. Speaker, schools that he opposes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ll take the pause on curriculum development. We’ll listen to 

the teachers in that regard. We’ll be there, as we have in the 

past, for increased ESL supports, for increased classroom 

supports. The province is growing. This government recognizes 



3800 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

it, and we’ve been investing in education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Educational Initiatives 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for the Premier to say that we 

oppose schools is simply laughable. What we oppose, Mr. 

Speaker, is an approach by this government that hides the 

details. What we oppose, Mr. Speaker, is an approach by this 

government that can ultimately cost the taxpayer more. That is 

where our opposition sits. 

 

Teachers, Mr. Speaker, they do want more respect from the 

province and they want a better teaching environment, Mr. 

Speaker, and they want a better learning for their students. And 

they’re frustrated. They’re frustrated by crowded classrooms, 

by crumbling schools, by a lack of educational assistants, Mr. 

Speaker, and the lack of the one-on-one time that their students 

need. And they are concerned and frustrated about the lack of 

respect that this government has demonstrated consistently over 

the past years. They’re concerned about the misplaced 

priorities, Mr. Speaker, of this government. 

 

And while they’re pleased that apparently some of the 

initiatives are being put on pause, some aren’t being put on 

pause and this has created a lot of confusion. In fact this 

government, Mr. Speaker, has created great confusion in the ed 

sector over the past years. My question to the Premier: for the 

benefit of very frustrated teachers and parents, which initiatives 

of its agenda are being put on the back burner or being shelved 

or being cancelled, and which initiatives are full steam ahead? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the process for using P3s and 

bundling to build new schools, one in his riding, couldn’t be 

more transparent. There is first and foremost an evaluation of 

the business case. We use an external firm, perhaps like Ernst & 

Young or Deloitte & Touche. I assume he’s not calling into 

question their reputability. Then there is an external fairness 

officer assigned to every single project that’s there, to ensure 

that there is no preferential treatment. Then we narrow down 

the successful proponents for the new schools, we qualify those, 

and then from that group we go forward with an RFP [request 

for proposal] — all of which is transparent and reported, Mr. 

Speaker, the same model that’s being used for 204 P3s across 

the country. 

 

So this isn’t about transparency, for the Leader of the 

Opposition. It’s not about a process he can’t agree with. I think 

it’s quite simple. It’s politics. Fifty-four times he stood in the 

Assembly and said, build a school in my constituency, build a 

school in Hampton Village. Mr. Speaker, we’ve announced a 

school for Hampton Village and eight others. But, Mr. Speaker, 

the CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] leadership, 

the union leadership that ideologically oppose P3s — the only 

group in the country that do — are calling the tune over there, 

Mr. Speaker. He needs to stand up in his place, acknowledge 

the transparency of the process, and say, thanks for building a 

school in our constituency; that’s what I’ve been asking for in 

this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in Nova Scotia’s experience it 

wasn’t CUPE that cancelled the P3 approach, Mr. Speaker. It 

was a Tory Finance minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s no wonder teachers are frustrated. When a question is asked 

about what initiatives are being put on hold, what initiatives are 

full steam ahead, there is absolutely no answer. So I’ll ask 

specifically to the Premier: on the issue of standardized testing 

. . . This is something that greatly concerns teachers because it’s 

ill-informed and frankly, Mr. Speaker, isn’t putting resources 

into the classroom where they are needed most. My question to 

the Premier: is its approach to standardized testing being 

scrapped? Yes or no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The Leader of the Opposition and the 

Deputy Leader of the Opposition and a few others were kind 

enough to attend the fall session of the STF councillors where I 

spoke, where . . . Well in this particular occasion however I 

answered all of those questions already, Mr. Speaker. The 

former minister has answered the questions. The current 

minister has answered the questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re proceeding with early years evaluation. 

We’re proceeding with Tell Them From Me, Mr. Speaker. And 

in terms of standardized testing, we’re going to pause the 

provincial-wide standardized testing proposal as it was debated 

here in the Assembly. I’ve been very clear about this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re going to do is seek to expand those 

standards-based efforts that are working, including the one at 

Chinook School Division which has seen literacy, grade reading 

levels increase, Mr. Speaker, by some 80 per cent in the cohort 

that was studied. We’re going to continue with proven 

standards-based efforts that have been occurring in the Melfort 

area, Mr. Speaker, in the Regina Separate School Division. 

 

We’re going to take those projects, spread them over the 

province. Because you know what, Mr. Speaker? We know they 

work. They’re good for the students. The teachers like them. 

Our students are achieving at a higher level. And it’s going to 

take us to a point, Mr. Speaker, where our completion rates will 

meet the growth plan targets, and we’ll have a better education 

system, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to do it over the politics that 

are coming from the other side. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question was whether or not 

the standardized testing approach of this government was going 

to be scrapped, yes or no. And in that very long answer, Mr. 

Speaker, I heard a no. It’s no wonder that teachers are 

frustrated, Mr. Speaker. And Dr. Spooner, an education prof at 

the University of Regina, had this to say about the 

government’s recent rhetoric on this: 

 

The ministry’s previously announced standardized testing 

plans were merely on pause long enough for them to 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3801 

rebrand and relaunch the unpopular and misguided, 

top-down directive under a more slick public relations 

strategy.  

 

My question to the Premier: is this really just a public relations 

exercise when it comes to standardized testing, or will his 

government scrap this ill-informed approach and put those 

resources straight into the classroom where our kids, where our 

students, where our teachers need them most? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would caution the Leader of 

the Opposition not to take knowledge of the inside thoughts of 

the Saskatchewan Party from former NDP candidates like Mr. 

Spooner. With great respect, I don’t think he knows exactly 

what the plans of the government are or, Mr. Speaker, whether 

or not he perhaps is supportive of the direction we’re going to 

go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have answered this question in scrums. We’ve 

answered the question, I think, in estimates last year. We’ve 

answered the question subsequently through the minister, the 

new minister’s scrums. I have answered this question at the 

STF. We’ve answered it already in this House. 

 

I’ve said we are pausing the province-wide effort. We’re going 

to take what’s working in the school divisions today. We’re 

going to export it. We’re going to continue with Tell Them 

From Me because it’s working. We’re going to continue with 

early years evaluation. That was the answer when he asked it in 

the spring. It’s the answer today. I say it to him in the House 

again, Mr. Speaker. I can go to his home if he wants me to 

repeat it there, or meet him for coffee. The answer is the same. 

So are the questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships  

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, another area that that 

government’s being stubborn is in its approach to the P3 

schools that it’s pushing forward. Despite the fact of and all the 

evidence of much, much larger cost and certainly construction 

delays, it seems that this government is unwilling to provide 

taxpayers all the facts that they deserve. In fact this 

government’s been really secretive about its P3 approach to 

schools. So I guess I say, if this government is so confident in 

its P3 approach and that it’s the right one, as they say, for 

students and communities, then I don’t understand why it’s 

afraid to expose just a little bit of daylight to its plan. 

 

My question to the Minister of Education: will this government 

support an independent, upfront analysis of its major P3 schools 

project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll repeat 

the answer from the Premier that talked about this very thing. 

The process of P3s since 2004 . . . And I know when they want 

to cite a P3 that hasn’t worked very well, they go back to the 

’90s, Nova Scotia. They’ve done it time after time after time. 

And they would realize, if they’ve studied P3s at all, that since 

2004 they have been very successful. Prior to 2004 there were 

mistakes made. And mistakes were made, Mr. Speaker, but 

governments learned from them, learning such as always having 

a value-for-money calculation done, Mr. Speaker, by an 

independent officer such as Ernst & Young or Deloitte or 

KPMG, Mr. Speaker — very independent. They go on to make 

sure that we have a fairness adviser through the whole process 

so all people that are bidding have all the fair information, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We went through this in estimates. And I’m looking forward 

that we can get the time again where I can spend more than a 

minute to answer the question; I can have a long time to answer 

the question. Because after we did, Mr. Speaker, this is what 

that member’s comments were. He said, “. . . I’m not 

suggesting that the route needs to be . . . an independent 

officer.” Except today he is. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that was after many, many, 

many questions about accountability. And since that, we see a 

plan come forward without any detail. And for the minister to 

pretend somehow that he’s provided people with the upfront 

analysis in their hands, the facts, is simply not the case. Nor is it 

independent when it’s some process that’s appointed by 

Executive Council and kept in the dark. 

 

This side of the Assembly doesn’t support secret deals, Mr. 

Speaker. And so I look back to government. At this point in 

time the public deserves to know the full cost of the full cycle 

of the P3 project as described. This government continues to 

stubbornly move forward with its processes, denying 

Saskatchewan people with the facts that they deserve. So to the 

minister: can’t the minister simply commit today to support an 

independent, upfront analysis that includes the full costs and the 

full cost of credit to be shared with Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I just finished 

explaining to the member opposite. And you know, a number of 

months ago he agreed with the process that there’ll be an 

independent money evaluation done by an independent officer. 

Now if he’s questioning Deloitte’s independence, and if he’s 

questioning Ernst & Young’s independence, Mr. Speaker, I find 

that very questionable myself because they are very reputable 

firms, Mr. Speaker, national firms. 

 

I find it interesting that the NDP would have the nerve to stand 

up in the House and talk about secret deals. Mr. Speaker, of all 

the parties to stand up in the House . . . I don’t know if the 

member opposite was in the House, but I know the fellow 

sitting right behind him was, when Eldon Lautermilch had to 

stand in this House and apologize for a P3 that had the public in 

for 97 per cent and the private partner in for 3. We’re not 

getting into those, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 



3802 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister wants to 

compare his P3 deal to SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company] or some other circumstance in the 

history is, have at her, Mr. Speaker. But this side of the 

Assembly are going to be calling for all the facts to be shared 

with taxpayers. And I’ll remind the minister that it’s the 

Wildrose party in Alberta, along with all the opposition parties, 

that are calling for the P3 plan to be scrapped. And in fact, I 

quote the Wildrose party. It’s “worried that taxpayers will be 

fleeced.” 

 

Saskatchewan taxpayers deserve to know the facts, and they’re 

worried about being fleeced too, Mr. Speaker. They can’t 

understand why this government’s being so stubborn and won’t 

provide them the upfront facts in an independent way. So if it’s 

really such a great deal as the minister suggests, it’s not good 

enough to just simply suggest that. What is he willing to do to 

ensure the transparency that Saskatchewan people deserve? So 

to the minister: he doesn’t have to wait for the legislation to be 

brought forward here today that we’re bringing forward. Will 

he commit to an independent, upfront, value-for-taxpayers 

evaluation of this project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, for the third time, for 

the third time, we’ll be doing an independent evaluation, Mr. 

Speaker. Not the government, not the proponents, but a firm 

like Deloitte, Ernst & Young, any of those firms, Mr. Speaker, 

they will be doing the evaluation as this project moves forward. 

 

He cites an Alberta example, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell you 

that in phase no. 1 in Alberta, with 18 schools that were 

bundled, there is a total savings of $97 million. In the second 

phase, 10 schools were bundled, a savings of $105 million, Mr. 

Speaker. And in phase no. 3, a savings of 43 million. It would 

be only the NDP that would say that’s not good enough, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is good enough. 

 

But I don’t necessarily think it’s even the NDP that are asking 

these questions, Mr. Speaker. I believe that CUPE couldn’t get 

the referendum done here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, on the waste 

water treatment plant, so now they’re asking these people to put 

in legislation, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the questions are 

coming from. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Of course the numbers referenced about 

Alberta are under investigation by the auditor right now as well, 

Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan people should be well aware of 

that. And I think we can recall the comments of the now Deputy 

Premier who was once the minister of Education just back in 

2008, who said, “It’s easy to say a P3 is a great idea in the first 

year when, in fact, over 25 years, it may not be such a great 

idea.” He said that in 2008 when his government chose not to 

pursue P3 schools. And he’s still right. It’s sure easy to suggest 

that P3s are the way to go or a great idea, but you know, it’s the 

responsibility of a government to actually prove that to 

taxpayers. 

 

To the minister: will this government listen to the advice of the 

minister of Finance from 2008? Will it recognize it’s not simply 

good enough to just say P3 schools are a great idea, and will it 

submit to an independent analysis of its plan so that taxpayers 

aren’t fleeced? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to put on the 

record that we will listen to the advice of our Finance minister 

not only in 2008, 2009 to 2013 because every year it’s been a 

balanced budget. That’s the advice we’re going to listen to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the opposition would talk 

about Alberta and the auditor looking into it. The auditor is 

looking into the fact that whether in bundle no. 1 they actually 

saved $97 million, or maybe it was just a little bit less. It’s not 

that it was to cost more; it’s how much money they save, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what the Auditor General is looking into, Mr. 

Speaker. We are going to move forward as long as these 

projects make sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s interesting because just here today before question period, 

there was a petition read about more work that needed to be 

done on one of the schools. I will tell that member opposite, 

that work will get done a lot sooner if he’d support the nine new 

schools we’re building in Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Long-term Care Placement 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve just learned 

that Regina seniors could soon be shipped to care facilities that 

are 150 kilometres away. This means vulnerable seniors will be 

left far away from their spouses, their families, their friends, 

and their support systems. Does this Minister of Health support 

the expansion of this policy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region is looking at expanding the policy to include citizens of 

the city of Regina within the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 

to look to see if there are available beds within the health region 

that would provide more adequate care for them in long-term 

care, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, should the change be made by 

Regina Qu’Appelle, this would put Regina Qu’Appelle and 

citizens of Regina on the same level playing field, Mr. Speaker, 

as every single citizen in this province in the 10 southern health 

regions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the meantime, we know that we are making 

improvements in terms of reducing the wait times for long-term 

care. There are 33 per cent fewer people waiting in long-term 

care, Mr. Speaker, than there was just two years ago, and the 

average wait time today, Mr. Speaker, is 25 days. That’s half of 

what it was 18 months ago, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that Regina Qu’Appelle is close to making a decision on 

this particular matter. 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3803 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — The fact that this policy has been in place in 

other health regions does not mean that it should be expanded 

further. When our economy is doing so well and when 

government revenues are up 50 per cent, Saskatchewan families 

expect health care and senior care to be getting better, not 

getting worse. But it is getting worse, Mr. Speaker. And many 

Regina seniors are now afraid about what this new policy will 

mean for them. 

 

To the minister: what does he have to say to these seniors who 

are now on the verge of being shipped 150 kilometres away 

from their homes and their loved ones? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have 

roughly 8,700 long-term care beds in this province. The reality 

is, is that beds are not always available in the home community 

of the individual when they need that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the last week we’ve had the Leader of the 

Opposition raising an issue about a senior living in an acute 

care bed when a long-term care bed was not available, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the regional health authority, in this case Regina 

Qu’Appelle, has beds available in communities surrounding the 

city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, I think it is appropriate for the 

region to look to see whether or not this would be an option that 

they could present to the family members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this case, the 150-kilometre radius would 

include 10 long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, many that do 

not have wait-lists and many that have beds available, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact these 10 long-term care facilities are 

single-room facilities. Every single room is a single room with 

an individual bathroom, Mr. Speaker. We believe that seniors 

can get adequate care in rural Saskatchewan as well as in 

Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Combatting Bullying 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know the 

importance of anti-bullying initiatives in the lives of students 

across Saskatchewan. The Legislative Secretary who’s 

responsible for this government’s anti-bullying work said this 

last week: 

 

It was very hard for me in the last couple of weeks when 

everybody wants to know what’s the strategy. It’s really 

hard to keep my mouth shut when it comes to that because 

I don’t want to jump the gun and let the cat out of the bag 

. . . 

 

It sure sounds like this government had already written the 

report and action plan, that the plan was ready and in the bag, so 

to speak, Mr. Speaker, but it seemed it was just waiting for 

Thursday’s deadline. So there is absolutely no excuse any 

longer to keep delaying its release. After all, this isn’t 

something that should be stage . . . This isn’t something that 

should be stage-managed. 

 

My question to the minister: will this government release its 

anti-bullying report and action plan today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can advise 

the members opposite the report is in its final stage and is going 

to be released very soon. 

 

I find it interesting to note that the NDP government released an 

anti-bullying strategy when they were in government. They 

announced it in February 2005, and finally introduced it — 

surprise, surprise — Anti-Bullying Week November, 2006, 22 

months later. And what for? So they can introduce it during 

Anti-Bullying Week, and — surprise, surprise as well — done 

without any consultation with students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to have something that works well, 

that’s effective. And we’ve got no help from the members 

opposite because they submitted absolutely nothing. They 

should be embarrassed and ashamed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Improved Cellular Service in the North 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you. Today, Mr. 

Speaker, we are very happy to announce that four remote 

northern communities in Saskatchewan will be receiving 

cellular service as early as 2015. 

 

Thanks to a new agreement between SaskTel, Huawei, and the 

Athabasca Basin Development Corporation, we will see 4G 

wireless services extended to Wollaston Lake, Fond-du-Lac, 

Stony Rapids, and Black Lake. This new agreement combined a 

contribution of 5.8 million from SaskTel, $385,000 from 

Huawei, and $249,000 from the Athabasca Basin Development 

Corporation. This investment will bring cellular phone service 

for the first time to Wollaston Lake, Fond-du-Lac, Stony 

Rapids, and Black Lake. 

 

By fostering this partnership to bring better communications to 

the North, we are working with northern communities to ensure 

that they get the best services that can be provided. It is this 

kind of investment in the future that is needed to maintain the 

unique way of life many northerners cherish. When these new 

facilities are up and running and SaskTel’s 4G network brings 

these communities online, the residents and visitors to the 

region will be much more connected and have a lot more 

opportunity for education, health, government services, and 

business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan government I 

congratulate the partners of this initiative — Athabasca 

development corp., SaskTel, and Huawei — for their 

contribution to bring 4G service to the North for the first time in 

these communities. 



3804 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try to 

get it across the Deputy Premier hollering across the floor, but 

thank you very much to the Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

for providing us with an advance copy of his remarks. And I’d 

like to say, on behalf of the official opposition and particularly 

on behalf of our two northern members to the legislature, but 

particularly the member from Athabasca who’s been well on the 

record in terms of the expansion of this kind of service, we 

think that this is a good announcement. We think it looks good 

on the face of it. We’ll be interested to see how it plays out, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But in particular, we want to extend our congratulations to the 

communities and the Athabasca Basin Development 

Corporation. But the communities of Wollaston Lake, 

Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids, and Black Lake, communities and 

First Nations that have been there, steadfast in terms of 

developing economy, developing the basic infrastructure that 

you need to make that economy grow, and calling for that 

partnership, not just calling for it, Mr. Speaker, but putting up 

their own dollars for investment as well. 

 

Certainly I would be interested to see the role that Huawei plays 

in the development, Mr. Speaker, and of course with SaskTel 

additionally. But on the face of it, Mr. Speaker, we think this is 

a good announcement, and we’re very anxious to see how this 

unfolds in the days ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I move that Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Environment that Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 605 — The Public-Private Partnerships 

Transparency and Accountability Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 605, 

The Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and 

Accountability Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Rosemont that Bill No. 605, The Public-Private Partnerships 

Transparency and Accountability Act be now introduced and 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the Government House 

Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, 

asking leave to make a motion regarding time of the votes. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a motion regarding timing of the vote. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to grant leave? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Time Allocation 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There has 

been discussion between the parties. I believe you’ll find leave 

for the following motion: 

 

That notwithstanding rules 29(5), 29(6), 29(7), on 

Tuesday, November 5th, 2013, at 30 minutes before the 

ordinary time of daily adjournment unless the debate on 

the address in reply is already concluded, the Speaker shall 

interrupt the proceedings and put every question necessary 

to dispose of the main motion. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That notwithstanding rules 29(5), 29(6), and 29(7), on 

Tuesday, November 5th, 2013, at 30 minutes before the 

ordinary time of daily adjournment unless the debate on 

the address in reply has already concluded, the Speaker 

shall interrupt the proceedings and put every question 

necessary to dispose of the main motion. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3805 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Makowsky, seconded by Mr. 

Merriman, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to resume debate on the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you might recall, when I began my 

remarks on Thursday last I talked about the concept of growth, 

in particular two kinds of growth, the first being growth in 

population. And I mentioned the fact that we have seen recently 

growth in our population that we haven’t seen since the early 

years of our province. We’ve seen growth on an unprecedented 

scale, growth that we haven’t seen in generations, growth that 

has propelled our province’s population to 1.1 million 

individuals for the first time in history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also began to talk about growth in the economy. 

And I mentioned that regardless of which measure you want to 

pick — whether it’s GDP [gross domestic product] growth, 

retail sales, or wholesale sales, export sales, capital investment, 

job creation, increases in average weekly wages — regardless 

of the measure you use, our economy here in Saskatchewan is 

either number one or two in the entire country. We are Canada’s 

leading economy, something that we haven’t seen before, Mr. 

Speaker. All across the board the growth in fact has been 

impressive. 

 

I mentioned construction. I was in the construction industry for 

30 years. It’s an industry of particular interest to myself. 

Historic investments in road infrastructure that we mentioned 

now total $3.7 billion since the election of fall 2007. Highways 

and bridges in Regina — where I’m a member, proud to 

represent the good constituents of Regina South — we have 

seen the completion of the Lewvan overpass, the completion of 

the Pinkie Road overpass, and also the construction of new 

roads serving the Global Transportation Hub. 

 

In addition to the highway construction that we’ll all have soon 

done, 13 new and completely upgraded special care facilities in 

rural communities all across Saskatchewan, along with a new 

hospital now under construction in Moose Jaw, the new 

children’s hospital which is set to begin construction early next 

year, and of course planning to replace the century-old 

provincial hospital in North Battleford well under way as we 

speak, Mr. Speaker. Now it’s the same with K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] schools everywhere, where hundreds 

and hundreds of millions of dollars are being invested in dozens 

of new facilities, major additions and renovation projects. 

 

Right here in Regina, just to bring it back to Regina again, the 

old Arcola school, the old Douglas Park School — both of them 

have now been replaced with brand new state-of-the-art 

facilities. Campbell Collegiate’s long-standing structural issues 

have finally been resolved, and Robert Usher school has been 

remodelled to accommodate the high school students formerly 

at Monseigneur de Laval school. More work is being done on 

the planning stage. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Three of the province’s newly announced joint-use schools are 

to be built in Regina to serve growing student populations in 

our city’s expanding northwest, southwest, and southeast 

neighbourhoods. We’re very pleased with that. As the press 

release from October the 22nd underlines, all this new school 

construction is needed because, for the first time in a great 

many years, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s K to 12 enrolment is 

growing. 

 

I’ll take this opportunity to quote a few remarks from the press 

release if I can. It begins by saying: 

 

Today, Premier Brad Wall joined Education Minister Don 

Morgan, students, teachers and school division 

administrators at Dundonald School in Saskatoon to 

announce that the Government of Saskatchewan will build 

nine new joint-use schools. These schools will be located 

in communities experiencing unprecedented growth 

including: Saskatoon, Regina, Warman and Martensville. 

 

The press release goes on to say the following, “Saskatchewan 

is experiencing remarkable growth across the province, and 

some of it is right in the classroom.” As the Premier has noted, 

“We need to meet the challenges of growth and have adequate 

infrastructure in place.” 

 

“Saskatoon public schools [says Saskatoon Public Division 

Board Chair Ray Morrison] has seen unprecedented 

growth in the last few years . . . With new neighbourhoods 

being built, we need to ensure we can provide the right 

facilities to support learning for our students. On behalf of 

our board [he says], I want to extend my sincere thanks to 

the provincial government for responding to the needs of 

our students and families. By providing vibrant learning 

spaces for our students, we are fostering their potential and 

building stronger communities.” 

 

Well spoken. Another quote: 

 

“Our division has been growing on average the size of an 

elementary school each year for the past . . . [few] years,” 

Regina Catholic School Division Board of Education Chair 

Vicki Bonnell said. “While this growth is welcome, it does 

strain our facilities [she notes]. It is wonderful to see the 

provincial government actively addressing these pressures 

and the new schools announced today will go a long way 

in helping our division accommodate the city’s growth.” 

 

Now those are the quotes directly from the Chairs of the school 

divisions affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, K to 12 enrolment isn’t the only thing that’s going 



3806 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

up in the new Saskatchewan. Remember the critical nursing 

shortage mentioned in my remarks on Thursday? Well unlike 

the NDP who were afraid to set targets lest they fail to reach 

them — can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, afraid to set targets 

unless they couldn’t meet them? — we set a target on finding 

800 new nurses in our first four-year term of government. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, we achieved that goal. In fact we 

achieved more than the goal, and today we’re happy to say that 

over 1,000 new nurses are practising medicine here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We also recruited 300 new doctors. Now there’s clearly more 

work to do on this particular issue, especially, as we have noted, 

in rural Saskatchewan. But we’re much better off today than we 

were before, with more progress to achieve in the future. 

 

And there are more special care facility workers and more 

social care workers as well, more daycare spaces and, Mr. 

Speaker, more affordable housing units than before. All these 

very important indicators are up in the new Saskatchewan. 

 

Amidst all this growth, Mr. Speaker, it is true to say that not 

everything is going up. Some things are actually going down. 

Provincial debt has gone down. Provincial debt when we took 

government in 2007 was $6.8 billion. Today it stands at $3.8 

billion. Now that’s down $3 billion, down over 40 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unemployment is down as well. It’s down to about 

5 per cent, one of Canada’s lowest figures coast to coast to 

coast. Unemployment in Regina and Saskatoon in particular is 

way down, the lowest levels of all major cities in Canada — all 

major cities in Canada. 

 

Surgical wait times, as we know, are down. We used to have 

Canada’s longest wait times. Now we’re at fourth. Lots more 

work to do on this file, but it’s a good start. 

 

Crime statistics are down as well. Personal income tax, Mr. 

Speaker, is down. Education property tax is down, and 

small-business tax, well that’s down too. All these things are 

down. Ridiculous money-losing government forays into 

competition with the private sector — like SPUDCO, like 

Navigata, and other ill-advised adventures, Mr. Speaker — 

they’re way, way down. 

 

And you know what else is down, Mr. Speaker? And there 

might be a correlation here. I’ll leave that to members to decide. 

The number of NDP MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] is down. It’s down a lot. In 2003 after the provincial 

election, there were about 30 of them, as I recall. After the 2007 

election, they were down to about 20. As we look across the 

aisle today, Mr. Speaker, I think there are less than 10 — nine 

to be exact, single digits. It seems like every election the NDP 

loses about 10 or so MLAs. Now if that continues on pace, Mr. 

Speaker, well I’ll leave you to draw your own conclusions on 

that. 

 

Why point out all this, Mr. Speaker? Why is it important? Mr. 

Speaker, it’s important because, to the NDP, growth is in fact a 

foreign language. They don’t understand it. They don’t 

welcome it. And they never actually planned for it. In fact as we 

know, they planned for decline in the economy and decline in 

the population. 

Just listen to what NDP MLAs said about the possibility of 

growth here in our great province. I know we’ve heard it before, 

but it’s worth repeating. I know the members opposite will 

respect me and listen to me as I tell them: 

 

The Saskatchewan Party plan to increase our population by 

100,000 in 10 years is more wishful thinking than 

statistically attainable. 

 

So said former NDP MLA Doreen Hamilton. 

 

. . . they propose to increase the population of 

Saskatchewan by 100,000 over . . . I forget what number of 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well it so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, that it 

flies in the face of reality. 

 

So said former NDP MLA Harry Van Mulligen in this 

Assembly. 

 

Now I’m sure the NDP didn’t want to hear those old quotes 

again but, Mr. Speaker, like I said, they need to. It’s important. 

Just look at the opposition members opposite, Mr. Speaker. Do 

they look like a group that understands the importance of 

growth? Do they look like a group that understands the 

importance of meeting the challenges of growth and ensuring 

that all Saskatchewan residents benefit? Mr. Speaker, I for one 

don’t think so. I think my colleagues don’t think so as well. 

That’s why the NDP don’t get the Saskatchewan plan for 

growth, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been calling for a plan, not 

recognizing that it’s been sitting there right in front of them all 

along. 

 

I have a copy right here, Mr. Speaker. It says, right on the 

cover, growth and Saskatchewan, which of course doesn’t make 

sense to the NDP who for 16 years planned for a decline and 

said growth was impossible. That’s what the quotations prove. 

That’s why they closed the Plains hospital. It’s why they closed 

52 rural hospitals. It’s why they closed over 100 schools in the 

province of Saskatchewan and even shut down 1,200 nursing 

home beds — planning for decline, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here’s a little bit of this plan that we’re talking about. The 

Premier’s opening message: 

 

Too often enterprise-oriented governments appear to see 

growth for the sake of growth. This is a mistake — one 

that can cause governments to lose focus and discipline. 

The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth is about that focus and 

discipline. It sets out the Government of Saskatchewan’s 

vision for a province of 1.2 million people by 2020. It is a 

plan for economic growth that builds on the strength of 

Saskatchewan’s people, resources and innovation to 

sustain Saskatchewan’s place among Canada’s economic 

leaders. 

 

Growth [it continues] will be a result of continued 

investments in a competitive economy, infrastructure and a 

skilled workforce. Building on our agricultural and natural 

resource advantage, Saskatchewan will be a global leader 

in export and trade by 2020 and will invest in knowledge 

and innovation in the development of Saskatchewan’s 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3807 

future economy. Capital investments in new projects and 

expansions will grow our economy, and Saskatchewan will 

continue to welcome newcomers from across Canada and 

throughout the world to live and work in our province. 

 

An expanding economy is the foundation for a growing 

and prosperous province. The purpose of growth is to build 

a better quality of life for all Saskatchewan residents. To 

this end, the Saskatchewan Plan for Growth outlines the 

government’s direction to improve health care and 

education outcomes, while building growing and safe 

communities and improving the lives of persons with 

disabilities in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth reaffirms the 

provincial government’s commitment to fiscal 

responsibility through balanced budgets and further 

reduction in government debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that sounds like a plan to me. If we continue, just 

looking at the table of contents. A growing Saskatchewan. The 

opportunities and challenges of growth. The Saskatchewan plan 

for growth: vision 2020 and beyond. Building the infrastructure 

for growth. Growing and developing Saskatchewan’s labour 

force. Increasing Saskatchewan’s competitiveness. Advancing 

Saskatchewan’s natural resource and agricultural advantage. 

Connecting Saskatchewan to the world. Fiscal responsibility to 

support growth. Growth with purpose: building a better quality 

of life for Saskatchewan people. And finally, the Saskatchewan 

heritage initiative: the use of non-renewable resource revenue in 

a debt-free Saskatchewan. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, this sounds a whole lot like a plan to 

me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that I’ve taken a lot of time from members, 

and it’s at this time that I think it’s probably time for me to 

wind up my comments. 

 

I’ll do it in the following way if I can. Traditionally what I like 

to do is to thank members for their time and their patience, and 

I always invite members of the opposition to reconsider their 

stance on the Speech from the Throne. In years past, I’ve 

remained ever the optimist. I’ve said, I know they’re going to 

change their mind one day because secretly they know that 

we’re right, secretly they know that our budget is sound, 

secretly I know that they like the fact that the debt is being 

reduced, that the population is growing . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Absolutely, it is a good point. 

 

In particular I want to appeal, this time, to the Leader of the 

Opposition who has come out, we think, against the idea of 

building a school in his own constituency in Saskatoon. Mr. 

Speaker, could that possibly be true? When you think about the 

comments from the Saskatoon Board of Education Chair who 

says, thanks to the provincial government for recognizing the 

unprecedented growth in the enrolment in our classrooms, the 

unprecedented need as a result to build new schools in our 

community. Thank you for recognizing and acting on this 

imperative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be hard for me to accept that the 

Leader of the Opposition could possibly vote against this kind 

of improvement. I appeal to him and his eight other members 

across there — at least at this point in time — to reconsider; not 

to let ideology stand in the way of sound public policy; not to 

let party politics get in the way of good decision making on 

behalf of the people that we are all elected to serve. Mr. 

Speaker, I appeal directly to the Leader of the Opposition and 

his colleagues in the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan to 

do as I will, to vote against the amendment and instead to vote 

for the Speech from the Throne. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Coming to this Speech 

from the Throne in this year, I’m reminded of the first chance I 

had to speak to the Speech from the Throne quite a number of 

years ago, and at that time I spent some time talking about my 

family. And it’s especially important this year to talk about my 

grandfather, John Farden, who I’m named after, and his father, 

Ole J. Farden who moved up here from Minnesota in 1903. So 

it’s 100 years ago this year that they came. Other parts of my 

family then came over the next four, five, six, seven years to 

live in the central part of Saskatchewan. So that was the 

Fardens and the Nilsons and the Jacobsons.  

 

And what I know, Mr. Speaker, is that they came here with a 

plan and a vision for the future, and they were thinking about 

the long term. They were thinking about me even though it was 

many years before I existed. They were thinking about my 

children and about the other people who are part of our family 

because they came here to set down roots and to build a place 

that was good for all of us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a special thank you to my 

wife, Linda, to my daughters, Ingrid and Solveig, for all of the 

support that they provide to me in this job. They have made a 

number of sacrifices, but they also have benefited from being 

part of this legislative family, this legislative organization. And 

I want to say a special thank you to them. 

 

I also want to acknowledge my parents, Tom and Randi Nilson, 

who live here in Regina and follow the question period and 

things that happen in the legislature every day, as they have 

every year of my political career. I also want to thank Linda’s 

parents, Stan and Betty Lee, for all of the support that they have 

provided to us as a family. 

 

[14:45] 

 

In my constituency office, I want to thank Conni and Cory and 

Judy who have provided assistance to me over the years and 

continue to provide sage advice to me but, more importantly, to 

all of the people who contact them. 

 

And I also want to say thank you to all of the people of Regina 

Lakeview — and I would say the southern part of Regina, as I 

feel very much that I represent that whole area — for all of the 

support they provide but, more importantly, all of the questions 

that they raise about what’s happening in the community and 

how they provide suggestions and ideas about how we can build 

for the future. 

 

And while I’m saying thank you, I also want to make a special 

point of thanking the civil service of Saskatchewan, all of those 



3808 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

people who provide us advice here in the legislature, who 

provide advice in the executive side of government, and also I 

think those who work with the judiciary. All of those people 

have a very good, important task to provide independent, fair 

advice on all of the policy issues that are being dealt with by the 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what is especially frustrating for someone 

who knows that that’s an important part of how our society 

works, what’s really frustrating for me is how often much of 

that advice is ignored or it’s not sought. And I think that’s one 

of the reasons why, as we talk about this particular Throne 

Speech, we talk about disappointment because we’re in a 

situation where we have some very good things that we can do 

but, unfortunately, much of that plan for the future isn’t there. 

 

I was quite surprised to see that the Premier had written a letter 

to The StarPhoenix in response to The StarPhoenix editorial. 

And his whole point of the letter was to say, well I have a plan; 

don’t you recognize that? Well I think we all recognize in this 

Assembly that that plan from a year ago was dismissed as a 

pamphlet or something that really had no substance, and I think 

it continues to be a problem for this government because we do 

not understand what their vision is for the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you are elected to be government, 

there’s an opportunity for you to do some things and to make 

some choices that are of benefit in the short term but also in the 

long term. And I’m reminded of a line from a poem by Seamus 

Heaney who died. He’s an Irish poet. And it’s from his poem 

called Squarings. And it’s just one line, and it’s this line: “Just 

old truth dawning: there is no next-time-round.” Mr. Speaker, 

there is no next time round.  

 

The choices that are made, the disappointing Throne Speech 

that we have, there is no next time around for these people who 

are supposedly providing us with leadership in this province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that that’s the same kind of a 

line I want to talk about here: for the Premier, for the Finance 

minister, for the Highways minister, all of those ministers, is 

there’s no next time round. We are living here in Saskatchewan 

in some of the best times that we have ever seen, and the people 

are fed up and surprised by the choices that the government is 

making. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know right now that the budget that we 

have is based on taking about 25 per cent support out of 

one-time royalties. We know Newfoundland is spending more, 

but Saskatchewan is 25 per cent. We know that that’s not 

sustainable because there’s a cycle in the revenues from 

resources that we all have to be aware of. We have seen the 

issues that have happened in Western Canada around those 

kinds of resources. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is no next time round. When the 

economy is in good shape, when good things are happening, 

that’s the time that you need to make the choices that benefit all 

the families of Saskatchewan. And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m not seeing that in this government. 

 

Now what we instead see or hear are things like the Premier 

saying, on Thursday, that issues are being torqued. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that that’s exactly what we’re getting from that 

government, is that instead of getting clear plans that people 

understand and can feel good about, we’re getting torqued 

messages that end up diverting us from the problems that are 

ahead. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a whole number of things that are 

causing us some difficulties, but I think they all go back to this 

difficulty about understanding how you provide for the 

financial benefit of the province.  

 

Now I heard some of those members over there say that on this 

side of the House, we don’t have a long-term plan for this 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, I know, I know that the Minister of 

Health worked in the civil service helping develop the 

long-term plan for Health for this province, and I know he now 

has a different role, but I would . . . I know he keeps in mind the 

good, hard work he did 10, 12 years ago in developing that 

plan. 

 

I know that there’s other people who, within the government, 

who are building on the things that have been done over the 

decades. And one of the most frustrating things in this 

legislature is to hear the Premier or to hear the Minister of 

Health or to hear the Minister of Highways talk about things 

that are not . . . have not been done over the decades. 

 

Now I know that the Premier was going after our leader this 

morning about a brand new school right in his riding. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier was there when he got a brand new 

hospital in his riding. And I know that the Minister of Health 

was talking about no long-term care developed, but before he 

was a member from Weyburn, there was a brand new health 

facility, Tatagwa View in Weyburn. 

 

And I know I can go right across the whole of that side of the 

House and point out that those kinds of projects which the 

people of this province want, whether they’re hospitals or 

schools or roads or other government structures, are the kinds of 

things that the people of the province want. But they also know 

that they take long-term planning. They take lots of work and 

understanding. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Education kind of avoids 

and passes over to the minister of structure, or whatever they 

call him, the whole job of dealing with building new schools, 

and they do it in a haphazard way, we have many, many 

questions about that. What we do know is that when you are 

going to build something, it takes money. And I think most 

Saskatchewan people know that you can get that money by 

saving up your money to build something, or you can borrow 

money and build something. But you can’t just sort of create a 

P3 and say there’s not going to be any debt involved, or there’s 

not going to be any money involved. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the minister has been torquing 

this issue, to use the Premier’s words, to try to divert the 

attention from the fact that this is going to cost all of us some 

money. Now the big difficulty is that in this time, where we’ve 

got the most money that we’ve ever had in this province, we’re 

not paying for it now. We’re pushing it out down the road. And 

why are we doing that? I’m not quite sure, Mr. Speaker. And 

the people of Saskatchewan aren’t quite sure. 

 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3809 

That’s why we’ve introduced legislation here in this House 

about transparency as it relates to the debts that are going to be 

incurred and pushed down the road. Mr. Speaker, we had a 

previous time where a lot of debts were pushed out into the 

future. And we came to a come-to-Jesus moment, if I can put it 

that way, that caused a lot of trouble, not just for people here in 

this legislature, but for every single person in the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those of us who are a little bit older — and I 

know there’s probably more on that side than on this side — we 

know that when you get to that point where you have to pay for 

things that you’ve committed to, then the dollars had better be 

there or else you’re in some fairly major trouble. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of the province have had a few instances 

like that over the decades, and they’re not in favour of flowing 

that way now. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what we ask of the government is if 

you’re going to make these kinds of debt commitments — 

whatever you want to call them, lease payments, or P3 

payments, or whatever — tell us exactly how much it’s going to 

cost and when we’re going to have to pay it. And I think that’s 

the part, Mr. Speaker, that seems to be covered up or held away 

from us here in this province. Now when you go and you do the 

. . . look at the international studies of public–private 

partnerships — and there are many, many books that have been 

written in the last couple of years — the continual theme is 

always transparency and public accountability and telling the 

public exactly how much it’s going to cost. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many of the issues around those projects 

which have caused a great deal of difficulty relate exactly to 

that question of who is paying what when, what kind of risk is 

being shared, what kinds of things are going to be done in the 

longer term. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that this government and these 

ministers have enough experience to give us any assurance that 

we’re not going to be in trouble on this whole area. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, part of our concern on this side of the House is 

that every time we’ve raised this issue, there’s been this 

diffusion of the question and there’s been a pushing away of 

getting the information. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a simple way to deal with that 

particular issue, and that is to come forward with the 

information and make sure that the public knows all the way 

along. And if you think about the three words in P3, it’s public–

private or private–public partnership. And partnership is a clear 

meaning where obviously the public and a private company 

have to work together and make sure that a plan is developed 

that everybody understands and that works for the people. 

 

Now in this particular instance we as the public have not given 

a blank slate to the Minister of Infrastructure or to the Minister 

of Finance or to the Premier to spend our public money without 

telling us what the long-term commitment is going to be. And 

that is the fundamental issue that I think is behind all of the 

questions that are being raised at this point. 

 

Now we know that we have a system of retrospective review. 

Auditors can go back and look and see what’s happening. The 

difficulty with this is you’re going into a commitment where 

you don’t know the long-term costs. Now in my previous roles 

in this legislature, I was involved with the development of 

legislation around the cost of credit. And part of a, I think, 

uniform law conference or national effort — both on a 

provincial basis and on a federal basis — was to get very clear 

rules on the cost of credit, and then the disclosure of that 

information. 

 

And so if one goes to the statutes that we have over here on the 

side, or if you go onto your laptop at home, you can look up 

The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act. And what does that Act do, 

Mr. Speaker? That Act tells those provincial banking 

institutions that we have, credit unions and other companies, to 

in a similar way that federal banks are told, is that if I’m going 

into the bank to borrow money, or if I’m going to lease a car, or 

if I’m going to lease a school, I’m going to have that 

information laid out to me by the bank. And there are very strict 

rules about what information is supposed to be there, and how 

the information is to be described. And the whole purpose of 

the legislation, after much work, was to make sure that you 

could have a comparable list of the costs in all the different 

ways that you might buy or lease, or what other arrangement 

you wanted to get a particular asset. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the fundamental question that 

this government is avoiding. They don’t want us to see what 

those kinds of commitments are. And they won’t disclose, they 

won’t provide a full cost of the credit disclosure that the public 

needs when we’re looking at some of these particular issues. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s fundamentally wrong. That’s why we 

passed legislation both provincially and federally to deal with 

the banks because we wanted to make sure that people would 

not get into debt situations that they didn’t understand. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the question that we have here because 

we’ve had a bad experience with the party that many of these 

people opposite were part of before around the long-term costs 

of credit that eventually came home to roost. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that we need to ask some serious questions 

about that. 

 

Now when I come into the Throne Speech and listen to a 

number of the speeches that have come from members across 

the way, I’m disappointed by the fact that the notes and the 

information that’s been provided to members has not been 

vetted more carefully by those members. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there are a number of themes that are, I think, beneath the 

respect I have for individual members across there that they 

have been talking about and pushing. And I think maybe the 

last speech was a good example of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of your roles being a member in this 

legislature, is to make sure that what you are talking about you 

can then respect and honour. And, Mr. Speaker, there are a 

whole number of issues and there are a whole number of places 

where members have just read off stuff that’s been handed to 

them. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that we all must, in this place, 

do some serious thinking about how that happens. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the statistics are thrown about, about 

population, I think it’s quite curious. I know I listened to the 



3810 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

member from Cypress Hills last week and he was expounding 

about the difference in numbers in the province between what 

StatsCan has, or the census numbers and the health card 

numbers. And I always remind people, and I know as 

government, we were always watching and looking at the health 

card numbers versus the Statistics Canada numbers because 

they were different. They changed at different times. 

 

Now what we know, and if you look at the Throne Speech 

material or you look at other material that this government has 

spread out across the province, they have basically looked at the 

Statistics Canada numbers. But what we know is that when you 

look at the health card numbers, they’re adjusted every time the 

new health cards are brought in. 

 

But it’s quite interesting, and I encourage people to go to the 

Ministry of Health and look at their covered population 

statistics. And what we have, I think as of June 30, 2012, is 

1,090,000 people. And that I think fits with kind of what we 

know. But we also know that if you go back and you look at 

their figures, that there has been over a million . . . It was up, I 

think in 2006, to 1,040,000 people. Mr. Speaker, all I want to 

say is that when you get some of this information, it’s good for 

the bluster and for the arguments, but let’s look at the 

information in a way that takes into account exactly what is 

happening in the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think if I could make any suggestion to the 

Premier and to the government, is that they’re at six years plus 

or about, well I guess six years almost to the day in 

government, and people are wanting to know where we’re 

going, not where we’ve been. And a big problem we have, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we don’t know where we’re going. 

 

I recall in 2007 when we got . . . My first speech in opposition, I 

talked about a bus going down a hill with a driver with no 

control on the steering wheel. Unfortunately it still feels a fair 

bit like that. And when we don’t actually get a vision for the 

province, well then we get some of our thoughtful people in the 

province like the editorial board at The Star Phoenix saying, 

what’s going on here? Where’s the plan? What’s happening? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we get too hyperpartisan, when we get 

too torqued, to use the Premier’s words, we forget about how 

and why we can build as a legislature. Because one government 

builds on the work of another. And I was really dismayed to 

hear on Thursday when the Premier, and I’ll quote from 

Hansard, said on page 3773 — this is October 31st, 2013 — he 

said, “. . . Mr. Speaker, there are no lessons in health care, 

human resource policy to be learned from members on that side 

of the House.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as soon as you use an absolute term like no 

or complete or all those kinds of things, what you are forgetting 

about is that the person out there listening to you realizes, well 

that can’t be right because how in the world could you be 

building a children’s hospital if there hadn’t been years of 

planning before? How in the world could you have a hospital in 

Humboldt if there hadn’t been planning before? You know, 

how in the world do you have a hospital in Outlook if there 

hadn’t been planning before? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are getting too much of this sort of attack 

to the back as opposed to looking forward and telling us where 

we’re going to go. And, Mr. Speaker, we in this province have a 

strong, bright future ahead, but too many people are being left 

out. And, Mr. Speaker, those people have just as much right as 

the rest of us to be part of building in this economy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I would suggest to the members 

opposite is that they should start thinking about what it is that 

the public expects of them in those best of times that we have 

right now, because there’s no question that there’s a situation 

right now where there is no next time ’round. Mr. Speaker, that 

is a crucial factor in what we are thinking about and what we 

are doing in this legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I unfortunately am extremely disappointed in 

the vision that I was expecting. I’m disappointed in the fact that 

what we got in the Throne Speech doesn’t build on the strong, 

long history of this province respecting all of the contributions 

that are made, and it doesn’t include everybody in the future for 

the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be able to vote in support of this 

Throne Speech. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t know, I’m at a loss as well. I don’t know what 

my colleagues are going to want as payback for that. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to stand in the House . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Interesting and short. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Yes, I will be short. Yes, I will 

grant them that. I will do that. But, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a 

privilege to stand in the legislature today, almost 10 years to the 

day after I was elected to this Legislative Assembly. It is indeed 

a privilege to stand here and to be able to represent the people 

of Saskatoon Silver Springs, the people of Saskatchewan, and it 

is indeed . . . 

 

You know, I read a book about how you divide your life into 

decades, and I can tell you that this past decade has been very 

rewarding. It’s been an opportunity for me to get to know 

colleagues on this side of the House, all colleagues in the 

legislature. Each election some members come and go. But 

indeed it has been a privilege to stand in this legislature and to 

represent people and to be in government right now at such a 

historic time in Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government’s message in the Throne Speech was one of 

optimism and growth. It is an exciting time to be in 

Saskatchewan. The population growth the past six years is 

staggering and I must say surprising to many, although they 

seem to all be on the other side of the House. We’ve heard the 

comments from many members about how it would never 

happen, how it is impossible, how it was farcical that we could 

ever grow in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, this 

government, this Premier, we are able to prove the skeptics 

wrong, and Saskatchewan is not only growing but will continue 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3811 

to grow. Mr. Speaker, under the capable leadership of our 

Premier, the most popular Premier in the country, we have 

experienced unprecedented growth. Our population is at an 

all-time high. Our economy is strong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve always been proud to call Saskatchewan 

home. There were times in my life when the pull to move 

somewhere else was quite strong. Jobs weren’t abundant . . . 

that there was opportunity. Friends were leaving. But I always 

wanted to stay in Saskatchewan, and now I’m so proud that 1.1 

million people are able to call our province home. 

 

It’s been a pleasure to be part of a government during a time 

when Saskatchewan is thriving and growing. We are not 

planning for decline, as members opposite had an opportunity 

to do for 16 long years. Mr. Speaker, today we are the envy of 

the nation. Saskatchewan that was stagnant in population and 

economic growth is no more. And if we have anything to do 

with it, it’ll never be that way again in Saskatchewan. 

 

For the first nine months of 2013, our employment was up 

nearly 20,000 people. This put Saskatchewan on pace for the 

best year of economic growth on record ever, bar none. Our two 

largest cities, Saskatoon and Regina, are expected to lead the 

nation in economic growth, and our population continues to 

grow as the opportunities available for individuals around the 

world are right here in Saskatchewan. Not only are our large 

urban centres growing, but rural Saskatchewan as well. My 

hometown of Blaine Lake, Saskatchewan, continues to do well, 

continues to grow, and continues to prosper. 

 

Agriculture, which is the centre point of the community that I 

come from, continues to be an important part of 

Saskatchewan’s economy. In 2012 our agricultural exports were 

$11.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, accounting for one-third of all 

Saskatchewan exports. With this year’s harvest nearing 

completion, it looks like 2013 will indeed be a record year. To 

help ensure that our agriculture sector remains strong, our 

government has committed $27.7 million to agricultural 

research this year. This indeed is a record investment. Not only 

is it a record investment, Mr. Speaker, but it is a good 

investment. 

 

As a government we seek to invest in areas that will provide 

jobs, provide economic growth, and provide a better quality of 

life. Investing in agriculture does all of that while working to 

feed our world. This important industry is vital to 

Saskatchewan, and our government has continually listened to 

farmers and will continue to listen to farmers. 

 

One of the ways we are doing this, listening to Saskatchewan 

residents, the rural residents especially, is through the 

innovative online agricultural drainage forum. The Water 

Security Agency is undertaking an unprecedented forum where 

we’re asking Saskatchewan residents for their opinions on 

agricultural drainage regulations. It’s a complicated issue. 

Water does not end at property lines. It does not end at 

provincial boundaries. It does not end at international 

boundaries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To begin this review, we have gone to the Saskatchewan public 

and asked for their input. We have asked for farmers, ranchers, 

landowners, mayors, councillors to go onto the online forum 

and to give us their opinions regarding agricultural drainage. 

 

[15:15] 

 

We are listening to people who will help us work and design 

legislation to suit their needs. Rather than initiating legislation 

like we saw for 16 long years by the NDP that often would 

come from this building or come from somewhere in their 

ministries, we are going out and starting and asking the people 

of Saskatchewan what they want to see, and we will build our 

legislation around that. It’ll be a robust online discussion that 

will lead to very sound legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m talking about the Water Security 

Agency, I want to just take an opportunity to thank the many 

women and men that work in the agency for how they handled 

the challenge that we faced in the spring of this year — a 300 

per cent snowpack, an incredible amount of water coming into 

our province, and how it was handled. And, Mr. Speaker, I also 

want to thank members on both sides of the House for bringing 

their constituency concerns to myself and to the Water Security 

Agency. And we have spent now, between 2011 and 2013, 

some $50 million in addressing water concerns in the province. 

And I put to you, Mr. Speaker, that we are making 

Saskatchewan a better place, and we will be better prepared in 

the future as we face those challenges. 

 

While the agriculture sector is growing and exporting more than 

ever, other areas of our economy are growing as well. We are 

now Canada’s largest exporter on a per capita basis. Our 

exports were some $32.6 billion in 2012. That’s a 10.3 per cent 

increase from a year ago, more than triple from a decade ago. 

The member opposite in his speech, he said, we didn’t know 

where we were going. Well we do know where we’re going. 

We have a higher population. We have more exports than ever 

before. We have a growing economy and we have a better 

standard of life for all Saskatchewan residents. That’s what this 

government was put here to do and that’s what we are doing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Contributing to the growth in our province is our manufacturing 

sector which provides employment for some 27,000 people. 

Many of them come from the Saskatoon Silver Springs 

constituency. It results in over $14 billion in annual sales. 

 

There are investments being made in the resource and mining 

sectors. BHP Billiton has decided to invest $2.6 billion over the 

next three years in its Jansen project. Again, Mr. Speaker, this is 

an area that employs many of the residents of Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, along with the potash corporation and Agrium and 

others. 

 

Saskatchewan is producing agricultural produce, manufactured 

goods, and natural resources that are in demand across the 

globe. It is not only what our province produces that is being 

exported but also our innovation and ideas. Our government 

invested $5 million from the Go Green Fund in the Aquistore 

project at SaskPower’s Boundary dam 3 carbon capture and 

storage. This project will demonstrate the feasibility and safety 

of long-term storage of carbon dioxide in deep saline geological 

formations and could result in the reduction of greenhouse 

gases. 

 



3812 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

So instead of being like the members opposite who talk about 

how we should be reducing greenhouse gases . . . And certainly 

they don’t want to talk about their record, their 70 per cent 

increase that we had in greenhouse gas emissions. While the 

population was going down, they had a 70 per cent increase. 

Now with the growing and thriving economy, Mr. Speaker, we 

indeed have greenhouse gas emissions that are going down on a 

per capita basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The project that has attracted investment from around the 

world, this project attracts investment from Japan and Korea 

and shows that Saskatchewan is indeed a leader in carbon 

capture and storage innovation. People that are interested in 

Saskatchewan’s innovative approach to all kinds of things, Mr. 

Speaker. And one that I’ve had an opportunity to talk about on 

an international stage is about water. We have generated a lot of 

international interest in Saskatchewan through our 25-year 

water security plan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I had the incredible 

opportunity two weeks ago to present the 25-year water security 

plan at the WATEC [Water Technology and Environment 

Control] 2013 Exhibition and Conference in Tel Aviv, Israel. It 

was a very interesting trip, Mr. Speaker, a very interesting 

conference, and indeed I learned a lot. The WATEC Conference 

is a leading international conference on the issue of water and 

had people there from around the world. The Governor of Texas 

was there. The Governor of Nevada was there, and indeed the 

leaders from around the world. 

 

The WATEC Conference focused on how new technologies in 

water management can help countries around the world with 

water management issues. This includes panel discussions on 

presentations of irrigation technology, regional water 

co-operation, and ways to approach financing water technology. 

 

Members opposite might be interested to hear they were talking 

about P3s as well. It’s something that countries from around the 

world . . . It seems to flow off the tongue. They’re not 

concerned about P3s. They’re talking about how you make 

them better, how they discipline government, and how they 

continue to be a very responsible way to put things forward for 

Canadian taxpayers, for Saskatchewan taxpayers, and for those 

around the world. So we’ll be interested to hear more about the 

P3 debate because as usual — and the member from Athabasca 

is an example of this — the world is moving in one direction 

and the member from Athabasca and his colleagues are moving 

in the other direction. I would suggest that P3s are the direction 

to go. You know, they’re not the be-all and end-all of 

everything, but they’re a tool. They’re an approach and they’re 

something that responsible governments around the world look 

at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been a keen interest from people around 

the world interested in our government and Saskatchewan’s 

story. It’s been a privilege, on behalf of the Premier and the 

government, to showcase Saskatchewan’s 25-year water 

security plan on the international stage. 

 

Last October the Premier announced The Saskatchewan Plan 

for Growth, and again the member from Regina Lakeview said, 

where are we going? We don’t have a plan. Well I ask him to 

reread the plan. He may have read it a year ago and maybe he 

didn’t read it all that close, but indeed we have a plan and we 

have a plan that’s the envy of other provinces around the 

country, other nations around the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As our province grows, so does our demand for infrastructure 

and resources like water. When I had the opportunity to do the 

presentation in Israel and talk about Saskatchewan, I also had a 

chance to meet with many companies one-on-one that are 

interested in doing business here in Saskatchewan. This 

conference was a great example of people taking notice of 

Saskatchewan. They have researched our province. They realize 

the vast resources that we have and they are interested in doing 

business here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The goal of the Water Security Agency and the Ministry of 

Environment, Mr. Speaker, is to balance the needs of industry 

with a healthy water system and to do it in an environmentally 

sustainable way. That is part of our plan going forward. 

 

I must say there were a few raised eyebrows at the conference 

when we talked about a growing economy and they learned that 

we are leading the country in growth, in GDP growth, and we 

have a very, very low unemployment rate. Those from around 

the world that were still feeling the effects of the recession 

wanted to know more about Saskatchewan and how we dealt 

with things and how things are moving forward. 

 

Our government has created a business climate. And the 

Premier has always said, and we say, we don’t take credit for 

everything that’s happened in the last six years, but certainly we 

are creating the climate that encourages companies and 

industries to grow and expand in Saskatchewan. And we are 

doing it in an environmentally sustainable way. I see the 

Environment critic taking notes and listening very carefully, 

and that’s encouraging. That warms my heart because indeed 

we can do that. Our government’s goal is to protect our 

environment while ensuring that business can operate and that 

we can get the benefit of those businesses operating in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I know members across the way, they seem to suggest 

sometimes that we can be environmentally friendly or business 

friendly, but not both. We don’t see it as black and white, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not mutually exclusive. We can’t have one without 

the other. We want to respect the environment, and we want to 

ensure that industries and businesses will provide jobs and 

economic stability for our province. Again I see the member 

from Athabasca looking and writing some notes and making 

sure because I think he would agree that that’s what we want in 

Saskatchewan. We want to continue to be the fastest growing 

area of our country, but we want to do so in an environmentally 

sustainable way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that we’re leading the way in is the 

Environmental Code. It’s something that we’re going to be 

introducing in the legislature very quickly. The code is being 

developed as a collaborative and a consensus model. It’s based 

on an unprecedented level of stakeholder involvement and 

leadership. We are working with industry, and we are working 

with environmentalists — those that value the environment — 

to come together with a creative, innovative, results-based 

regulation that allow for greater flexibility for industry while 

requiring very high environmental standards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The code will focus on holding companies accountable for 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3813 

achieving desired environmental results. It’s exciting. It’s 

innovative. It’s leadership, Mr. Speaker, and that’s something 

that we feel is our responsibility. 

 

Not only do we have the fastest growing economy in the 

country, but we want to do so in an environmentally sustainable 

way, Mr. Speaker. Not only do we talk about it — though, you 

know, we’re happy to talk about it and talk about environmental 

issues in this legislature — but what rings true is when 

companies talk about it, especially those who have chosen to 

come to Saskatchewan, those that have choices around the 

world of where they could set up and operate. One of those is 

Emterra, the company building the new recycling facility in 

Regina. They spoke very positively about the business climate 

in Saskatchewan last week, and to quote a CJME news story 

from last Tuesday, and here it is: 

 

“Compared to our 37-year history and starting new 

facilities like this in BC, Manitoba and Ontario, and even 

the state of Michigan, this has been the most productive, 

efficient and smooth transition we’ve ever had,” said 

Paulina Leung, VP of corporate strategy and business 

development with Emterra. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — You bet. That’s something that 

deserves a round of applause. Leung credits the province’s 

attitude toward new businesses and the commitment from the 

city, the Global Transportation Hub, and the Ministry of 

Environment. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that says a lot. A company like that, that is 

worldwide in their technology, worldwide in their innovation, 

has decided to come to Saskatchewan to set up, and gives credit 

where credit is due. Here is a business that’s helping ensure our 

province is greener, and that we were able to do this because 

our business climate facilitates growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I am indeed thankful to be from 

Saskatchewan. I am thankful to be able to raise my children 

here, and I’m hopeful that they’ll have an opportunity to stay in 

Saskatchewan as they grow and start their careers. I’m thankful 

for the growing community of Saskatoon Silver Springs, 

thankful that they’ve bestowed their trust in me to represent 

them here in the legislature. As I said earlier, it’s coming up on 

10 years, and it has indeed been a rewarding time to be here. 

 

During that time the constituency I represent has seen 

phenomenal growth, Mr. Speaker. There’s new construction 

everywhere you look, whether it’s new homes, new businesses. 

The progress and optimism of people investing in our 

community is evident. 

 

We all have seen the redistribution that’s taking place. And it’s 

always a difficult thing for a member of a growing constituency 

to have redistribution come because in effect my constituency is 

going to be cut in half. But that’s the short-term view. The 

long-term view is how positive it is because this constituency 

reflects what’s happening in Saskatchewan, that we’re growing. 

We’re welcoming more people, and I know when you go down 

the street in Willowgrove, for example, you’re going to meet 

people that have lived in every part of Canada that have come to 

Saskatchewan from around the world, that represent different 

religions from around the world. And they have one thing in 

common: they’re so happy to be in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I was first elected to the legislature, my 

children were just toddlers. They were small enough to stand on 

the chair and do a few things they probably shouldn’t have been 

doing here in the legislature. Sometimes their dad does things 

like that, that he’s not supposed to be doing in the legislature — 

but not very often, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But now my kids are 15 and 13. My daughter is 13 years old, 

and she’s in grade 8 at Cardinal Leger. My son is 15 years old 

and getting very, very close . . . I know my seatmate is a former 

driver trainer instructor, and that’s where I sometimes hope I 

had more skills in that area, and more patience, as my son gets 

near his 16th birthday and will be getting that driver’s licence, 

I’m sure. Both kids are very busy with many activities and also 

they benefit from great parenting from their mother, from my 

wife, Trish. 

 

At this time I’d like to thank Trish for all that she does to keep 

the home fires burning, keep the kids involved in their 

activities, and have her own career as well. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, life is busy, and I, like many people, am very 

fortunate to have support at home and support at work. I’m 

fortunate to have amazing people that give of their time and 

energy to support me, to support us, to support everyone in the 

legislature. And I have to thank my team of volunteers back at 

the constituency, led by my campaign manager and sort of 24-7 

supporter, Merle Sawatsky. She coordinates a group that 

provides me with just a tremendous amount of support and 

assistance and helps me do my job as the MLA for Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year has not been without challenges. It was a 

tough, tough summer. I lost my mom. She was very, very near 

80 years old. She was an incredible woman that lived life to the 

fullest. Every day, she just loved to be alive and loved to live 

life with passion, and she did that each and every day. She 

loved this place. She loved coming here for budgets and speech 

from the thrones, and later in life to be able to just watch it on 

TV. And from her, I learned a lot of lessons. I will miss her 

praise. I will miss her scolding, sometimes. And she’d always 

ask the question, why are the people on the other side so mad? 

And I said, oh, mom, they’re not really like that. They’re 

friendly people, but they have a job to do. They have a job to 

do. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I actually met your mom. I met his mom, 

nice mom. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Yes, the member from Athabasca, 

I know he met her in a restaurant, and I know she got to know 

each and every member whenever she could. So, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s tough. It’s something that we all go through, and I will miss 

her a lot. I’ll miss her love and I miss her dedication, and that is 

a tough thing to say. 

 

We also had another significant loss in the constituency of 



3814 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

Saskatoon Silver Springs, Quinn Stevenson. A young man 

tragically lost his life in a traffic accident. Quinn was a 

remarkable young man, 17 years old, had recently graduated 

from Centennial high school. He was a role model to many. 

Following Quinn’s untimely passing, we saw an example of 

what Saskatchewan people are made of. Over 1,000 people 

attended his funeral in Centennial Collegiate. The outpouring of 

support and tributes through fundraising for a scholarship in 

Quinn’s name has indeed been incredible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is probably one of the things that I’ve learned 

in this legislature, that this is the finest attribute that 

Saskatchewan people have, coming together to help people in a 

time of need. And again I saw that in the Saskatoon Silver 

Springs constituency through the outpouring of support for a 

young man that left us much, much too early, but again left a 

great effect on all of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t do our jobs without excellent support 

staff: my chief of staff, Cole; and ministerial assistants, Kaitlyn 

and Theo; admins, Shelley and Annie; and constituency 

assistants, Sara and Jacquie. Thank you to all of you for what 

you do. It’s been said many times by members on both sides of 

the House, but we have to rely on good people who are 

dedicated to their work to enable us to do our job. And I thank 

each and every one of you for helping me. 

 

This is an exciting time to live in our province and see it grow. 

This indeed, Mr. Speaker, is the new Saskatchewan. We have a 

new sense of optimism, a new sense of confidence that is seen 

throughout communities, big and small, far and wide, in our 

province. I’m very proud to be part of a government that listens 

and responds to the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The constituents I have talked to since the Throne Speech are 

thrilled with the announcement of another joint-use facility in 

Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency in the Evergreen 

community, Mr. Speaker. I will talk in glowing terms about 

new schools, whether they’re P3s or not. We need them in 

Saskatchewan. And as an MLA, and I think it’s incumbent upon 

all MLAs, especially when it’s located in their own 

constituency, to talk about the need for schools and to talk 

about how we have built more schools than ever before in the 

last number of years. And it’s just a sign of optimism that the 

government has confidence in growing areas of the province. 

And that’s indeed why I’m so thankful that we’re able to see 

another joint-use school because I know it’ll spur on additional 

growth for the area and for the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am privileged to be here as an MLA, privileged 

to serve in Executive Council as the Minister of Environment, 

and to see how Saskatchewan’s growth has benefited many, and 

to ensure that this continues. 

 

I have seen the change in Saskatchewan in the last six years. It’s 

a good change, Mr. Speaker. A former teacher of mine and a 

good friend, Dr. Dean Vause, he says, success isn’t what you 

accomplish in life; it’s what you inspire others to do. And I am 

grateful to my family, friends, colleagues, and constituents, and 

members on both sides of the House for the inspiration that they 

provide me and enable me to do my job. 

 

It’s my goal, Mr. Speaker, it’s our government’s goal, that we 

will continue to keep moving Saskatchewan forward and that, 

Mr. Speaker, is why I will be voting in favour of the Speech 

from the Throne and certainly not supporting the amendment. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would like to start off my remarks this afternoon by thanking a 

few people, in particular my constituency assistant, Whitney, 

who I know I’ve talked about many times before. I think he’s 

on year 20 of being a CA [constituency assistant]. I’m his third 

MLA. He started working for Bill Neudorf in the ’90s and 

worked for my father as well. 

 

Whitney is a wealth of knowledge. It’s really his constituency 

and I kind of work for him. He knows everybody and 

everything and has historical knowledge of what’s gone on 

before, and is really in touch with the communities that I 

represent. And considering how much time we spend in Regina, 

it’s so reassuring to know that I’ve got Whitney in my 

constituency office taking care of things. I don’t have to worry 

about . . . I don’t have to worry about things when I’m gone. So 

I want to start off by thanking Whitney. 

 

I also want to thank my staff in my minister’s office in this 

building, Tennille, Tara, and Stacey. They’re all relatively new 

to their positions and it’s been exciting to get to know them and 

watch them get comfortable in the jobs that they have. And I 

want to thank them for their support. 

 

As my colleague, the member for Silver Springs, had mentioned 

there’s been a few of us who have faced some challenges and 

losses, myself included, over the last several months, and I want 

to thank my colleagues for their continued support. I’ve been 

supported by this family that I have since I was first elected 

seven years ago. So I want to thank . . . I want to thank my 

colleagues for their help and support. We really are a family. 

 

And I joke with the Finance minister that I spend more time 

with him than anybody else I know because we’re on so many 

different committees together. And it’s kind of nice that you 

like the people that you work with considering we do spend so 

much time together. So I want to thank everybody for 

supporting me. And I’ve seen these folks rally around our own 

when we face challenges, which is very comforting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I represent, along with my colleague from Silver 

Springs, one of the fastest growing areas in the entire province. 

And indeed, Mr. Speaker, I have communities that are amongst 

the fastest growing communities in all of Canada. And with that 

growth, comes challenges. And I know that we’ve said this 

many times before, but I think we would all rather face the 

challenges of growth than the challenges of decline. 

 

And I want to want to thank the mayors of my communities and 

the reeves that represent the areas for their approach to regional 

co-operation. It used to be that they, small-town Saskatchewan, 

they were pitted against each other, usually based on their 

hockey teams and that kind of carried over into municipal 

politics. And it’s really good to see the co-operation from the 

mayors and the reeves, partly because they’re so physically 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3815 

close together. In some cases there’s only a mile or two that 

separate these communities. But their approach to things has 

been very encouraging for me. And I’m so very blessed to have 

this group of men and women to work with on a daily basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking of growth, I know one of my colleagues 

has used this quote before, but I’d like to put it on the record yet 

again, quote, here is the acid test of any government: is the 

population growing or is it decreasing in its population? Are we 

getting people to come here because there are jobs and hope and 

opportunity for the future? Or are we faced with massive job 

loss, massive outflows and exodus by the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was from former Premier Roy Romanow. 

And it’s interesting that it was a NDP member who said this. 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the history of the NDP 

in this province, according to their own former premier’s words, 

they were an abject failure. 

 

And the member from Athabasca’s beaking from his chair 

again. And I know he doesn’t like the reality of the situation 

that we now face, Mr. Speaker, because he has to admit that 

their policies didn’t work. They didn’t work. 

 

We have seen the increase in population and absolute attitude 

change of the people of this province over the last several years. 

And according to Roy Romanow, the NDP failed at their job as 

a government because they oversaw a massive exodus of people 

from our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So their attitude towards growth, we saw it again today with the 

member from Lakeview complaining about the population 

numbers that we’ve used. We’ve had unprecedented growth in 

this province. And even today, faced with the reality of our new 

situation, Mr. Speaker, the member from Lakeview still can’t 

accept the fact that Saskatchewan’s a great place to be and that 

we’re actually really doing very well. He wanted to dispute the 

population numbers, Mr. Speaker, and I think it just goes . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I know some of the members would 

like to enter into the debate. I believe some of them already 

have. Others will be given an opportunity, but currently the 

Minister of Central Services has the floor. I recognize the 

Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I 

said the NDP’s negative attitude is so evident even today with 

the member from Lakeview trying to dispute our population 

numbers. And I think it’s a really sad reflection. It’s . . . I don’t 

know, Mr. Speaker. They come to this House and there’s no 

smiles over there and they seem pretty grumpy, and I think 

that’s kind of a sad state of affairs. I know on this side we’re 

pretty pleased with the way our province is growing, and it’s 

too bad that the NDP apparently aren’t. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, speaking of the member from Lakeview — 

and just an absolute unwillingness to understand how well we 

are doing or to accept the fact that we’re doing this well because 

we know that we didn’t see any of this under the NDP — the 

member for Lakeview said, “A document like this . . .” It’s the 

Premier’s growth plan that he released last year. “A document 

like this distracts everybody, and I think his popularity [the 

Premier’s popularity] will stay up there as long as there’s sort of 

a myth of a booming economy.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look at the job numbers. We look at 

manufacturing numbers. We look at export numbers. We look 

at all of the financial and economic indicators in our province. 

We’re not making that up. We don’t do that. It’s other people 

who put those numbers together and present them to the public. 

And the member from Lakeview, his only reaction in the face 

of all of this good stuff that’s happening in our province is to 

say that it’s a myth. And I’m sad for him, Mr. Speaker, that he 

can’t accept the reality of what our province is doing and what 

we’re capable of. 

 

But to the NDP and their economic plan, they talk about smart 

growth a lot, which is I guess an interesting buzzword. I don’t 

know if they did some polling on that to see how that played 

with people. But polling and buzzwords aside, I think what you 

need along with whatever kind of growth plan you have is the 

actual plan. And to this day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s no 

plan. I’ve gone over their website several times, and it’s 

interesting to me not what’s there — because it’s pretty 

vacuous; there’s not much there at all — it’s what’s no longer 

there. 

 

A couple of years ago they put together a policy document on 

the eve of the last election, which was authored by their current 

leader. It’s gone. Any documents referring to the policy 

positions and election platform from the last election — gone. 

Mr. Speaker, even the Regina Manifesto is gone from their 

website. I don’t know how on earth they’re ever going to plan 

to eradicate capitalism now that their little guidebook to doing 

that has been taken off their website as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk about a smart 

growth plan, but they don’t have one. There’s nothing. I know 

when our Premier was elected Leader of the Saskatchewan 

Party when we were in opposition, within months he had a plan 

in place which he gave out to the people of this province, and 

we were judged on that. And I think, Mr. Speaker, the results of 

the last two elections show very well what people thought of the 

plan that we presented to them. 

 

We see the numbers in the House today reflect that even above 

the numbers that we saw in 2007. People expect their 

governments, or those who think they want to be government 

again, to have an actual plan. And to stand in the House or stand 

in scrums and go . . . Any answer to anything or any problem 

that the NDP see as, well we need to have a smart growth plan, 

but they’d have absolutely no plan in place. I think the people 

of this province are absolutely going to see through that. 

 

The only thing that I did find on their website, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to economics or a growth plan was, we need 

more eggs in more baskets. I don’t know if he’s going to try to 

be a chicken farmer or a cook or a chef. I don’t know what his 

plan is with more eggs in more baskets. But, Mr. Speaker, it 

reminds me of another brilliant political candidate whose only 

economic policy was to bake a bigger economic pie. Maybe 

they can get together because the member opposite apparently 

has the eggs for that. But, Mr. Speaker, more eggs in more 

baskets is not a plan, economic or otherwise. 

 



3816 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

[15:45] 

 

And I think again if we look at what the province is doing now, 

how things are going now, and you look at the growth plans that 

we’ve released, something is working, Mr. Speaker. We have 

record population in our province. We have record investment 

in Saskatchewan. We have record weekly wages in our 

province. We have record export numbers, record retail 

numbers, record wholesale trade, record construction levels — 

both residential and commercial — record employment levels, 

and the lowest unemployment level in Canada, Mr. Speaker. I 

think there’s probably some more economic indicators, but I got 

tired of searching for them so I just wrote down a few. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, like I said, the people of this province are 

expecting something a little bit better from the NDP than more 

eggs in more baskets. 

 

And I would point, I would point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

even their former leader, Dwain Lingenfelter — or as the 

members opposite like to say, he whose name cannot be spoken 

— knew that our government was on the right track. And this is 

a quote from the day after the election in 2011. Dwain 

Lingenfelter said, and I quote, “. . . I give full credit to the 

premier for the work he’s done in keeping the economy going.” 

So, Mr. Speaker, even the leader of the NDP, former leader of 

the NDP, knew that something was going right in this province 

and was giving our Premier some of the credit for that, 

although, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the credit for how well 

our province is doing is not the government’s credit, although 

our job is to kind of stay out of the way and let people live their 

lives and put their businesses into effect and make good 

choices. It’s the people of this province who are making these 

record numbers in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to the issue of population. The 

biggest challenge in my constituency is — the Highways 

minister will be shocked to hear this — is not highways, partly 

because they’re all getting fixed, so I want to thank the minister 

for that. We’ve got some awesome roads in my constituency. 

Our challenge is schools. And when the Saskatchewan Party 

came out with a plan to increase the population by 100,000 

people in ten years, it was interesting and pretty shocking the 

reaction from the NDP. And I know the member for Athabasca 

says that we’re rewriting history, but I don’t know how we can 

be rewriting anything when we’re quoting NDP members. You 

know, these are public statements that they made in Hansard. 

We all agree Hansard is pretty accurate. 

 

So Harry Van Mulligen had said in 2003, in response to this 

proposed plan to increase the population, he said, and I quote: 

“. . . I say their plan flies in the face of reality . . .” He goes on 

to say it’s not very realistic. And he goes on to say that this is a 

shaky basis for an economic plan. “Because these plans, Mr. 

Speaker, if you’re not right, you will in effect take hundreds of 

. . . billions of . . . dollars to put it into a plan that is doomed to 

fail because the reality says the plan will fail.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what a bad attitude and proven absolutely wrong 

in his assessment of what our province was capable of doing. 

And it wasn’t just Mr. Van Mulligen. There was policy analysts 

that said the same thing. And I think, Mr. Speaker, the tides 

have really turned in our province, and we have a different 

outlook in our province as to what we are capable of doing. 

But I wanted to go back to schools. Just recently in the 

announcement for nine joint-use schools in our province, two of 

them are in my constituency, one in Warman and one in 

Martensville. There’s unprecedented growth. The enrolment 

numbers in the elementary school in Warman has gone up 90 

per cent in the last few years. There is a brand new middle-year 

school that just opened this September in Warman. And I’m 

very thankful for past and present Education ministers for 

understanding the need for capital infrastructure in my 

constituency when it comes to schools. There is an expansion to 

the high school in Martensville that will be open shortly and 

then, with the addition of these two joint-use schools, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the children and the teachers and parents and 

the community in my cities of Warman and Martensville will be 

well served. 

 

And you know what wouldn’t have happened, Mr. Speaker? 

None of these would have even been planned for under the 

NDP. I have their enrolment projection numbers from 1994-95 

up to 2010-11. And, Mr. Speaker, year over year, decline, 

massive decline they’re predicting in our student population in 

the school. And even . . . I’m not sure what year this was 

released. Oh, June 2001. And for the next 10 years, they had 

predicted absolutely nothing but decline. And even then, in the 

early 2000s, my communities were already starting to grow. 

They’re bedroom communities out of Saskatoon, and they 

would have had absolutely no plans to build schools in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to thank my government, treasury board colleagues, 

cabinet colleagues for understanding the need for capital, 

education capital in my constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, as far 

as I can see . . . First of all, when I talk to parents, nobody cares 

that it’s a P3. They absolutely do not care. What they care about 

is that their children are being educated in a healthy 

environment where there is space for them to learn. They don’t 

really care how it gets there and not a lot of concern about the 

P3 aspect of it. 

 

And I think the one thing that we’ve lost in this discussion — I 

know the NDP certainly have lost this, lost sight of this in this 

discussion — are the students. The member, the Education 

critic on the other side wants to talk about process. Well go 

ahead and talk about process. But I can guarantee you, Mr. 

Speaker, the teachers and the parents and these kids don’t care 

about process. They want to know that there are going to be 

desks in a school, in proper classrooms — not in gymnasiums, 

not on stages — that they can actually have a really good . . . 

They’re getting a good education. And those teachers are 

amazing for what they’ve done in the cramped spaces that they 

have, waiting for these new schools to be built, Mr. Speaker. 

But these students need a healthy place to learn, and the 

Education minister has completely lost sight of this. 

 

As far as I can tell, the only people who are upset by this 

announcement are the nine . . . Education critic. The nine 

members on the other side of the House are the only people 

upset about this, which is shocking for the Leader of the 

Opposition to not agree with a school in his own constituency. I 

was at that announcement, Mr. Speaker, and I spoke to folks 

from Hampton Village who were there, the parents that were 

there. They’re excited about this. So I wish the member 

opposite luck when he goes home and goes door knocking in 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3817 

Hampton Village and explains to those parents and the kids 

why he doesn’t want a school for them because I think he’s 

probably on a slightly different page. 

 

I do want to quote from mayors in Warman and Martensville, 

and I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that I’m the only 

constituency in the province with two cities. We are growing 

every day it seems and these schools really need to be built. So 

the mayor of Warman says, and I quote: 

 

We appreciate and thank our provincial government for 

stepping up and looking for solutions for overcrowding in 

our schools. With this announcement, we are charting new 

ground. We look forward to all the good work that lay 

ahead and the brand new school that will follow. 

 

The mayor for Martensville says, and I quote: 

 

The provincial government’s announcement of two new 

schools in Martensville is simply great. Any time a new 

school is announced is a reason to celebrate. 

 

And then he goes on to continue to thank his MLA and the 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, like I said, I think that the only 

people who aren’t excited about this announcement are the nine 

people sitting across the aisle from us. I have quotes from 

parents as well. 

 

I want to end, Mr. Speaker, on just a little discussion about 

economics. We know that the NDP want to be government 

again. I’ve already stated that they have absolutely no plan 

except having eggs kicking around in a basket, and they need 

something a little bit more than that. And what’s really 

frightening, Mr. Speaker, considering how well our province is 

doing, we know that the members opposite refuse to stand up to 

their federal leader. They take marching orders from Thomas 

Mulcair. 

 

And there is an article that was out lately, and the article begins 

with, and I quote, “Federal NDP leader Thomas Mulcair says if 

his party wins the next federal general election, his government 

will manage Canada’s finances in the same manner as Greg 

Selinger has managed Manitoba’s finances.” Oh my goodness, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what his plan is for our county? I can’t 

even imagine what playbook the NDP are going to be taking 

their cues from on economic policy because they don’t have 

any plans, they have nothing on paper to tell us what it is. But I 

certainly hope they won’t be taking their marching orders from 

Thomas Mulcair saying that Manitoba is the shining example of 

economic management in our country. 

 

The article goes on to say, points out why this is probably not 

the best position for Thomas Mulcair to take. They are in debt. 

They are overspending. They overspent last year. They’re slated 

to overspend again. The only reason they come anywhere close 

to not spending more is because of federal transfers. They have 

some of the highest income taxes in the country. They have 

been hiked regularly over the last several years. And then right 

after the 2000 election, Mr. Speaker, they hiked the PST 

[provincial sales tax] without any warning during the election. 

 

That cue we understand the NDP on the other side will actually 

take because that’s exactly what they did. They ran an entire 

campaign, got into government, hiked the PST and then said 

after the fact, well the election campaign’s no time to talk about 

raising taxes. Well no kidding because people wouldn’t vote for 

you, so they just do it on the sly. Talk about having a little 

secret agenda, Mr. Speaker. The NDP know all about that. And 

as a very wise person said the other day when we were 

discussing this article, taking economic advice from the NDP is 

like taking Stanley Cup victory parade advice from the Leafs. 

My apology to the Finance minister. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the economic policies of the NDP 

in the past. And it’s been referenced many times, many times in 

this House — I think my colleague from Wood River can do it 

off by heart — the long list of mismanagement from the NDP. 

So I won’t go into all of that. But the mindset behind it, Mr. 

Speaker, is another scary thing, along with Thomas Mulcair’s 

economic plan for our country, because Maynard Sonntag said 

in 2001, in the face of all of these massive losses by the NDP 

government said, “I bet — and I’ll put my job on the line . . . 

that we will lose money in the future.” That’s their attitude, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I know that the people in this province work far too hard to 

have an NDP government in place who has absolutely no regard 

for their money. They think it’s their own and they can spend it 

as they wish, Mr. Speaker. But it’s the taxpayers of this 

province who fund the things in this province, and we need to 

treat their money with the respect and dignity that it deserves. 

They work very hard for it. And we ask for a share of that, and 

it’s our job to spend it wisely. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that one of those wise things 

we can do is to continue to build schools for our children. And 

for that I’m very thankful for this government’s approach. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m getting over a cold and I’m starting to lose my 

voice, and I’m sure there are some in this House that are quite 

happy by that. So I will wrap up my remarks by saying that I 

will not be supporting the amendment, and I wholeheartedly 

support our government and our approach to growth in this 

province. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the House 

for this privilege to speak on behalf of my constituency at this 

time. I would also like to thank our Premier for his leadership 

and his eloquence in telling the Saskatchewan story. I would 

also like to thank all the members of our caucus for their 

support and the work to draw together and build this wonderful 

province. I would also like to thank our capable office staff, the 

people in there. They work hard behind the scenes, but thank 

you for your work and your continued work. 

 

I’d also like to thank some of the people at home. First off in 

my office, team Telfer. They’ve been such fantastic support. In 

the last little while I’ve needed them extra, and it has been very 

much appreciated. Once again, a thanks to my board of 

directors from the constituency. Their advice and counsel is 

always needed. 

 

I would like to thank also my wife, my partner, my friend, 

Valerie, for her continued support. And of course our children, 



3818 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

our three kids, two girls and a boy who always support, and 

now the latest member. I’ve got a grandson that’s 21 months 

old. And this grandpa job I would recommend to anyone. It’s 

probably the best job I have. One of the ministers down there 

says he would gladly wait for a while yet, but when the time 

comes, it’s the best job you’ll ever find. And last but not least, I 

would like to thank the people of the Batoche constituency for 

supporting me these past 10 years. 

 

To start my reply to the Speech from the Throne, I would like to 

give some history of how we got here. And that would mean 

looking at the NDP record. 

 

The NDP was relieved of their government duties after a 

16-year downhill run. In fact they’ve held power for about 70 of 

the last 100 years. So let’s look at the foundation, or shall we 

say the record of the NDP, and then our present government. I 

would like to compare the economy, health, agriculture, 

highways, education, and then key to growth is population. 

 

When opportunity knocks, you have to answer that door. Well 

the NDP answered the door and said, go away. The NDP record 

on the economy is a dismal report of decline and 

mismanagement. From SPUDCO, a phony potato company, to 

driving out the potash companies, and crippling, crippling the 

oil industry. A gentleman in Saskatoon has pictures of a caravan 

of vehicles belonging to the oil companies, a full caravan of 

vehicles leaving Saskatoon and heading for Calgary courtesy of 

Tommy Douglas. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And the most famous oil rig in all of Alberta is Leduc No. 1, 

and I think the records show that that rig was brought over from 

Saskatchewan. It could have been us, Mr. Speaker, but they 

said, go away. 

 

The NDP record on health care is as follows: 52 hospitals 

closed. And we keep repeating this because it is a fact. It is true. 

That is what happened; 52 hospitals closed. Twelve hundred 

seniors’ beds closed — phenomenal. The longest surgical 

wait-list in all of Canada by the party that claims to have built 

medicare, and they crippled it to the point of the longest 

surgical wait-list in all of Canada. We had a shortage of 800 

nurses. They promised to build, at the corner of my 

constituency or actually in Humboldt constituency, the 

Humboldt hospital which our area uses. And they promised for 

three elections to build the Humboldt hospital, and of course it 

was just never built. 

 

The NDP record on agriculture, which is very dear to me, the 

NDP plan on agriculture was simply zero, nothing, nada, zilch. 

We all remember the municipal tax revolution as a low point in 

the NDP relationship with agriculture. The hollow echo of the 

status quo is not on. 

 

Then we go to the NDP record on highways. Highways were so 

underfunded that catching up will be the most difficult part. The 

provincial government collects 15 cents a litre tax on fuel to 

build and maintain highways. What did the NDP do? They put 

that money in general revenue and let the highways deteriorate. 

The NDP record on education, the NDP plan for education was 

the same as their other plans. They planned for decline. They 

closed schools. They laid off teachers. 

 

NDP MLA Harry Van Mulligen, March 24th, 2003 said the 

following in the legislature, and I quote: 

 

. . . they propose to increase the population of 

Saskatchewan by 100,000 over . . . I forget what number of 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well it is so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, that 

it flies in the face of reality. 

 

. . . So, Mr. Speaker, I say their plan flies in the face of 

reality, Mr. Speaker. Now it may well be an admirable 

goal, but it’s not very realistic, Mr. Speaker. It’s also I 

might say, if this is the basis for their whole approach to 

government, that this is a shaky basis for an economic 

plan, Mr. Speaker. Because these plans, Mr. Speaker, if 

you’re not right, you will in effect, take hundreds of 

millions, billions of . . . dollars to put it into a plan that is 

doomed to fail because the reality says that plan will fail, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP planned for decline, whether it was the 

economy, health, agriculture, education, highways, and yes of 

course population. Or to quote Eldon Lautermilch when he said, 

“It will leave more for the rest of us.” That was the NDP plan 

and they stuck to it. 

 

Enough said about the record of the negative nine on the other 

side of the House. Let’s look at the record of the Saskatchewan 

Party who has been in power for a short six years. First, our 

record on the economy. The province with the lowest 

unemployment rate, the fastest growing economy in Canada. 

The largest mining company in the world is building the largest 

potash mine in the world right here in Saskatchewan. K+S 

mining is back. That’s one of the companies that the NDP drove 

out. The forest industry is finally standing up again, getting 

back to work. Things are happening. There’s a future in the 

forest industry. And most important, we’ve paid off 40 per cent 

of the provincial debt. That enables us to do a lot of things for 

the economy. 

 

Saskatchewan Party’s record on health. Under the 

Saskatchewan Party’s record, we are building hospitals, even 

that one in Humboldt. It’s now built and open and working. We 

have shortened surgical wait times. We have 300 more doctors. 

We have more than 900 nurses added to the list. 

 

And now we’ve a new endeavour. We are opening collaborative 

emergency centres, CECs, to facilitate rural communities. One 

of them is in my constituency at Wakaw. These are a huge step 

in the right direction to facilitating the people of Saskatchewan 

in the health care program. 

 

We are in the process, in the process of building 13 seniors’ 

care homes. Some are already under construction and one has 

already been built — a far cry from shutting down 1,200 beds. 

 

The Sask Party on agriculture. The Sask Party has been working 

with agriculture since our first election. With 47 per cent of 

Canada’s cropland, Saskatchewan is agriculture, and agriculture 

will always be a key player in the Saskatchewan economy. The 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3819 

latest endeavour for agriculture was revealed in the Throne 

Speech, and that is the setting up of a livestock insurance 

program. This is something that the livestock producers have 

been asking for, and I’m looking forward to watching it unfold. 

 

Farmers have also been very pleased with the increased 

coverage in crop insurance. The response by our government to 

several years of spring flooding disasters has been 

unprecedented. With a 300 per cent snowpack, the government 

aid for flooding was huge. The work of our government has 

been very much appreciated by the people of this province. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party’s response to highways. The 

Saskatchewan Party is committed to the infrastructure and 

hasn’t stopped building highways since we were elected just six 

short years ago. The toughest job has been to decide which 

highway to do first, as there are so many that the NDP has left 

in disrepair. 

 

Just the other week I had the privilege of attending the grand 

opening of the final leg of the twinning of No. 11 Highway, so 

it is now twinned from Regina to Prince Albert. For Prince 

Albert, this is huge. We always are referred to as the Gateway 

to the North. Well this acknowledges us. This is like the early 

settlers had the ribbon of steel to connect British Columbia to 

the rest of Canada. Well this connects Prince Albert with the 

rest of Saskatchewan. And it’s huge and very much appreciated. 

At over $1 million per kilometre, highways are a major cost for 

the provincial coffers, but highways remain a huge factor for 

the Saskatchewan future. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party on education. The biggest challenge to 

education has been to keep up with the growth. In order to 

facilitate this unprecedented growth, we are building nine new 

schools. These schools will be built using the P3 system of 

financing and building. P3 stands for public-private partnership. 

The overall cost will save our government millions of dollars. 

 

The NDP say it won’t work and cite some P3 projects that 

floundered in the early days of the development of P3s in the 

’90s. The P3 system has now been fully developed and has an 

impressive record across Canada. I believe over 200 P3 projects 

are under way or have been completed and are very successful. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party on population. What can you say? 

More than 1.1 million people. Saskatchewan has grown by 

100,000 people in six years. The original goal we were aiming 

for was to hopefully accomplish that in 10 years. And now the 

people of Saskatchewan have responded, immigrants have 

come, and we are there in just six short years. 

 

And that once again was said by the negative nine as 

impossible. I now say to them . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Mr. Speaker, I’m being heckled by the member from 

Athabasca. When he speaks, I quietly listen and let him speak. 

How about you give me the same respect and let me speak? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would like to . . . Order. I would like 

to remind the member to place his comments through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now say to them, 

have a little faith in our people. We have given them the tools, 

and they are limited only by their imagination. Our people have 

always been resourceful, otherwise they wouldn’t be here. 

 

The future of Saskatchewan has never been brighter. We are 

now a have province. People are calling us the new 

Saskatchewan, and there are jobs and a future for our children 

right here at home. There is an interest by the world in all the 

products and resources Saskatchewan has to offer. Opportunity 

has again knocked at Saskatchewan’s door. This time we 

answered and have thrown the doors open wide. Welcome to 

the new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be enthusiastically supporting the Throne 

Speech and not supporting the amendment. I thank you for the 

privilege. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

privilege to enter into the debate again. I think this is about the 

14th Speech from the Throne I’ve heard. I don’t think I’ve 

answered or replied on every Speech from the Throne but most 

of them over the 14 years. And it’s always a privilege to be able 

to stand up and talk a little bit about . . . Because when you 

reply to the Speech from the Throne, it’s a little more 

wide-ranging. You can talk about a few more things other than 

perhaps a piece of legislation or a specific budget bill or what 

have you. So it certainly has the opportunity to speak a little bit 

more broadly about what’s going on as far as a political life. 

 

As many other members talked to what’s going on in your 

personal life, so I’m going to do a couple of those things as well 

as then get into my different responsibilities, whether it’s 

Ministry of Highways, whether it’s SaskBuilds, SaskTel, 

Gaming, STC, [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] and 

just talk a little bit about those responsibilities, what we’ve done 

over the past year, and what we need to do as we move forward. 

And then I’d like to wrap it up by 5 o’clock, I hope. No, then 

I’d like to wrap it up quite a bit earlier than that and just talk a 

little bit about, really, the attitude that we see in the province. 

 

And it’s interesting that we could have members on this side 

over the past year since the last Speech from the Throne, and 

they’re out in their constituencies as I am in Indian 

Head-Milestone and what we hear in our constituencies 

compared to the nine on the opposite side, you’d really, truly 

believe that you’re in a totally different province. I mean from 

what they say to what we say and, you know, I guess probably 

we each can be, can really stress our point, and perhaps not 

everything in the province is quite as glowing as what we’d like 

to think it is. There are some room for some improvements, but 

I can guarantee it’s a far cry from what the opposition talks 

about when they talk about the doom and gloom that they see 

around the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what that sign language is but 

anyway, I need to get on to the content. Here first of all I need 

to thank people that, in my political life, that make it as 

successful as it has been, and starting with constituency 

assistants. My previous one was Vonni Widdis, and Nicole 

Entner-McCullough has been managing the office for the past 

number of years since we’ve become government and how she 

does an excellent job. 



3820 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

I think we all talked about how important our constituency 

assistants are. And I can tell you that Nicole has been crucial in 

keeping the concerns of the people from Indian Head-Milestone 

in forefront in my mind. She kind of keeps me apprised of every 

call that comes in and the calls I need to return. And sometimes 

she has to remind me again to return that phone call, but she 

does an excellent job and I really appreciate her for all that she 

does. 

 

As well as the people in my office, whether it’s Karalee, 

Amanda, Chris, or my chief of staff, Clay, looking after the 

issues that we have within the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure. And as I said, it’s just not the issues that we deal 

with in Highways and Infrastructure, but it’s all the other issues 

that we have, whether it’s issues around SaskTel, whether it’s 

issues around the Gaming Corp., SaskBuilds, all those different 

interests and responsibilities. They all do a great job and I want 

to thank them for that. 

 

I can tell you that there are times through the summer that I’m 

not here a lot. I’m usually available by phone or email, but 

they’re the ones that keep the office going here in Regina and 

do a very good job of that, an excellent job. So that if we have 

successes or I sound like I have the right information, it’s 

because they’ve provided it to me more than anything else. So I 

want to thank them for that. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The other area I want to just touch on is at home, my wife, 

Cindy, and our two boys, Craig and Mark, who have really been 

kind of living a dream life, especially over the last, well last 

probably . . . Actually I think they’ve always had a dream life 

right from the time that they were born. They’ve been very 

fortunate boys. But over the last little while they’ve had some 

great opportunities and I think they’ve taken advantage of them 

for the most part. They’ve been able to travel the world and 

they’ve seen the world through an athlete’s eyes as well as . . . 

maybe not always an athlete. Sometimes they kind of cross over 

and are more tourists and partiers and kids, yes, but have had 

really an amazing opportunity. 

 

And it was just kind of interesting and I was quite frankly a 

little concerned, although I had seen the premiere of their new 

TV show that just aired — on MTV at 7 o’clock if anybody’s 

interested — and I had seen the premiere so I kind of knew 

what was coming but you’re never quite sure how the general 

public is going to see it and accept it. I kind of saw it for, you 

know, what it is. And I was part of seeing it being made, 

whether it was in Aspen, Colorado, at the X Games or at home 

or wherever. And so far so good, I think. For the most part, the 

reviews have been pretty positive. I just know that it’s really 

geared for a younger audience. I would probably . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes. I would probably be . . . 

 

I do know that, talking to some of my colleagues here that have 

been great enough to say that they’ve watched it and enjoyed it, 

to some of the younger friends, more their age in the mid-20s, 

who really enjoyed it, to the two grandmas. Our boys have two 

grandmas that are left. Both their grandfathers have passed 

away. And after seeing the show, it might be a good thing . . . 

No. But the two grandfathers who have passed away, but the 

two grandmas who are still living, and what their comments 

were. And it was a little bit different than the 22- and 

23-year-old comments. It maybe wasn’t quite as glowing. I 

think even though the one grandma said, you know, after she 

was saying that, I’m not so sure I really wanted to hear my 

grandson say that he was hung over on national TV, and then 

she started reminiscing, oh but boy, we sure used to have some 

pretty crazy parties. So I guess it depends on the perspective 

that you’re coming from. 

 

But it has turned out fairly well. My only concern is that it was 

episode one of eight, and I think they kind of build as far as 

different activities, I guess I’ll say. I don’t think I have to worry 

about being seen in any more. The next one is set in Vail, 

Colorado, at the US [United States] Open and then they go to 

Cancun after, so I know what’s in that one. And I may be just 

really briefly in that because we were at that competition. And 

then maybe there’s one held here this summer, this past 

summer, where they show the beautiful Saskatchewan in the 

summertime, and especially the Qu’Appelle Valley. And so 

they kind of, I think they might even contrast the beauty of the 

Qu’Appelle Valley and how, you know, nice the lakes can be, 

and then the other half of the show I believe is Craven, which 

maybe not be the beauty of Saskatchewan. That may be 

Saskatchewan at its . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s a different kind of beauty. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Different beauty, yes, when it’s fully 

in flight, I guess. That’s one other episode. And then I’m not 

sure. I mean the other ones are around the world. But anyway, 

point being is that I just hope people kind of take it for what it 

is. It’s their life and what they’re doing, and kind of a glimpse 

behind. And it’s not all actually reality. I think there is a bit of 

staging going on. But for the most part it is kind of what they do 

when they’re on the road. Enough of that. 

 

Anyway on to the political and my responsibilities when I’m at 

work, and I will honestly tell you that I really have to thank 

again my constituency assistant Nicole and the people within 

my constituency office for keeping me going as straight as they 

possibly can. Because I can tell you that my mind has been 

distracted a little bit, all that’s been going on at home with the 

craze around the Olympics coming up. Mark is going to be 

competing, I think, pretty darn sure, unless he is injured, which 

is just one jump away. The next jump could be that next injury. 

He hurt himself in Australia and bruised his heels really bad. 

And literally it’s been two months before he’s been able to do 

much of anything, so it does happen. But hopefully he’s healthy 

enough. And he’s favoured, which is kind of one nice thing 

because you’re certainly getting lots of recognition. The only 

problem is, it’s a long ways down if you don’t follow through 

with the expectation. So there’s that pressure riding on him. 

 

And on Craig, he’s also competing on the national team and 

he’s kind of on the bubble. I think they take four and he would 

be about rider number six or seven, so I think it’s going to be 

difficult for him to get there on the competitive level. But he 

does have a — I don’t know where he gets it from, from his 

mom — a bit of a gift of the gab and . . . What are you guys 

laughing about? A bit of the gift of the gab and he has been 

hired by CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation]. He’s 

going to be . . . If he’s not riding, he’s going to be the colour 

commentator for CBC through the two weeks of the Olympic 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3821 

games for all the snowboarding events. So that’s going to be 

interesting. 

 

It was weird. I never thought that we had . . . I was guaranteed 

that one son was going to be there. I always thought it was 

Mark, but it’s definitely Craig because who knows with Mark 

whether his body holds out. So anyway I said I wasn’t going to 

talk anymore about that and that was another few minutes. 

 

So anyway, I do need to talk about what we have been doing as 

a government in the various areas that I have responsibility 

with. I found it interesting, one of the members from across the 

way, and I appreciate she had looked into the Speech from the 

Throne and what the Speech from the Throne was supposed to 

entail. And it was supposed to entail what we’ve done in the 

past and then what we are going to see in the future. And she 

was very critical of the Speech from the Throne because she 

didn’t feel it had much of a vision of the future. I really looked 

at it. Obviously like we would probably do on most issues, that 

member and I see it completely opposite. 

 

I saw in the Speech from the Throne, certainly . . . And they 

would like to say it’s some patting on the back. I would say it’s 

just simply talk; what we’ve done as a government over the past 

year, but more importantly what our visions are and what we 

want to do and what we want to complete as we move forward 

into the next year, as the province is doing very well. But that 

still means a lot of work ahead of us in order to keep up with 

the growth. 

 

In Highways and Infrastructure, when we look back on what 

we’ve completed over the past year . . . And this work certainly 

didn’t end or start under my watch as the Ministry of Highways 

and Infrastructure, but this has been work that has finished in 

this past year, but has been worked on for many, many years in 

planning and designing, all that work that needs to go in to 

make sure that this infrastructure is in place to meet the 

demands that we have moving forward. 

 

For example, in some of the most recent projects was opening 

the No. 1 overpass on the west side of Regina, the west Regina 

bypass. Had the opportunity to be part of that ribbon cutting 

with the GTH or the Global Transportation Hub CEO, Bryan 

Richards. That’s a huge advancement, allowing trucks that are 

going in and out of the GTH to get back on to No. 1 or off of 

No. 1 in a safe manner. 

 

These aren’t the typical semis that we used to know, the 

18-wheelers as we used to say. And I think there’s probably the 

odd song about an 18-wheeler. I don’t know how the 

songwriters would do a song about a 28- to 32-wheel truck. It 

just doesn’t have the same ring as the 18-wheeler. So there may 

not be any more country songs written after truckers. But 

anyway, the west Regina bypass is crucial in making sure that 

those trucks that are, you know, quite frankly small trains going 

up and down our roads but small trains that are driven very 

safely, getting in and out of the GTH in a safe manner and 

making sure that for all the rest of the traffic, we’re all safe and 

sound. 

 

October 18th also marked the opening of No. 10 passing lanes, 

and I had the opportunity to be with the mayor of Fort 

Qu’Appelle and the mayor of Balgonie with the opening of the 

passing lanes going out from Balgonie to Fort Qu’Appelle. As I 

said, and I want to make sure this is very clear because that’s 

kind of in the heart of my constituency, this work started a long 

time before I was the Minister of Highways and is great work. I 

travel up and down that road often and I can tell you over the 

last couple of weeks or three weeks that it’s been open, I think 

traffic is flowing more smoothly. I don’t see people taking quite 

the chances that they were in the past if it’s a slower moving 

vehicle. But I really think the proof of how effective these 

passing lanes will be will certainly take place this summer as 

the summer traffic increases with boats and campers and 

sometimes campers and boats being pulled and see how 

effective these passing lanes are. And if they’re effective, 

certainly look to spread them out into other high-volume traffic 

areas, especially when it’s a mix of traffic such as campers and 

that type of traffic that tend to drive maybe a little bit slower 

and how they interface with all the rest of the traffic. So look 

forward to the benefits of those. 

 

On October 25th I was unable to be there, but my colleagues 

from Prince Albert and Batoche and surrounding area were part 

of the completion of the No. 11 Highway between Saskatoon 

and Prince Albert. And how important that was. 

 

That’s all work that has been done in the past, and I know the 

members don’t want us to pat ourselves on the back too much 

about the past, but we can certainly look to the future and some 

of the projects that we’ve talked about as we move forward. 

 

The No. 11 twinning was the final piece of twinning that we 

had necessarily on the books for this year but in the Speech 

from the Throne we lay out a number of other areas that will be 

twinned as well as planning that will take place. You know, 

we’ll certainly start the twinning between Saskatoon and 

Clavet, which is a very high-volume area because of the potash 

mines out east of Saskatoon, as well as No. 7 between 

Saskatoon, Delisle — huge traffic volumes — as well as 

Highway No. 39 between Estevan and Bienfait which again has 

high traffic volumes. 

 

With that, Estevan to Bienfait is only one section of a fairly 

lengthy section from Regina to the American border. We are 

committed to, also in the Speech from the Throne, the planning 

of that because we know that the truck volumes have increased 

maybe higher on that road than any other road. So we need to 

keep that in mind and address it. That’s part of an overall 

highway infrastructure program. But for the members opposite 

to say that there’s nothing looking forward, there absolutely is 

something to look forward — twinning on those sections. Also 

the work that’s being done from Regina to Estevan. 

 

But not only that. You know, on an average year in 

Saskatchewan, we spend — and I’m going to ballpark it here; 

I’m going to average it — around $600 million a year. And 

some of that is for maintenance. Some of that is for capital. But 

when you think about it, it’s not quite $200 million a year. But 

if you condense it down into, for example, the capital of the five 

or six months that we need to get work done in Saskatchewan, 

it’s an awful lot of expenditure on a daily basis here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t think that’s going to slow down any time soon. In fact I 

think if anything else, you know, the work that we’re doing on 



3822 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

highways is only going to continue to accelerate. We know the 

demands are there. The east Regina bypass is definitely a piece 

that we’re continuing to work on, as well as looking at other 

pressure points, as well as looking at some of the TMS [thin 

membrane surface] roads, or thin membrane surfaces, that we 

need to address. So lots of work going forward, but certainly a 

lot of work that we’ve done over the past number of years. 

 

I have the responsibility for SaskTel, which is a company that’s 

very well respected here in Saskatchewan, and it continues to 

invest greatly in the province. Right now we’re in the middle of 

a $670 million upgrade, fibre to the premises, and also for 

Infinet, Mr. Speaker, huge investments into the infrastructure 

because, quite frankly, the infrastructure for SaskTel was put in 

place some times as far back as the ’50 to ’60s. Some of the 

copper wire is outdated. We need to make sure that that 

infrastructure is upgraded because people are wanting that, they 

demand that, and that’s what SaskTel is working towards. 

 

In fact you know, just in the Speech from the Throne, the 

member opposite said there was no looking to the future. Well 

looking to the future is putting $5 million into CommunityNet 

so that schools throughout the province have proper broadband 

width. They do have proper broadband width, Mr. Speaker. And 

you know, it’s great to have the hardware. It’s great to have the 

computers. But if you don’t have the bandwidth in order to 

utilize those computers to their maximum, it kind of defeats the 

purpose. And that’s why SaskTel, along through the 

government, is investing through CommunityNet to make sure 

that that is complete as we move forward. 

 

I was certainly glad to have the opportunity today to stand in 

the House as the minister . . . as a ministerial statement and talk 

about the four communities that have . . . If you can imagine, 

it’s really hard to believe, but there are still more communities 

that have never had cellular service before. And after the 

announcement today of cellular service that will be going into 

Stony Rapids, Fond-du-Lac, Black Lake, and Wollaston Lake, 

what an improvement I think — although sometimes I wish I 

didn’t have cellphone service — but what an improvement that 

will make for citizens in that area to be able to communicate, 

especially because it’s a remote area, and to be able to get help 

if they need help. 

 

So improvements moving forward, not just looking back but 

moving forward. And that’s another area that SaskTel will be 

working on, not to mention the partnership between SaskTel, 

SaskPower, and Cameco to make sure that there is a proper line 

up the northeast side for business and communities to access 

Internet service, continuing to invest in the infrastructure 

throughout the province. 

 

SaskBuilds I have the responsibility for, and we’ve talked a 

little bit about it in the House over the past couple of days. 

SaskBuilds is a new corporation, not quite a year old, a treasury 

board corp. that is looking at the infrastructure in our province. 

First job was to develop a 5- to 10-year capital plan that will 

help guide our investments into the future. The second issue or 

mission of SaskBuilds is to look at alternative financing. How 

can we meet some of the infrastructure needs that we have 

today and meet those needs today and not push them off into 

the next generation or generations down the road that we saw 

previous governments do? 

[16:30] 

 

So that’s what SaskBuilds has been up to, and it’s had a very 

busy year looking at different P3 projects, whether it’s 225-bed 

long-term care spaces in Swift Current to the replacement of the 

provincial hospital in North Battleford to the work that it’s 

doing on the Regina east bypass to, finally, what’s been talked 

about most recently are the nine schools that SaskBuilds is 

looking at bundling to move those projects forward. It’s 

interesting that the questions from the opposition have been 

around the schools, and I can see they’re talking on more the 

bundling. I don’t know if they’re . . . I think they’re totally 

against P3s, although they haven’t really talked about North 

Battleford, Swift Current, or the Regina east bypass. They’ve 

really certainly only seemed to focus on the schools here in 

Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

I was also very fortunate to have the responsibility, and only for 

maybe a year, of ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]. And as of June the 9th — July the 9th, sorry — 

2013, ISC became a publicly traded company, Mr. Speaker, 

with the government still maintaining quite a significant share. 

But the successful restructuring has allowed the government to 

realize about $150 million of proceeds from that public 

offering, still with some control in the company, but also 

allowing the company to expand way past its borders and 

benefit from the expertise that we’ve learned here in 

Saskatchewan, and then be able to move it out across, really 

across Canada and even into around the world. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to get to understand the busing 

company much better over the past year and a half, and some of 

the challenges STC has seen. But this is not just over the past 

year. It’s been over a past number of years. It is a service that 

many residents have come to rely on. I certainly know that. 

STC, in order to manage its losses and its subsidy that it gets 

from government, has been looking at trying to increase 

ridership, trying to make ridership — people that are riding the 

bus — that much more comfortable, whether it’s Wi-Fi 

[wireless fidelity] on the buses, whether it’s changing route 

times, or whether it’s seat sales. They’ve done an awful lot to 

try and increase the ridership. Unfortunately that hasn’t always 

increased the ridership. But, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing 

everything in their power to make sure that’s the case. 

 

In the event that we don’t see ridership increase and we have 

buses travelling routes with only two or three passengers, I 

think it’s only a responsible government — some might even 

say it’s a common sense government or smart government; I 

would think maybe those words would come into play — that 

you’d have to look at those routes and say, should we continue 

those routes or not? And if we discontinue them, Mr. Speaker, 

what does that look to the bottom line of STC? It’s a very 

difficult decision to make, absolutely. We’ve made that 

decision on three routes to discontinue them. I’ve certainly 

heard the lobby of the people in those communities. But I can 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve also heard an awful lot on the 

other side. And people were even questioning we, as a 

government or myself as a minister, what took you so long? 

You know, you should have been doing this certainly a lot 

sooner. 

 

But I want to congratulate the people from STC on the work 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3823 

that they’ve done to make sure that that corporation is running 

as lean as it possibly can be. They do a great job over there, and 

I appreciate the work. 

 

Just one other responsibility that I have — and this is not in any 

sort of particular order so I don’t want anybody to read into it 

— but the Gaming Corp., Sask Gaming, is also under my 

responsibility. In other words, the casinos in Regina and Moose 

Jaw and their entertainment centres. And this is a very 

interesting business right now because you’ve seen it mature, 

really. There’s not a lot of growth. There’s not a lot of 

opportunity to bring more people in the doors, but they’re doing 

everything they possibly can to make sure that it’s always 

entertaining, as they would say and, you know, I admire the 

work that they have done over the past number of years to build 

the business. There was huge growth for a number of years and 

it’s flattened out. And this is pretty traditional across the piece, 

across Canada. But they’re still working hard to make sure that 

people are coming in the doors, and not just coming in the doors 

but they have a good experience when they do come into our 

doors as they move forward. 

 

Just in closing, Mr. Speaker, that’s kind of what’s been going 

on on the day-to-day basis as far as looking back through the 

many responsibilities I have and also looking forward. But I 

think it’s really extremely important, the last piece that I wanted 

to touch on. And as many of our guys and men and women 

travel the province in their constituencies and around the 

province, they really are noticing . . . And I have to admit it’s 

palpable. You can feel it, the change in attitude in our province 

over the last number of years after . . . You know, and some 

would pinpoint it six exactly to the date which was 2007 . . . 

The exact date was, people . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — November 7th. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — November the 7th, 2007. Thank you. 

That didn’t take you too long. Maybe it’s not exactly to that 

date, but what I can tell you is in the last number of years, two 

or three years, I have noticed a huge difference in the attitude of 

this province. 

 

You know, it doesn’t matter whether it’s the people in 

agriculture are positive, very positive. They are investing. You 

go into any of the dealerships — and I am lucky enough to 

represent the community of Avonlea — Nelson Motors. Or if I 

go into South Country just outside of Regina, those businesses 

. . . And I don’t mean to just pick on John Deere. I also should 

say Young’s and Markusson New Holland in White City and 

Young’s Equipment just outside of Regina. All the dealerships 

are noticing a huge investment into agriculture the likes of 

which they’ve never seen before. 

 

And I don’t know if I’ve heard a positive word from the other 

side. You know, it’s just negative, negative, negative. But when 

you go out into rural Saskatchewan, it’s extremely, extremely 

positive. Do they have other needs? Yes, they want to do some 

work on some of their infrastructure, some of their roadways, 

Mr. Speaker. But you would never get it from the other side that 

there is a positive vibe going on, Mr. Speaker. And it doesn’t 

need to be in rural Saskatchewan. It’s in urban Saskatchewan 

too. 

 

And I just . . . I really do have to kind of wonder. I remember 

being in opposition, and I had the privilege of being in 

opposition for eight years. The people of Saskatchewan thought 

we needed some years to age I guess in opposition. And it was 

difficult to go out and just kind of look at the fault or the 

negative part of what was going on in the province because 

people want to for the most part be pretty positive. But we were 

having to . . . I remember back from ’99 to 2003, things weren’t 

great in the province. People had stuff to complain about. And 

you’d feel like you’re piling on if you’re always looking at the 

negative and what’s going wrong, and you want to look at the 

positive. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that’s the job of an opposition. And I 

remember it being difficult at that time, but I can’t imagine 

what it would be like for the negative nine going out right now 

when there is so much positive, and you’re trying to look for the 

negative. When we were in opposition, you went out to look for 

negative, and it wasn’t too hard to find, you know, whether it 

was a tax revolt meeting or whatever it might be, when it was 

schools having to close. I think there was 13 schools closed in 

my constituency in the eight years that I was representing them. 

There was businesses closing. There was a lot of negative. You 

didn’t have to look too hard. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when I go out in my constituency now, there 

are challenges absolutely, but it is a completely different world 

than what those members come back into the House and spout. 

It is not anywhere comparable, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

so because of that, because the Speech from the Throne is such 

a positive, forward-looking document, exactly opposite to the 

nine speeches or eight speeches that we’ve heard from that side, 

nowhere close to reflecting what we’re hearing when we’re out 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Only six have spoke so far? 

Seven? It’s nowhere close to the reality that we see when we’re 

out on a day-to-day basis talking to residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are challenges moving forward 

absolutely. And we’re going take a look at those, what needs to 

be done and try and address them. But I can tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, the province is in as good of a spot today than it has 

been in its 100-and some-years of existence. Mr. Speaker, more 

work to do and that’s why I’ll be supporting the Speech from 

the Throne. Not only does it look at what’s been positive in the 

past, but it’s got a strong direction and plan for the future. I will 

be supporting the Speech from the Throne and not voting for 

the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great honour 

to rise and speak to the Throne Speech motion moved by the 

member from Regina Dewdney. And I’ll be supporting this 

motion. 

 

I’d like to begin by thanking some people. I’d like to thank my 

partner, Lisa, my family and my friends for their ongoing 

support. Thank you. I’d like to thank my former constituency 

assistant, Kalee Kent for the effort she put in opening the office 

and making it a welcoming environment for the constituents of 

Coronation Park. She set the tone for assuring that our office 

was not the wrong door for people to knock on. So thank you, 



3824 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

Kalee, and all the best in your new endeavours in Calgary. 

 

I was worried that she’d be difficult to replace because we’re a 

very busy office, and luckily I was able to find a new assistant. 

Kristy Shaw is my new CA, and she arrived in the middle of 

some very complex casework issues and has managed very 

well. She stepped up and ensured that we, as an office, have not 

skipped a beat, and the transition has been almost seamless. So 

thank you, Kristy. I and the people of Coronation Park are lucky 

to have you on our team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, up until now, I’ve usually been fortunate enough 

to be one of the first MLAs to rise in support of our 

government’s throne speeches. On the plus side, being among 

the later group this year has given me the opportunity to listen 

to many of my colleagues pointing out how strong the Throne 

Speech is. I want to congratulate everyone who’s risen before 

me on doing such a great job highlighting all that our 

government is doing to support Saskatchewan’s growing 

economy, population, and communities. 

 

On the downside, it means that my colleagues have already 

spoken about many of the highlights of this year’s Throne 

Speech. So I think the best approach for me to take is to speak 

about the Throne Speech from the perspective of my role as the 

Legislative Secretary for disability issues. 

 

One of the great things about this government, Mr. Speaker, is 

that we have not, we are not, and we will not pursue growth just 

for growth’s sake. After all, growth without purpose will be a 

hollow goal. As the Premier has said all along, growth is about 

enabling us to improve quality of life and support our most 

vulnerable citizens. That, Mr. Speaker, is a noble goal — 

growth with purpose. And grow we have, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

reached record population numbers in the past year, over 1.1 

million people and still going strong. That’s a remarkable 

milestone. 

 

And you know what other remarkable milestone we’ve reached 

this year, Mr. Speaker? One that’s just as important, one that 

says just how seriously we take our goal of growing 

Saskatchewan for the right reasons? This past year, we reached 

the milestone of over 11,000 Saskatchewan citizens enrolled in 

the Saskatchewan Assured Income for Disability program, or 

SAID. 

 

Why am I linking these two numbers, Mr. Speaker? Because at 

their heart, they are linked. It’s our growing population base 

and revenues that have allowed our government to expand and 

increase the SAID program, and that in turn has helped us to 

help people change their lives. 

 

People like Gayle Dixon, Mr. Speaker. I was fortunate enough 

to meet Gayle last spring when we celebrated SAID reaching its 

10,000th client enrolled. Gayle and her service dog Daisy 

attended that event, and I have to admit that they stole the show. 

Gayle was one of the first folks to go on SAID when the 

program was expanded in 2012, and her story shows the impact 

that SAID can have on quality of life, on dignity, and on pride. 

 

When Gayle got her first SAID cheque last year, she said she 

wanted to go out and do something she’d never been able to do 

on social assistance. You know what that was? It was a trip to 

Wal-Mart to buy a furnace filter and some stain for her back 

steps, and a trip to the Dollar Store for a brush to do the staining 

with. That was the difference between SAID and social 

assistance, the kind of thing that most of us here would just take 

for granted. Gayle says that SAID gives her self-respect. To 

quote Gayle herself, “SAID gives respect. I can take care of 

myself.” 

 

That SAID celebration was one of my first official events as 

Legislative Secretary. It’s one I’ll remember for a long time 

because the people who came out to share their stories about 

how pivotal SAID has been in their quality of life, and because 

it demonstrated how important our growth plan goal of 

becoming the best place in Canada to live for people with 

disabilities really is. 

 

A key part of that goal, Mr. Speaker, is set out in this year’s 

Throne Speech: our commitment to develop a comprehensive 

disability strategy. As Legislative Secretary for disability issues 

I have the honour of being part of that work. It’s a big job, no 

two ways about it, but I’m pleased to say that we’re bringing 

some of the best, most committed people in Saskatchewan 

together to tackle it. 

 

Just last week we announced the members of the new citizen 

consultation team who will lead the consultations that will 

support our disabilities strategy. The committee is made up of 

15 people who are committed to making Saskatchewan the best 

place in Canada for people with disabilities. The committee will 

be co-chaired by Amy Alsop, a Regina woman with a vision 

disability. Amy is a Paralympic gold medallist, a disability 

advocate, and we’re lucky to have her co-chairing our team. 

The other Co-Chair is Daryl Stubel, director of the office of 

disability issues in the Ministry of Social Services. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Other committee members are Merv Bender, the executive 

director of the Prince Albert and district service centre; Larry 

Carlson, a retired civil servant who’s worked in the field of 

disabilities his entire life and who himself has an acquired brain 

injury; Roger Carver, a Saskatoon man recently retired as 

executive director of Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of Hearing 

Services and who is himself deaf; Dawn Desautels, a 

Shaunavon mom of an adult son with a disability who is 

currently serving as a board member of the Cypress Hills 

Ability Centres; Carole Eaton, a registered psychologist who 

works with people with psychiatric disabilities, people with 

concurrent disorders of mental illness and substance abuse, and 

people with acquired brain injuries. Lynette Griffin, a Regina 

woman who’s lived her entire life with a physical disability 

who is a manager of paratransit accessibility for the city of 

Regina and who is also a Paralympian; Charmaine Landrie, 

Lloydminster cognitive disability strategy consultant; Andrea 

Lavallee, Meadow Lake mom of a son with spinal muscular 

atrophy type II, co-founder, past-president and current board 

member of People Advocating For Children With 

Exceptionalities.  

 

Michael Lavisis a Regina man and founding executive director 

of Creative Options Regina, a non-profit organization that 

develops personalized support services for adults with 

intellectual and developmental disabilities; Marie 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3825 

Lindenschmitt, a mother of a child with autism and an 

occupational therapist who supports integrating her clients into 

their home, work, school, leisure and community; Laurie 

McSymytz, a Wynyard resident who has been a rehabilitation 

and peer councillor for the Canadian Paraplegic Association 

who is involved with the development of the South 

Saskatchewan Independent Living Centre here in Regina; 

Eugene Paquin, retired senior school administrator with 

experience supporting students with special needs and who was 

a caregiver to a daughter with Type 1 diabetes, a spouse with 

multiple sclerosis, and a second daughter who is deaf; Shaun 

Soonias, a First Nations man living in Saskatoon who is a 

director of social development for the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations who manages the FSIN 

[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] disabilities office; 

and Ian Wilkinson, a Saskatoon father of a child with autism 

who is also the executive director of the Saskatchewan Abilities 

Council. 

 

I had the honour and the privilege of meeting with these folks 

last Wednesday, and let me tell you, they’re an impressive 

group of people who are going to get the job done. We’re lucky 

to have them working on behalf of our province and our 

province’s most vulnerable citizens. And I look forward to 

working with them over the coming year on the consultations 

and the disability strategy in general. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s commitment to supporting 

vulnerable citizens does not begin nor end with the disability 

community. Before I joined this Assembly, if you asked most 

people to describe me, they would immediately have said Street 

Culture Kidz, and they would have been mostly right. Working 

with and supporting street culture is one of my life’s greatest 

joys. Seeing the difference a small group of people can make in 

helping young men and women leave street life, build healthy 

and productive lives for themselves, become contributing 

members of the community, and become taxpayers contributing 

to our province’s growth, that’s not an easy journey for any 

person. The odds are incredible. The obstacles are almost 

insurmountable. Yet time and time again I’ve seen young men 

and women do it with little more than determination to build 

better lives for themselves and their families and with the 

support of Street Culture. 

 

So you can imagine my delight, Mr. Speaker, when one of the 

first events I was able to attend as the MLA was opening 

Downtown Browne’s shelter, the province’s first voluntary 

youth shelter owned and operated by Street Culture. Sometimes 

the first step in turning your life around is just having a safe 

place to go. The shelter gives kids exactly that — a warm, 

welcoming, safe place. It was this government that funded the 

shelter and it funds it to this day. It was this government that 

understood the critical need of the community and that stepped 

up to meet it. It was this government following through on our 

commitment to use the benefits of growth to support our 

province’s most vulnerable so that in the end we can all share in 

the good things that growth brings. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the men and women across the 

aisle don’t seem to get it, that with growth comes opportunity. 

No, they prefer instead to paint a picture of doom, despair, 

gloom, and negativity because to listen to them nothing is ever 

good enough. They mock our goals. They disagree with how 

we’re achieving them. And when we do achieve them, they say 

they would’ve done better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Teddy Roosevelt has often been quoted: 

 

It’s not the critic who counts, not the man who points out 

how the strong man stumbles, or the doer of deeds 

could’ve done better. The credit belongs to the man who’s 

actually in the arena; whose face is marred by dust and 

sweat and blood; who strives valiantly . . . who at the best 

knows in the end the triumph of high achievement, and 

who, at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring 

greatly; so that his place shall never be with those cold and 

timid souls who know neither victory nor defeat. 

 

Maybe, just maybe, Mr. Speaker, it’s time to channel one of my 

favourite segments from Saturday Night Live, and in particular 

Weekend Update with Seth Meyers and Amy Poehler, a 

segment SNL [Saturday Night Live] likes to call “Really!?!” 

 

Our government has reduced surgical wait times. We’ve 

increased the number of nurses caring for patients, and most 

recently, we’ve created a $10 million Urgent Issues Action 

Fund to begin to address some of the issues facing long-term 

facilities. The NDP says, not good enough. Really? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Really? 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Really. So let’s look at what they consider 

good enough when they were government. The NDP closed 51 

rural hospitals. They closed the Plains hospital. They closed 

over 1,200 long-term care beds. Let’s not forget that under your 

so-called leadership, Saskatchewan had the longest surgical 

wait time of any province in Canada. And now the nine of you, 

including a former Health minister who oversaw so many of 

these closures and fiascos, and you criticize our plan to fix it, to 

fix the mess that you left behind. Really? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Really? 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Really. Real leaders spent months 

petitioning for a new school in Hampton Village, but when we 

announced the plan to build not only that school, but nine new 

joint-use schools to serve public and separate school divisions 

there and in other communities, he changes his mind for 

nothing but ideological stubbornness. Really? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Really? 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Really. I find that tough to swallow. Our 

government has funded 43 major capital projects and over 900 

additional smaller projects across the province. What did your 

government do again? Oh right, you closed schools. And now 

we’re preparing to build nine joint-use facilities, the equivalent 

of 18 new schools. You oppose that? Really? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Really? 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Really. Really. You say government needs to 

do more to combat bullying. You criticize our government’s 

anti-bullying consultations. You criticize the work of my 

colleague from Saskatoon Fairview on those consultations and 

you criticize our plan to report back to the people of this 



3826 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

province on what we heard during those consultations. Yet you 

couldn’t be bothered to contribute to those consultations by 

sending in a submission of your own, despite having months to 

do so. Really? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Really? 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Really. But a year ago you somehow found 

the time and the energy to pull together a submission on Bill 85 

back when those consultations were open. In fact I seem to 

remember seeing footage of the Labour critic, the member from 

Saskatoon Centre, on TV holding a news conference to release 

his report, and then walking a copy of the report up to the 

Minister of Labour’s office himself. So he can pull something 

together for labour issues, but not for anti-bullying? Really? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Really? 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Really. What about disability issues? You 

criticize us for not doing enough, in spite of expanding benefits, 

implementing the SAID program, setting a goal to make 

Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for people with 

disabilities. So what exactly did you do? Oh right. You let the 

wait-list for services for people with intellectual disabilities 

grow to 440 people. You left shelter allowances untouched 

between 1992 and 2005 despite about 40 per cent inflation over 

that period. You ignored the need for assured income for people 

with disabilities for 16 years, and for 13 of those 16 years you 

didn’t even increase shelter allowances for people with 

disabilities. Really? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Really? 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Really. I can’t imagine the audacity of 

having left such a dark, dreary, pitiful legacy to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and then sitting here and criticizing the 

government that has built a legacy of growth, of opportunity, of 

prosperity. I thought hope was better than fear. What would 

Jack say? Really, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be supporting this Throne 

Speech. And really, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the 

amendment. Really. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the 

members opposite are eagerly awaiting my speech. I know that 

they’re all waiting with bated breath, so I’d like to start. I 

always have much to say. I am a Chartier. I don’t think there’s a 

single person in my very large family who doesn’t always have 

much to say, but I think before I get on to the Throne Speech, 

it’s always very important for me to thank and recognize people 

who, in my life, ensure that I’m able to do this job. 

 

I have a really amazing family, Mr. Speaker. My kids, 

Hennessey and Ophelia. Hennessey is 15 and Ophelia is 5, and 

they have made huge sacrifices — we have as a family — so I 

can serve the constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale and the 

people there. My kids are wonderful and incredibly patient and 

understanding, not always on Sunday night when I get in the car 

to drive here, but they know, and we’ve had lots of 

conversations about why I do this job. And short-term sacrifices 

in our family hopefully, for long-term gain for their generation 

and future generations, Mr. Speaker. So my kids, Hennessey 

and Ophelia, are the reason I’m here. And we sometimes pay 

the price for that. But they’re pretty special kids, and I’m very 

thankful that I’m their mother. 

 

I have to say thank you to my mom and dad. My mom and dad, 

who are 81 and 80 years old respectively, they’re the reason, I 

think, I’m here as well, Mr. Speaker. I come from a family of 

activists, both political activists but also community activists. 

My parents still, at the age of 80-plus, are going strong in trying 

to work hard to ensure their community is a better place. And 

they really instilled that in all seven of their children and their 

14 grandchildren. 

 

My sister Michelle, who, I have said this before, but she always 

says, do not thank me. Do not do things like that. But my sister 

Michelle is like another mom to my children. She really is there 

when I can’t be. And there are times when I think she’s the 

preferred option. But I really appreciate that. She makes coming 

to Regina much easier for me. I know that when my kids, 

whether they need a ride to meet at We Day on Wednesday at 

quarter to eight in the morning, that my sister will be the one 

pinch-hitting and doing that for me. I know that when someone 

needs to be at a school Halloween party, it’s my sister Michelle 

who will take time off work to do things like that. So I’m very 

grateful for my sister Michelle. 

 

Blair, Ophelia’s dad, is awesome too, and has been very 

supportive of me in this role. And he also is really great when it 

comes to taking care of the kids. 

 

Of course all of us have incredible staff. I know that to be true, 

and my staff are wonderful as well. I have Judy who has filled 

in in my office in a pinch, but she’s also spent the last year in 

my office when Vanessa was on maternity and parental leave 

with her sweet little baby. And Vanessa just came back actually 

to my office two weeks ago. I missed her tons and I was very 

glad to see her back. But I know, I know that pull that comes 

from leaving your children, whether it’s a 10-minute drive from 

your office or a two-and-a-half-hour drive from your office. So 

I am very grateful and appreciative that Vanessa has returned to 

work after her year-long maternity-parental leave. I’m very 

lucky to have both these women in my office who work very 

hard for the people in my community and working hard to 

ensure that people have what they need. And they’re great, 

incredible advocates. They both have very different skill sets 

but complement each other so incredibly well. One has been a 

long-time constituency assistant and Vanessa was much newer 

to the job, and they are a great team. 

 

I have to say thank you to the staff in the caucus office. They 

work so incredibly hard and do such a great job. With the nine 

of us in opposition, sometimes things are stretched pretty thin, 

but we always can count on the staff for getting the job done 

and providing us the support we need to do the job that we are 

responsible for here in this House. 

 

I want to talk about the legislative staff. This summer, as a 

member of the all-party Traffic Safety Committee, it was great 

to get to know some of the folks in the Clerk’s office. The 

library staff are always amazing. Everyone from custodial to 

cafeteria staff are great too. 

 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3827 

And last but not least here, I want to thank the people of 

Saskatoon Riversdale for giving me the trust to represent their 

voices. Saskatoon Riversdale is a wonderful community. This 

has been my home for much of my life and I couldn’t imagine 

living anywhere else. 

 

So I know once we call a supper break here, I will come back 

and have an opportunity to speak much more fully to the 

content of the Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3795 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3795 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3795 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3796 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3796 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3796 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3796 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3796 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Diwali Celebration  

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3797 

 Moustaches Appear for Movember  

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3797 

 Olive and Grape Harvest Festival  

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3797 

 Habitat for Humanity Events  

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3797 

 Better Together Food Drive  

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3798 

 Martial Arts Student Wins Gold and Bronze  

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3798 

 Position on Public-Private Partnerships  

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3798 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Relationship with Teachers 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3798 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3799 

 Educational Initiatives 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3800 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3800 

 Public-Private Partnerships  

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3801 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3801 

 Long-term Care Placement 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3802 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3802 

 Combatting Bullying 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3803 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3803 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Improved Cellular Service in the North 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3803 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3804 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3804 

 Bill No. 605 — The Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and Accountability Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3804 

MOTIONS 

 Time Allocation 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3804 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3805 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3807 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3810 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3814 



 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3817 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3819 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3823 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3826 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




