




















































Hansard: November 07, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 10A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2013, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3899 

 November 7, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Merci, monsieur le Président. Je veux vous 

présenter un groupe des étudiantes de l’école St. Andrew de 

Regina. Je pense qu’il y a 33 étudiantes avec nous ce matin. 

 

[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present to 

you a group of students from St. Andrew School in Regina. I 

think that there are 33 students with us this morning.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students are part of something called Le 

Club du Souvenir — rough translation, the Remembrance 

Group. They are led here today by a very special teacher, 

Madame Carolynne Kobelsky. She is called Colonel Kobelsky 

during the meetings of this club. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a regular or normal extracurricular club 

as we have come to understand them. These students from 

grades 5 through grade 8 — and this has been going on now 

for, I think I heard six years this morning — are required to 

apply and sign attestation papers or an oath of loyalty in order 

to get into the club. Colonel Kobelsky assigns each member a 

rank and a service number which they are wearing today in the 

Legislative Assembly with their T-shirts of remembrance. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve even heard that if you’re late for a meeting that 

the colonel requires 10 push-ups. They’re all nodding their 

head. We might want to try that in the legislature maybe, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What makes this group even more unique is their mission 

statement which is this, and I quote: “To develop and foster a 

sense of respect, appreciation, and remembrance for the 

sacrifices of our Canadian forces.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, allow me to give members some examples of 

what they’re doing to fulfill this particular mission statement. 

They help care for over 50 veterans at the Wascana Rehab 

Centre here in Regina by making them toques that look like 

poppies and writing them thank you cards for their service. 

They send care packages to troops, our troops all over the world 

including, I think lately, a care package to those serving in the 

Canadian Navy and working in the Arabian Sea fighting piracy 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They find information for members of the Royal Regina Rifles 

regiment on loved ones who have served or were lost overseas. 

Mr. Speaker, they even have what they call a hallway of heroes 

at their school to document and honour the relatives of students 

who have served. Mr. Speaker, they also escort veterans 

through the hallway of heroes before their Remembrance Day 

service, which I understand is tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we may honour those who fought for our 

freedoms one day a year, these students, grades 5 through 8, 

under the remarkable leadership of, I might say of the colonel, 

do this regularly throughout the year. 

 

There is a lot of names here. It would take a long while to read 

them all in the record, but we’re going to do it anyway, Mr. 

Speaker. So I’m going to read all the names. I apologize for 

some mispronunciations. And I’m going to go through it 

quickly and if they would just give us a quick wave as, as I read 

the name. 

 

We’ll start with the colonel, Madame Kobelsky. Jaryd 

Antonissen, Emily Bumphrey, Jenna Bryksa, Kennedy Cantin, 

Taryn Dillon, Megan Donnelly, Alex Duesing, Alek Eisler, 

Nathaniel Hak, Nolan Hansinger, Breanne Harty, Nathan Harty, 

Jordan Jenkins Natasha Kalmakoff, Paige Kelenc, Kendall 

Kleisinger, Jack Klippenstein, Jana Laliberte, Sera Lizée, Aiden 

Lumbard, Bailey Mattern, Max McFadden, Lauren Nelson, 

Kianna Parisloff, Olivia Parker, Dayle Phaneuf, Ainsley 

Priddell, Madison Randall, Christopher Shikanai, if I 

pronounced that right; Gabrielle Srochenski, Jessica Stroeder, 

Madison Zimmer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have a chance to meet the students 

again a little bit after the question period is complete. And we 

had a chance to chat this morning. They sang a beautiful song 

for those of us who were in the gallery there, and the media as 

well. Mr. Speaker, I’ve invited them — I hope it’s okay with 

members with here — I invited them to perform at our 

Remembrance Day service next year, and I think they’ve 

agreed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a remarkable group of kids here in Regina, 

ensuring that remembrance continues throughout the year, not 

just here but across the province. We want to thank them for 

what they do, Mr. Speaker, and we want to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly this morning. Welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Merci beaucoup. Je voudrais dire des mots 

aussi en français pour les élèves avec leur chef, Carolynne 

Kobelsky, et au part de l’opposition officielle, je voudrais dire 

félicitations à tout le travail que vous faissiez pour les vétérans 

et les soldats. Et aussi merci beaucoup, merci beaucoup, au part 

des toutes des officielles électives, pour le travail que vous 

faites et votre dedication au sujet de souvenir. Et merci 

beaucoup à tous. Merci beaucoup. 

 

[Translation: Thank you very much. I would like to say some 

words in French for the students with their leader, Carolynne 

Kobelsky, and on behalf of the official opposition, I would like 



3900 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

to say congratulations for all the work that you do for the 

veterans and the soldiers. And also, thank you very much, thank 

you very much, on behalf of all the elected officials, for the 

work that you do and your dedication concerning remembrance. 

And thank you very much to all. Thank you very much.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce some officials in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from the 

city of Regina and the municipality of Sherwood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not uncommon anywhere in the country in 

areas of rapid growth that there’s some tensions between 

adjacent municipalities. That doesn’t matter, Mr. Speaker. What 

matters is how those issues are dealt with. And over the last few 

months, through mediation, officials from the city and from the 

RM [rural municipality] have done just a tremendous amount of 

work and co-operation which culminated last night, Mr. 

Speaker, in an historic signing on annexation and 

compensation, and also a memorandum of understanding for 

future development. Mr. Speaker, you will hear more about that 

in a few minutes in member statements. 

 

But for now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce, in your gallery, 

Michael Fougere, the mayor of the city of Regina. With him is 

his chief of staff, Herman Hulshof, and also Councillor Mike 

O’Donnell from the city. And we also have from the rural 

municipality Reeve Kevin Eberle, Deputy Reeve Tim Probe, 

and Rachel Kunz, the administrator. Mr. Speaker, also as you 

can imagine, there were a number of other officials including 

. . . I should mention City Manager Glen Davies for the 

tremendous amount of work he did, other officials that did great 

work on this project. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to 

join me in thanking those members and also in welcoming them 

to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the official opposition I am honoured to join with the minister 

opposite and welcome leaders from the city of Regina and the 

RM of Sherwood that are here today, and certainly proud to 

recognize and to thank them for their leadership that they’ve 

provided to come together on this annexation plan and also 

resolving some matters of a relationship and planning for the 

future. 

 

I found it encouraging this past week when I attended the 

regional planning summit here in Regina that brought together 

the rural municipality, businesses, the city, to see Councillor 

O’Donnell and Deputy Reeve Probe presenting to that summit, 

and ensuring that the planning that we undertake right now is 

able to serve the entire region. So it’s my pleasure to welcome 

His Worship Mayor Fougere, Councillor Mike O’Donnell, 

Reeve Kevin Eberle and Deputy Reeve Tim Probe here today. 

Thank you for your leadership to our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s an 

honour for me to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly a gentleman seated in the west 

gallery. And that’s Barry Martin. And Mr. Martin is the Chair 

of the board with CAA [Canadian Automobile Association] 

Saskatchewan and he’s here today to witness the government’s 

response to the Special Committee on Traffic Safety. So we 

want to welcome him to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, I’d like to join the minister in 

welcoming the guest here to see the proceedings today and the 

introduction of a start to try to lessen . . . lives and injuries in 

Saskatchewan highways. So I’d like to welcome him to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce some special guests who are seated in your gallery. 

With us today is Ms. Bev Antal. Bev, could you give us a bit of 

a wave. She’s accompanied by her daughter-in-law Jenny and 

her son Jon. And I would just mention that Jon is a paramedic 

with STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society]. Also 

accompanying the Antal family is my constituency assistant 

Carol Mellnick. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bev recently lost her husband, Roy, and of course 

Jon, his father. Roy grew up just down the road from my home 

and we started school together in a small country school. I’ll 

have more to say about Roy and our experiences later, Mr. 

Speaker. So at this time, I’d like to ask all members to help me 

welcome the Antal family to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the legislature, I’d like to 

introduce people that are no strangers to the legislature. They 

are family and friends of the late Howard Willems — Brenda 

Baergen and, in particular, his son Jesse Todd who I’ll say a 

little bit more about it in a minute or two. 

 

Joining them are representatives of the Canadian Cancer 

Society, Donna Ziegler and Donna Pasiechnik. They join us in 

the gallery today for the proclamation of Howard’s law. 

Tomorrow marks one year since Howard Willems passed away 

after a courageous battle with cancer. He was a tireless 

advocate for an asbestos registry. 

 

Today the proclamation of Howard’s law means that an 

asbestos registry is becoming mandatory for all public 

buildings. While Howard is no longer with us, it is our hope 

that this registry, which is his legacy, will save lives. Mr. 

Speaker, Jesse Todd spoke to us at the time of his father’s 

passing and looked us in the eye and said, “We cannot stop 

now. We must continue on.” We thank them for being here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3901 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming this important group, with all the 

important groups, but to welcome this group here today with 

Jesse Todd, Brenda Baergen, Donna Ziegler, and Donna 

Pasiechnik. 

 

To the Willems family, with coming up to the anniversary of 

Howard’s death, I am sure there are many emotions that you’re 

feeling, and rightfully so, but I hope in the midst of it and 

seeing proclamation today of such an important work, and a 

dream and a vision that Howard had, I hope that there’s also a 

lot of joy in knowing about the work that he did will have a 

lasting legacy here in Saskatchewan, and our hope is across the 

country as well. So thank you so much for the work that you’ve 

done and how you’ve shared your family’s experience with the 

province. 

 

And thank you also to Donna and Donna because Howard’s law 

is an example of how this legislature can work really well, with 

civil society doing its part and with government and opposition 

working together for common sense things that better the lives 

of many Saskatchewan people. So thank you so much for being 

here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bienvenue à tout 

le monde. It’s my great pleasure to join with the Premier and 

other colleagues in thanking Carolynne Kobelsky and the 

remarkable students from École St. Andrew and the Club du 

Souvenir for all the work they’re doing to support our troops, 

both current members of the Canadian Forces and of course our 

veterans. 

 

I’d like to also add that I too will have the pleasure of meeting 

them a little bit later today. And I’ll also have the honour of 

joining them for their Remembrance Ceremony tomorrow at the 

school. I’m looking forward to it. 

 

I’d also like to take this opportunity to publicly thank 

Carolynne for great work that’s she’s done on another 

wonderful project in honour of our troops, and that is of course 

the Trafalgar Day Gala which was held at HMCS [Her 

Majesty’s Canadian Ship] Queen, with all the proceeds going to 

Wounded Warriors Canada. I’d like to thank her publicly. It’s 

wonderful to work with you, and I look forward to doing it 

again next year. Thank you so much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of education. And we 

know that education is one of the most vital services the 

government provides to citizens and that this government has 

failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision and the necessary 

resources to priorize the delivery of educational excellence, and 

that this government has failed to develop a real plan to close 

the Aboriginal education gap, support English as an additional 

language for students, and support community schools and their 

communities and students. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately priorize education by laying out a 

long-term vision and plan and the necessary resources to 

provide the best quality of education for Saskatchewan 

that reflects Saskatchewan demographic and population 

changes, that’s based on proven educational best practices, 

that’s developed through consultation with the education 

sector, that builds on strong education infrastructure to 

serve students and communities long into the future. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefit from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

They are signed by many northern people. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of replacing the gymnasium at Sacred Heart 

Community School. The petitioners point out that the gym at 

Sacred Heart in North Central is unsafe, has been falling apart, 

and has been closed for the immediate future. They point out 

that there is an interim solution in place, Mr. Speaker, with the 

refurbishing of the old sanctuary at the old Sacred Heart 

Church, but that this is not a permanent solution. They point out 

that any school needs a gym as a place for the school and the 

community to gather together to engage in cultural and 

educational activities and to promote physical activity, which is 

good for the mind, body, and spirit of all children. And they 

point out that as a matter of basic fairness and common sense, 

Sacred Heart Community School needs a gym. Mr. Speaker, in 

the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to 

immediately commit to the replacement of the gymnasium 

of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

This petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon, Strasbourg, 

and Cupar. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 



3902 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

Remembering Roy Antal 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Roy Antal 

spent 41 years as a photographer with the Leader-Post, and 

sadly, Mr. Speaker, last Friday I attended his funeral. 

 

You may have read the tributes to Roy in last week’s papers, 

which outlined his vast array of experiences during his long 

career at the paper. But as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, 

Roy grew up just down the road from my home, and we went to 

a country school. And during the winter months our parents 

would take turns driving us with horse and sleigh to school, and 

in the summertime we’d walk. And yes, it was uphill both 

ways. 

 

But after school, Mr. Speaker, our paths took different 

directions, and frankly we didn’t see each other that often until 

I was elected back in ’99 to this Assembly. After that I’d often 

see Roy here on Throne Speech days, budget days, and other 

special events doing what he did — taking pictures for the 

paper. 

 

But one of the first times that we met after I was elected was 

back in 1999 when I assisted a caucus colleague who was 

participating in a goat milking contest. And I agreed to come 

and hold the goat while my caucus colleague milked the goat. 

And sure enough, there was Roy taking pictures. And I had a 

look at those pictures just this morning, Mr. Speaker, and you 

know, myself and the member from Cannington, we didn’t have 

any grey hair back in 1999. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at Roy’s funeral, Rob Vanstone in his eulogy told 

us about the wall of photos that they have of Roy’s photos over 

at the Leader-Post. And he said, and I quote, “If the province 

can have a Brad Wall, we at the paper can have a Roy wall.” 

And I can think of no better tribute to my friend Roy. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Thanking Those Who Serve and Have Served 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we stood 

together in this legislature in remembrance with a touching 

ceremony. I was moved by the powerful and eloquent words of 

Padre D.J. Kim, chaplain of the Royal Regina Rifles, who 

called upon us to be ever thankful for the service and sacrifice 

of so many. 

 

It is my humble honour to recognize and thank all the men and 

women that serve and have served our proud nation in pursuit 

of freedom and peace. Our province has a strong history of 

service to our nation. That service to one’s nation not only 

shaped our nation but it has too shaped our province and the 

families and communities across it. Whether it’s a young mom 

or dad that recently returned to our province from service or a 

dad or a grandfather that served years before, it’s fair to say that 

service impacts many lives, families, and communities in 

powerful ways. 

 

Like so many across our province, a history of service to our 

nation is part of my family’s history. We must never forget the 

true purpose of pinning on a poppy, and on November 11th 

while we observe ceremonies, stand at cenotaphs, and come 

together at Legions, we must never forget to remember and be 

thankful year-round. I ask all members of this Assembly to join 

with me in extending our thanks, our respect to those that serve, 

have served, and those that we’ve lost. May we always 

remember and may our resolve for peace be strong. In the 

words of John McCrae, “. . . the torch: be yours to hold it high.” 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

New Relationship Between Municipalities 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

Assembly today to recognize the work done between the RM of 

Sherwood and the city of Regina. Council meetings were held 

last night and a new agreement was signed that forges a new 

relationship between the municipalities. 

 

In September, Regina City Council and the RM of Sherwood 

Council unanimously approved an MOU [memorandum of 

understanding] establishing a joint planning area and a 

mechanism for joint decision making as well as a forum for 

important communication regarding growth in the joint 

planning area. This MOU is a critical part of the co-operation 

between the two municipalities. The RM of Sherwood and the 

city of Regina have set a fine example of what can happen 

when municipalities work together. 

 

Saskatchewan is growing in population and also in economic 

opportunities, and this agreement will allow both municipalities 

to continue to create more opportunities, provide jobs, not just 

for the sake of growth but for the benefit of all the citizens of 

this region. Although this is a very important step, there is more 

work to do, and I believe they will continue to work together as 

they move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Legislative 

Assembly join me in thanking the city of Regina and the RM of 

Sherwood for all their hard work and collaboration to make this 

province the best place to live, to work, to play. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Thanking Those Who Serve and Have Served 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

father, who was a World War II veteran, taught us that service 

is deeply important. Mr. Speaker, as a World War II veteran, he 

is very proud of his sons and his daughters and our entire 

family for their service, but he was proud of all those that 

served. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of my family service and of the 

sacrifices made by the First Nations and Métis people in this 

country. I’d like to recognize some of my family members: my 

brother John who was a machinist in the Armed Forces for 27 

years; my older brother Wally who was a flight engineer and 

served close to 30 years; my older sister Dawna, served three 

years; and my youngest daughter Taylor served at the 

Esquimalt navy program; my Uncle George who also was a 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3903 

World War II vet and spent three years overseas; and my cousin 

Charles also served. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a family we also enjoy attending a special 

tribute ceremony back home, that this day I will always 

specifically think about the service of the over 7,000 First 

Nation, Inuit, and Métis people, and the 500 who gave their 

lives for this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pride to say thank you to all the 

veterans, to those that have served, and those that will continue 

to serve, and especially those that perished. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s no question that there’re many people throughout our 

country and our communities and our RMs that are very 

thankful for the service. And I want to especially recognize and 

thank the students that are here today for their tribute and 

service and to say to all the families that made the greatest 

sacrifice and those that continue to serve, I sincerely thank you 

from the bottom of my heart. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Change of Command at “F” Division 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, history was made yesterday as Chief Superintendent 

Brenda Butterworth-Carr was officially sworn in Wednesday as 

the new commanding officer for Saskatchewan’s “F” Division 

at the change of command ceremony right here in Regina. 

 

Chief Superintendent Butterworth-Carr is Canada’s first 

Aboriginal woman to lead an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] division. The new leader is from Dawson City, Yukon, 

and is a member of the Tr’ondëck Hwëch’ in Han Nation. Mr. 

Speaker, Chief Butterworth-Carr joined the RCMP in 1987 as a 

Native special constable and has served communities in the 

Yukon, British Columbia, national headquarters, and 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Chief Superintendent Butterworth-Carr has served on many 

committees and associations and received numerous awards, 

including both the Golden and Diamond Queen’s Jubilee 

Medals for her proactive work and outstanding commitment 

and dedication to Aboriginal communities across Canada. 

 

At yesterday’s event, the Assembly of First Nations Chief, 

Shawn Atleo, addressed the crowd, commenting, and I quote: 

 

This is history being made here in Treaty 4 territory in 

Regina. With the first Aboriginal woman to accomplish 

this level of leadership tells the young people, especially 

the girls, that anything is possible if you set your mind and 

heart to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

great accomplishments of this newly appointed chief 

superintendent and wish her all the best in her new position as 

the leader for the RCMP “F” Division. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saltcoats-Melville. 

Agribition 2013 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to rise in the House today to share that the Canadian 

Western Agribition kicks off this coming Monday, November 

11th. From November 11th to 16th, Regina will be hosting the 

Western Canada’s premier agricultural marketplace, trade 

show, and rodeo. The theme of this year’s show is Agribition 

for Everyone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Agribition is the largest cattle show in Western 

Canada, and this will mark its 43rd anniversary. Each year the 

event attracts more than 125,000 visitors from more than 50 

countries. 

 

This prestigious event happens over six days, showcasing some 

of North America’s finest livestock, agriculture equipment, and 

impressive trade show. It has more than 1,400 head of the best 

livestock in North America and more than 250,000 square feet 

of trade show space, containing approximately 400 vendors 

from around the world. It also includes commercial displays, 

seminars, heavy horse pull, tours for schoolchildren, youth 

education, a professional rodeo, grain expo, and an international 

business centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all of my colleagues and everyone to take 

time out of their busy schedules to check out this world-class 

event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Policies and Plans 

 

Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, it’s becoming painfully obvious the 

Leader of the NDP [New Democratic Party] has no policy and 

he has no plan. Tuesday my colleague from Carrot River 

challenged him to release his so-called smart growth plan. No 

response. Then the Premier asked him to release his 

environment plan. Again, no response. In fact, when reporters 

asked the NDP leader about his plan for the environment, he 

told them, I’m not rolling out my election platform today. How 

dismissive and arrogant can you get? 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one is asking the NDP leader for his election 

platform. However, you might expect to find something about 

the NDP policy on the NDP website, but you can’t. The NDP 

have taken great pains to scrub their website. Their last election 

platform is gone. The NDP resolutions are gone. Even the 

policy review book written by the NDP leader himself is gone. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, almost every other opposition party has a 

policy on their website, even the Rhinoceros Party in Alberta. 

Their platform may be a joke, but at least you can find it, which 

is more than you can say for the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s becoming painfully obvious the Leader of the 

Opposition has no policy and he has no plan. He likes to 

complain, but he won’t tell anyone what he would do 

differently. Will the NDP leader table his plan today, or will he 

just admit that he does not have one? 

 

[10:30] 



3904 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — Okay, it’s question time. I recognize the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Special Care Conditions 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last spring, Mr. 

Speaker, Carrie Klassen came to the legislature to raise 

concerns about the quality of care in the facility where her 

mother lived. And she was . . . We also heard from Lynne 

Seaborne, Mr. Speaker, and we know of many other families 

that share the concerns that were raised. 

 

Carrie told us about seniors being left unattended on toilets. 

Carrie told us about call buttons going off and not being 

answered. Carrie told us about seniors missing their baths. And 

all this, Mr. Speaker, was because of chronic understaffing. 

When she brought these concerns forward to this government, 

Mr. Speaker, they stubbornly dismissed them. In fact they 

suggested that they were overblown. They said that they were 

getting regular staffing reports from the facility and that there 

really was no cause for alarm. Mr. Speaker, in fact there was 

cause for alarm. 

 

My question to the Premier: after reviewing the CEO [chief 

executive officer] tour report, what does he have to say about 

the concerns Carrie Klassen brought forward about the Sunset 

facility last spring? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, right in the hon. member’s question there is a bit of 

conflict of facts because on one hand he says, on one hand he 

says that this government was dismissive of the concerns that 

were raised. At the end of his questions, he notes the CEO tour 

that the minister directed the work, the work that the minister 

directed be done . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well you 

know, they’re saying after the fact. Mr. Speaker, the opposition 

raised some legitimate questions. That’s how this place should 

work. And this side of the House responded. The minister 

provided leadership to the CEOs to make sure we were getting 

on the floor of these facilities. 

 

The report came back, Mr. Speaker, and there was some 

positive reports in terms of care, and there was some very 

concerning reports in terms of care. And we released it all. It 

was all available to the public. This government noted that we 

need to do better by our long-term care residents. We wanted to 

also salute the fact that we’re doing some very good work, our 

health care workers are doing some very good work in this area 

as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a $10 million emergency fund that was 

immediately deployed by the minister. There’s an expansion in 

home care. There’s medium- and long-term plans we’re going 

to work on, Mr. Speaker.  

 

The point of the answer I guess is this: this government was 

anything but dismissive. We take the matter very seriously. We 

recognize that the member of the opposition has raised them 

along with members of the public, and we’ll respond. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when the concerns were brought 

forward they said there was no cause for alarm. The dismissive 

approach continues even when we talk about minimum care 

standards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You would think with the serious concerns that Carrie brought 

forward to the legislature, that this specific facility that she 

raised with concerns about would actually be included in the 

CEO tour and the subsequent report, especially if the tour was 

as comprehensive as this government suggests. But despite all 

of the spin and the hyping we heard about the CEO tour, Mr. 

Speaker, the tour report doesn’t even include a proper review of 

the Sunset facility. My question to the Premier: why is this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the minister 

may want to respond specifically to this facility in regards to 

the tour. But again I just reject the preamble, the pretext for the 

Leader of the Opposition’s questions. And we do have to do a 

daily fact check in this regard it seems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government was anything but dismissive 

about the issues that were raised. We’re absolutely going to 

point out though where there is some successes, and that’s what 

was also been happening during the debate, Mr. Speaker. Our 

health care workers are doing some wonderful work, providing 

some great care, and that should also be noted as we continue to 

debate this issue. There seems to be a lack of recognition 

sometimes with respect to what those workers are doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the CEO tour was, I think, very helpful. It’s 

certainly the starting point. Again this government released all 

of the report back whether it was positive or frankly not very 

positive. And this government has been clear about its intent to 

continue to deal with the issue. I would hope that people of the 

province would see that, rather than closing long-term care beds 

as we saw under the previous administration, we’ve been 

opening new long-term care beds. We’ve been adding nurses. 

We’ve been hiring more doctors. There’s more work to do, Mr. 

Speaker, in this specific area, and we’re committed to do it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, just because this government 

doesn’t like the facts related to its response to the crisis that we 

have with seniors’ care doesn’t mean they can simply dismiss 

the facts. It was the minister, Mr. Speaker, when these concerns 

were raised in the legislature that said there was no cause for 

alarm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the CEO report only has a self-assessment 

checklist for Sunset which was filled out by Sunset 

management. It does not have the review document that other 

facilities have. The self-assessment checklist completed by 

Sunset management claims that the organization’s commitment 

to resident-centred care is clear and that things are generally 

rolling along quite well. But we know that’s not the case, Mr. 

Speaker, because of the concerns that have been raised by 

Carrie Klassen and other families who are concerned about the 

quality of care in this exact facility. 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3905 

So my question to the Premier: does he really think that this 

approach of self-assessment checklists provides an accurate 

picture of seniors’ care facilities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we do support 

this particular CEO tour. In fact I know the minister has 

directed regions to make sure that this is a regular occurrence. 

Is this the only way that we can monitor what’s happening in 

health care in long-term care facilities? No, Mr. Speaker. There 

are other ways. We hear from the public as well. We listen to 

health care providers. That’s what our patient-first initiative is 

about. The opposition has a role to play. People like Ms. 

Klassen have a role to play. We do need to be vigilant. We need 

to be listening very carefully to all of the input we get, Mr. 

Speaker. We understand that this a long-term process. 

 

We got to this situation in Saskatchewan over, well, over years 

where we were closing facilities, over years where we were 

contemplating — I can say the members opposite were 

contemplating — massive increases in long-term care fees. And 

any number of issues that have got us to this point. Mr. 

Speaker, we are accountable now for the situation. We will be 

accountable. We are moving with an emergency fund now. 

We’re moving with mid- and long-term initiatives. Mr. 

Speaker, we are committed to this, but absolutely we think the 

CEO tour had value, and we’re going to continue it on in the 

future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech this 

government tried to hype up how comprehensive its CEO tour 

was. But I’ve been hearing repeatedly from individuals that the 

CEO tour of facilities, Mr. Speaker, barely scratches the surface 

of concerns that exist. 

 

And now Carrie Klassen is back at the legislature, Mr. Speaker, 

wondering today why the specific concerns she raised about a 

facility were not addressed in the way that they needed to be. 

And she has some specific questions, Mr. Speaker. Carrie wants 

to know why managers were left to assess their own 

performance. Carrie wants to know why no one talked to 

front-line staff. Carrie wants to know why no one talked to 

family members. And Carrie wants to know why no one talked 

to seniors living in the facility. 

 

My question to the Premier: what is his response to the 

questions raised by Carrie? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, what we have committed to doing on an ongoing 

basis, Mr. Speaker, is to direct the CEOs of our health regions 

and senior leaders within the health regions to undergo this 

process on an ongoing basis, whether that be through an annual 

CEO tour of long-term care facilities which we will be 

conducting, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll learn from this process 

from this first round which we have never done before in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s arguably high time that we 

start spending more time, Mr. Speaker, and having senior 

leaders spend more time within facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we’ve also put in other ways. The Premier has talked about 

the $10 million Urgent Issues Action Fund. Mr. Speaker, what 

we’ll be asking the health region to do is report back on their 

progress 60, 90, and 120 days after receiving the money from 

the provincial government to determine whether or not the 

money has actually addressed the issues that they addressed in 

their report. Mr. Speaker, as well as we’ll provide a survey for 

the resident and family councils to provide directly to the 

Minister of Health, something that was never done before, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships and Provision of Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this week the 

Minister of Highways was asked about concerns with P3 

[public–private partnership] schools in Alberta. He replied, 

“There’s no basis behind them.” The Minister of Highways 

obviously has selective hearing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here’s what Bill Stuebing from Red Deer Public School Board 

had to say about P3 schools just last month: 

 

I do not believe that P3s are the most efficient use of 

public funds in the long term, and I would not support 

their continued use. I am disturbed that school districts are 

being presented with P3s as the only way to secure badly 

needed facilities. 

 

So my question to the Minister of Education is this: does he 

support the claim of the Minister of Highways that there’s no 

basis to the concerns about P3 schools in Alberta? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Highways, the Minister Responsible for 

SaskBuilds, has indicated and made it abundantly clear that we 

are going down this road with a great deal of caution and care. 

 

First off, Mr. Speaker, I can advise that there would be a 

detailed and expert value-for-money calculation. That money 

calculation would be provided by a professional, external, 

expert financial advisor, somebody from KPMG, Deloitte’s, or 

somebody like that. They would have a fair, open, and 

transparent process to determine whether it is value for 

taxpayers in using a P3 model. 

 

We want to ensure that there is somebody that would be an 

external fairness advisor for each of the projects that’s being 

undertaken. It would be undertaken by somebody that’s 

external, somebody that has got credibility and competence. We 

want to make sure that we use well-established Canadian best 

practices. The Canadian P3 market now is mature. At the 

present time, there are over 204 P3 projects completed or under 

way. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 



3906 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister must not have heard the 

question. But it’s disturbing that the Minister of Education 

simply stands by the Minister of Highways when we’re talking 

about the future of the schools in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when Medicine Hat Public School Board trustee 

Deborah Forbes was asked if she thought the Alberta 

government should continue to use P3s for new schools, she 

had the following to say, “P3 partnerships seem to be an 

experiment that is failing, so no.” Cindy Olsen, an Edmonton 

Catholic School Board member echoed these comments on P3 

schools: “Government says they have learned from the first 

ones, but have they?” Judy Hehr from the Calgary Board of 

Education shares this distaste: “It is unfortunate in a province as 

wealthy as Alberta that its school system has to consider P3s.” 

 

My question to the Minister of Education: why is he ignoring 

educational leaders and the experience from across Alberta that 

view the P3 school bundles as a failure that has not gotten any 

better over time? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote John 

Gibson, director of Alberta school’s alternative procurement 

process. And this is what he said: 

 

We had an auditor general’s report on our project. They 

found that we had, over the net present value, which is an 

accounting term for bringing cash flow over a long period 

of time to the present, that we had saved 100 million or 

$97 million to be precise. 

 

With regard to the report that the member is referring to, the 

same John Gibson, director of . . . [inaudible] . . . said: 

 

Never heard of it, because we have in our agreement that 

the contractor must maintain the building, including the 

maintenance, any wear and tear necessary due to the 

joint-use agreements with the municipalities. Every school 

board has a joint-use agreement with its municipality, 

even if it’s a rural school board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these processes are taking place in Alberta. I 

understand there might be critics but, Mr. Speaker, I like the 

idea of saving tens and hundreds of millions of dollars so that 

we can continue to provide more and more services to the 

students and parents in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s moving 

forward in a stubborn approach with blinders on, ignoring the 

experience of other jurisdictions, and hanging their hat on the 

argument that somehow P3 school bundling has evolved. And 

they’re asking us to look to the other, the experiences of other 

jurisdictions. Well, we are. Outside the shared rejection of P3s 

for new schools, these educational figures have something else 

in common. They were all elected as representatives of the 

Alberta education system last month. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan want a litmus test for how people 

feel about the P3 schools in Alberta. Then we should all, in 

particular the minister, should take a good, hard, long look at 

what’s actually going on there. 

 

My question to the minister: if he hears the warnings of 

concerned teachers, school board trustees, governments, 

auditors, parents, and students, and thinks he can still prove 

them wrong, why won’t he just open up his P3 master plan to 

the fair and open analysis that we’re calling for? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, earlier I indicated what the 

process would be, with an external review, an independent 

analysis for each one of the projects. And, Mr. Speaker, there is 

a ton of support for this in our province. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

read a few of the quotes from people in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Public School Board Chair Ray 

Morrison: “To say that I am pleased to be here today for this 

announcement would be a serious, serious understatement.” 

Vicky Bonnell, Chair, Regina Catholic Service Division: “As 

long as we have schools to accommodate our students’ needs, 

we’re happy.” Mr. Speaker, Larry Pavloff, board Chair, Prairie 

Spirit School Division: “We are very happy to hear this 

announcement.” Diane Boyko, Greater Saskatoon Catholic 

board Chair — it seems to me that’s the same Diane Boyko that 

ran for a nomination against somebody on the other side of the 

House — says this: “We are really quite excited about this 

announcement because it is going to relieve some pressure and 

it is going to create schools within the community.” Mr. 

Speaker, Katherine Gagne, Chair of the Regina Public Schools, 

exactly the same type of comment. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, everyone knows we’ve 

been calling for new schools for years. We just think they 

should be in the hands of the public, and built as fast as they 

can be. That government, that government holds Alberta up as 

some sort of shining example, but they’re not looking at the 

realities. 

 

In Alberta we’ve seen that there’s been access issues where 

they wouldn’t allow portables, child care facilities to be added 

on, Mr. Speaker. They blocked the community from utilizing 

the schools. Or we see the fact that the Alberta value for money 

is currently being investigated by the auditor or the fact that 

right now the current bundled bid only has one bidder from a 

consortia, having no competition for taxpayers, and now having 

every one of the opposition parties — Wildrose, Liberal, and 

NDP — united to scrap the P3 plan or the fact that Alberta 

school boards are stating very clearly that they want to go 

forward in a public fashion. 

 

My question to the minister: when will this government 

actually get in touch with the reality of what’s actually 

happening with P3 schools? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3907 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the reality of this, we’re 

going to build schools in the province. We need to build 

schools. The members opposite have nothing in the tree book 

about building schools. In fact, Mr. Speaker, their record is 

closing 176 schools. We built 20 schools since we’ve been in 

government. We’re going to add another nine joint-use schools. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat in this House every day since we’ve 

been in session, listening to them talk about Sacred Heart 

School. Mr. Speaker, one of the effects of this package that 

we’re doing with these nine joint-use schools, it will move 

Sacred Heart’s gymnasium to the top of the capital list, Mr. 

Speaker. So I’d urge those members to get behind it because 

their citizens and the people that live in their constituencies sure 

are. They want these things. They need these things, and this is 

a good way of doing it, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to see them 

get behind it even if it’s not in the tree book. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Crop Insurance Claims 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Many 

farmers are upset with how this government is dealing with 

insurance claims for wet acres. That’s why just yesterday, the 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention passed the following resolution: 

 

WHEREAS Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

(SCIC) advised customers to increase their wet acre 

coverage; and 

 

WHEREAS customers were told that SCIC would base 

their claims on the declared wet acres; 

 

BE IT RESOLVED that Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation base the wet acre claims on what the 

customers declared for 2013. 

 

To the minister: what is this government’s response to the 

resolution? Can producers expect action on these concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question. The facts are that the program has 

not changed. Up to $100 an acre is available now for unseeded 

acres. I guess one of the major changes over the last number of 

years is that under the NDP it was $50 an acre. But it was never 

intended to compensate producers for permanent water bodies, 

and that’s the only discrepancy these days. 

 

The last two years there were so many flood claims that 

inspections were not done, and so I think producers wrongly 

expected that to be the case this year. And we’ve just gone back 

to doing inspections the way the Crop Insurance always has 

done and needs to do to remain sustainable. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister is 

correct in saying the program hasn’t changed, but what has 

changed is the way the assessments were being done. The 

permanent definition was changed after the fact, after these 

producers had purchased their insurance.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the reeve for the RM of Kellross said this at the 

convention yesterday: “Last spring Lyle Stewart encouraged us 

to increase our coverage. Crop insurance customers were told 

that their claims would be treated in the same manner as other 

years. Well that obviously didn’t happen.” The reeve went on to 

say, “We think we were treated unfairly in this situation and we 

feel that the government, the Ag minister should revisit these 

claims.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the summer I heard the same concern from 

many farmers. To the minister: is this government going to 

stubbornly refuse to listen or will it revisit these claims? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member as well. The fact is that the process has not changed. 

We’ve just gone back to doing inspections as crop insurance 

always has done and needs to do in the future. We are and have 

been flexible with producers, and we continue to do so, as 

reinforced in a discussion that I had with senior crop insurance 

officials yesterday. 

 

Many claims have been re-inspected and are continuing to be 

where producers are not happy with the results. Appeal 

processes are also available to producers who may have issues, 

and some appeals have been requested. Since 2010 we’ve 

provided $740 million in unseeded acreage coverage and, I 

think, generally speaking producers are quite pleased with that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the SARM convention also 

passed a resolution yesterday which called for the Crop 

Insurance Corporation to extend its deadline to July 10th in 

order to give producers an adequate period of time to apply for 

eligible flooded acres. SARM delegates noted that the current 

deadline of June 20th is not an adequate length of time. To the 

minister: is this government willing to listen to these concerns 

about crop insurance deadlines, and will it make the necessary 

adjustments? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we take 

SARM resolutions very seriously, as we will with this one. This 

will be discussed with ministry officials and with Crop 

Insurance and myself. 

 

The facts are we have until June 20th to get seed in the ground 

under the crop insurance program. And then after that, flooded 

acres are irrelevant because it’s past the seeding date in any 

event. But you know, we’re willing to be flexible as we can 

with crop insurance, but we must maintain the program on a 

sustainable fashion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 



3908 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

Support for Home Ownership in Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Housing in 

northern Saskatchewan is a huge concern for families, but it’s 

also a concern for communities and for businesses, Mr. 

Speaker. And the housing needs in northern Saskatchewan are 

very special in the sense that less than half of the northerners 

own their own homes. Over all the rest of the province, that 

number is about 72 per cent. 

 

Many houses in northern Saskatchewan are overcrowded. It is 

much more difficult and more expensive getting building 

supplies for new houses, and it costs more to build. And private 

developers have less of an incentive to build houses in northern 

Saskatchewan compared to the rest of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. But this government stubbornly refuses to recognize 

those special challenges and dismisses the needs of northern 

housing, of issues that concern northern housing of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: why does this government have absolutely no 

plan for recognizing the challenges of housing in northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 

member opposite for the question. 

 

I know that with the housing activity in northern Saskatchewan, 

there is great needs. And we recognize that we have the most 

social housing units in all of Canada. And we also, one, we 

have more units in the North, one in five for the rest of the 

province. Mr. Speaker, since 2007 we’ve spent about $26 

million on units that are either completed or in progress. And 

we do recognize that there is an issue with being able to buy, to 

purchase units in the North as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have consulted with the northern mayors. 

We’ve been in the North to talk to the Pinehouse residents, in 

La Ronge, and talk about the special challenges. We also know 

that when we have the consultations to talk about strategies, the 

mayors were very, very involved. 

 

We’ve had the opportunity lately to see what can be done, and 

recognize that there is not only more people working in the 

North, but the opportunities to be able to own their own home 

is important. Home ownership is important to us, Mr. Speaker. 

And dealing with northern people is a big part of our program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about home 

ownership, and for the record, that government cancelled the 

home ownership in northern Saskatchewan for working 

families, Mr. Speaker. The rental purchase option allowed 

working families in the North, after a number of years of 

renting, to have the dignity of owning their own home by 

buying the government off and getting the government out of 

their hair when it comes to their own homes. 

 

Many families spent thousands of dollars paying rent year after 

year after year, Mr. Speaker, and they had the hope that they’d 

be able to own their own home after a number of years of 

renting. And this government and this minister callously cut the 

program. The rental purchase option for working families in 

northern Saskatchewan was cancelled by that minister and by 

that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, of northern Saskatchewan want to 

know one thing, Mr. Speaker: how could you turn your backs 

on working families that wanted the opportunity to finally own 

their own home and call their house their own home? Why did 

you do that, Madam Minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 

opposite, the program that the member’s talking about was in 

place from 2001 to 2011, and it helped 138 homeowners get a 

home. Mr. Speaker, the program was actually intended to be in 

place for three years. I talked to the member from Cumberland 

last year in estimates, and we talked about the home ownership 

and the fact that ensuring that people could own their home also 

made sure that . . . We had to ensure that they were able to look 

after their home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the program actually gave 54 tenants the right to 

purchase their home for $1. Mr. Speaker, the way the program 

was set up wasn’t giving everybody a balanced opportunity. We 

do know that the average price paid for the rest of them was just 

over $12,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to make sure that people who are 

working and want to be able to own their home are going to pay 

a price that’s comparable. We want to make sure the people 

who really need government support to have a home will get it 

from our government. That’s what we’re working on. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind members that when 

they’re directing questions or answering questions that they do 

it through the Chair and not directly to the individual that 

they’re speaking about. Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is this your first day in the House? 

 

The Speaker: — It might be your last day. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Implementation of Traffic Safety Committee 

Recommendations 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today we are happy to announce significant changes that will 

save lives and prevent injuries on Saskatchewan roads, based 

on the recommendations made by the Special Committee on 

Traffic Safety. 

 

Six changes relates to the unacceptable rate of impaired driving 

deaths in the province. They include implementing zero drug 

and alcohol tolerance for drivers under 19 years of age and for 

all drivers in the graduated driver’s licensing program and the 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3909 

motorcycle driving licensing program. We’re subjecting 

drug-impaired drivers to the same sanctions as alcohol-impaired 

drivers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll be strengthening administrative sanctions 

for drinking and driving, based on driver experience and the 

number of offences, including mandatory ignition interlock for 

convicted impaired drivers and immediate roadside vehicle 

impoundments. For example, Mr. Speaker, on a first offence for 

drinking and driving, new drivers will face a 60-day roadside 

licence suspension and a three-day immediate roadside vehicle 

impoundment. Experienced drivers caught drinking and driving 

will also face immediate vehicle impoundment up to 60 days, 

depending on the driver’s blood alcohol content and the number 

of offences. 

 

Fourth, Mr. Speaker, SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] will work with Corrections and Policing to 

determine and implement the optimal number of drug 

recognition experts. SGI will review the impairing factors 

section of the Saskatchewan Driver’s Handbook and SGI will 

analyze impaired driving data. 

 

Mr. Speaker, stronger rules and tougher sanctions are just one 

component of making roads safer. It is also critical that drivers 

understand the choices that they make to prevent crashes. These 

measures should help keep new drivers safe behind the wheel 

now and they will also help them develop a mentality that 

drinking and driving don’t mix. Changing behaviour will mean 

safety benefits for as long as these individuals drive. With these 

drinking and driving countermeasures, Saskatchewan will have 

one of the toughest packages of impaired driving legislation in 

Canada. 

 

We’re also taking action to address excessive speed, another 

top contributor to fatal crashes. We’re going to be lowering the 

speed threshold in the Safe Driver Recognition program from 

50 kilometres per hour to 35 kilometres per hour. We also will 

be implementing a two-year photo radar pilot project at three 

high-risk locations and in school zones. And to help ensure 

children are travelling safely, we’re making booster seats 

mandatory for children under the age of seven and less than 145 

centimetres or 4 feet 9 inches in height and 36 kilograms or 80 

pounds in weight. 

 

[11:00] 

 

We will also focus our efforts on traffic safety awareness 

programs to encourage drivers to make better choices behind 

the wheel to help make Saskatchewan a safer place to live and 

drive. More specifically, Mr. Speaker, SGI will continue to 

work with First Nations and Métis communities to develop 

targeted traffic safety programming. SGI and the Ministry of 

Highways will continue to work with First Nations 

communities to address local traffic safety concerns. And SGI 

will work with the Ministry of Justice and SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] to research and 

implement technologies that can be used to make roads safer. 

SGI will continue to produce traffic safety measuring 

throughout the year, using various delivery methods, and SGI 

will review its communications strategy. 

 

This traffic safety action plan reflects steps we can immediately 

implement to improve safety on Saskatchewan roads. I would 

like to thank the committee for all of the work that they did, Mr. 

Speaker, and we will be looking at the other recommendations 

as we move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to 

thank the minister by saying thank you for sending over the 

ministerial statement and to go over it a little bit. 

 

And I just want to start out . . . I know there are some guests in 

the galleries that are here probably to hear the announcement 

that the government is moving ahead on some of the 

recommendations, and good recommendations, that the Traffic 

Safety Special Committee, you know, did a lot of good work. 

And I want to commend the committee and the Chair, and also 

my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, who 

was the Vice-Chair. And I just want to say the good work, and I 

know they were dedicated to the members on both sides to 

work together, to lessen fatalities and deaths in our province, 

and to make sure our roads are safer for Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

And there are many . . . You know, there’s over 20 

recommendations that were brought forward by the committee. 

I know as an opposition we also had our, you know, minority 

opinion, and I’m hoping the government will act on that and 

will take all the necessary steps to improve our roads and safety 

for all Saskatchewan residents, not only our young children, but 

our young drivers, our families, and the people working on 

these roads, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, there’s a lot of individuals that are out there doing 

some good work, whether it’s highways, whether there’s . . . 

You know, and they try to improve the safety for people 

travelling on our highways. And I just want to say to the 

government, it’s a good start. I know we have to continue to 

lessen the fatalities. You know, when you look at the number of 

fatalities in our province, on our highways, you know, the 

national rate, I think it’s three times when you look at the rate. 

So this is a good start. 

 

It was identified as a problem with deaths and injuries on our 

highway and the cost. So I want to say that to families and the 

families, the grief that families have gone through . . . So if we 

can do a little bit to improve safety, and I know it’s individual 

choices, and we heard a lot of that, that individuals make those 

choices and how they conduct themselves on our roads and our 

highways. 

 

So I just want to say again, it’s a good start. We need to do 

more to make sure our roads are safe. But I just want to say to 

the minister and the ministry, you know, truly, and to the 

government, it’s a good start. It shows co-operation working to 

make our roads safe for our Saskatchewan families. 

 

So I’d like to say, thank everyone for the good work, and let’s 

continue. There’s more that we have to look at, but we can do 

that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 



3910 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 111, 

The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 

2013 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 112, 

The Accounting Profession Act be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les 

procurations 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 113, The 

Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and read the first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 114, The 

Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision 

Makers Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 114, The Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 115, The 

Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved that Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3911 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 

report that the committee has considered revisions to the rules 

and procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

and is presenting its fifth report. I move: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 

Leader: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the revisions to the rules and procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan as presented in the 

fifth report be adopted and brought into force effective 

November 12, 2013; and further, 

 

That upon adoption of this motion, the Clerk of the 

Legislative Assembly shall ensure the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

as revised are printed and republished. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the revisions to the rules and procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan as presented in the 

fifth report be adopted and brought into force effective 

November 12, 2013; and further, 

 

That upon adoption of this motion, the Clerk of the 

Legislative Assembly shall ensure the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

as revised are printed and republished. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 88 through 100. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 88 through 100. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 903 — St. Thomas More College 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you. I move that Bill No. 903, St. 

Thomas More College Amendment Act, 2013 be now read for a 

second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland that Bill No. 903, St. Thomas More 

College Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 100, this bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Hydraulic Fracturing in the Saskatchewan Energy Sector 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

bring a motion forward today: 

 

That this Assembly supports the continued use of fracking 

(or hydraulic fracturing) in the Saskatchewan energy 



3912 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

sector. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as everybody knows, there’s a lot of 

fearmongering and rhetoric being put around by various 

different people, so I want to read some of the stuff into the 

record on an article that was put in The StarPhoenix. And I’m 

going to quote from there. It’s called “50 years of safe fracking 

in Saskatchewan.” It was written by Kent Campbell and it was 

in The StarPhoenix February the 10th of 2012. I’m not going to 

read the whole thing, Mr. Speaker, but I’m going to read some 

of the more important parts of it. 

 

. . . Multi-stage fracking is used in our province only on 

horizontal wells to produce oil from a number of 

important formations, including the Bakken, Shaunavon 

and Viking. 

 

While use of this technology has increased, it has been 

applied safely in Saskatchewan for more than 50 years on 

roughly 33,500 oil and gas wells. It is the combined 

technologies of horizontal drilling and fracking that have 

unlocked the energy riches of the renowned Bakken in 

southeast Saskatchewan — a formation that otherwise 

would have gone largely undeveloped. 

 

Bakken is now recognized as one of the largest remaining 

conventional oil pools in North America. Technologies 

such as fracking are important to the future growth and 

development of Saskatchewan’s oil and gas sector, which 

currently accounts for about 20 per cent of provincial 

gross domestic product and provides jobs for more than 

32,000 people. 

 

. . . No fresh water can be used in the process in 

Saskatchewan without receiving appropriate approvals 

from provincial water agencies. 

 

Once a fracking operation is complete, the residual fluids 

that typically are 99 per cent water and sand, are recycled, 

disposed of at provincially approved waste processing 

facilities, or stored deep below surface. In all cases, strict 

environmental criteria must be met. Any discharge or 

storage of used fluids into the surface environment is 

strictly prohibited in Saskatchewan. 

 

Overseeing industry practices such as fracking is a shared 

responsibility that includes the Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority, Occupational Health and Safety, the 

Environment Ministry, the Saskatchewan Water Corp., 

and the Ministry of Energy and Resources. 

 

Various provincial regulations are in place to ensure 

fracking is done safely. The Oil and Gas Conservation Act 

and Regulations (Ministry of Energy and Resources) are a 

prime example. In addition, there are 

industry-recommended practices in common use to ensure 

safe, responsible development — for example, the 

recently released environmental reporting guidelines from 

the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. 

 

Fracking has been safely applied in oil and gas operations 

in Saskatchewan for decades. 

 

The comprehensive regulatory system we have in place 

ensures that the practice helps us continue to realize 

significant economic benefits from our oil and gas 

industry while we maximize environmental protection. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, hydraulic fracturing in Saskatchewan, as I 

just said, has been going on for many, many, many years. And 

this is very important to the economy in Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:15] 

 

In 2012 capital investments were $4.7 billion in Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, this puts a lot of people to work. It puts 

Saskatchewan on the map in not just North America, but it puts 

Saskatchewan on the map in the world stage. Actually there 

were 34,100 direct and indirect person-years of employment in 

the upstream oil and gas industry. Mr. Speaker, these are people 

that are living, working in Saskatchewan. This is how come 

Saskatchewan has gained 100,000 people in the last six years. 

Mr. Speaker, $12.6 billion combined value of oil and gas sales 

estimated for 2012. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying before, there’s a lot of hype. 

There’s some movies out there. There’s David Suzukis out 

there who want to sit there and criticize and talk about how 

fracking is destroying water; it’s destroying drinking water. Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you, there has not been one documented 

case, not one documented case in all of Canada as to where 

fracking has caused polluted water and polluted drinking water. 

 

You have to realize, Mr. Speaker, that when they put the well, 

first they have the surface casing which goes down well below 

the water depth, the normal aquifers that people would use, and 

that is all cemented in. Then you have the intermediate casing 

that is put down to a far greater depth, and that is cemented in. 

And then you finally have the production casing, Mr. Speaker, 

that basically goes to the base of the well, and that is all 

cemented in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do not, we do not have a problem with 

fracking causing problems with our drinking water. However 

we have the fearmongers going out there and, you know, we 

have the David Suzukis of the world going out there and 

saying, oh, this is a terrible thing, and this is going to destroy, 

this is going to destroy all the water. It just isn’t true and it isn’t 

possible. 

 

Of course David Suzuki likes to say we should all be saving the 

environment. We are working on saving the environment. But 

we also have to look at the economy of Saskatchewan. We have 

to look at the economy of Canada and how we’re moving 

forward, and oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, are not going to 

disappear in the very near future. The fact is, I don’t know if 

it’s going to disappear for years to come. 

 

Now the likes of David Suzuki sit there and say, well we have 

to be more energy efficient . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Suzuki . . . I 

. . . you know. He has five children, I will admit, but does he 

have to have four houses? Does he have to jet all over? What 

does he think that those jets run on? They run on kerosene. This 

is stuff that is made from oil, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I agree we can use alternate sources of energy, but it’s just 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3913 

oil and gas are the ones that we have to use at the present time. 

Mr. Suzuki always likes to drive his nice big bus around too 

and go telling all the people about all the problems of oil. Now 

that bus runs on diesel fuel, Mr. Speaker, another derivative of 

oil and gas. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to give credit where credit is due to 

the NDP when they changed the royalty structure to make 

Saskatchewan into this economic powerhouse in Canada back 

in, that was back in 2002. And, Mr. Speaker, like I said, I’ll 

give credit where credit is due. And actually this is a quote from 

our former premier, Mr. Calvert, and he said, “We are 

committed to fiscal changes which will grow the Saskatchewan 

economy and make us the most competitive jurisdiction in 

Canada.” And I also want to give credit to the present Leader of 

the NDP for supporting the XL pipeline, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is a little catch with the NDP. And I 

have to bring this up too because what are they going to do with 

their federal cousins, Mr. Speaker? Now the federal NDP 

leader, Thomas Mulcair, attacked Canada’s resource sector by 

saying, and I’m quoting, “It’s by definition the Dutch disease.” 

Mr. Speaker, how is it that the NDP does not want to see, the 

federal NDP does not want to see this province move forward? 

 

Now are the NDP, our provincial NDP, are they going to go 

along with their cousins over there down east? Are they going 

to be all of a sudden maybe changing their tune on how things 

go? Maybe. Maybe there’s a hidden agenda here. Maybe what 

they’re doing is saying, yes, we want the XL pipeline so we can 

give more money to Mr. Thomas Mulcair of the federal NDP. 

You know, you’ve got to sit there and kind of wonder on some 

of these things as they go on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s go back to their leadership convention, which was just 

held here a little while ago. And you know, Mr. Speaker, the 

. . . And I realize he didn’t become leader, but Erin Weir made 

it quite clear that the provincial NDP believe the cure of the 

Dutch disease is saying, and I quote, “Saskatchewan is well 

positioned to help implement and benefit from this approach by 

raising provincial resource royalties.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a good thing. This will drive business 

out of our province, Mr. Speaker. You know, the provincial 

NDP when they ran in 2011, they endorsed that cure, and they 

campaigned on raising royalty rates. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 

the people of Saskatchewan knew much better than that because 

obviously when we take a look at the House, we have the 

nimble nine over there, and the rest of us over here. Mr. 

Speaker, that made a big difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s the other catch. They had a little bit of a 

love-in here a while ago, actually it was September the 10th 

when the federal NDP caucus held their caucus meeting here in 

Saskatchewan. And the present NDP leader was over, needless 

to say, was over there, and they were enjoying all these various 

little things. But you know, one thing we never did hear out of 

that? We never did hear our provincial NDP leader stand up to 

the federal NDP leader and say, this money is for 

Saskatchewan. This is Saskatchewan’s money and I’m going to 

stand behind Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we never heard 

anything of that. 

 

Another one, Mr. Speaker, of the federal NDP, and this is what 

worries me a lot. The federal NDP House Leader, Nathan 

Cullen, you know, Mr. Speaker, he reaffirmed the NDP’s desire 

of implementing a carbon tax, stating that he’s, and I’m going 

to quote here, ‘“more of a cap-and-trade kind of guy,’ but that 

it’s important to put a price on carbon.” Mr. Speaker, this is 

worrisome. This is worrisome to Saskatchewan. This is 

worrisome to our way of being, to our growing of this province. 

 

And I can remember fondly of Mr. Calvert when he said, the 

one quote he said, “We will always be a wee province, in and 

out of the equalization.” Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to be in and 

out of equalization again. I want to be on the good side, on the 

upside all the time, and this is not a wee province anymore. 

 

As I said before, initially, we have grown by 100,000 people, 

and that is a very important fact, Mr. Speaker, because of our 

oil and gas and because of our fracking, which is as safe as safe 

can be. As I have stated previously, there has never been a 

tainted water supply documented in all of Canada, let alone 

Saskatchewan who has very strict environment regulations. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to pass . . . or I would 

like to put forward this motion: 

 

That this Assembly supports the continued use of fracking 

(or hydraulic fracturing) in the Saskatchewan energy 

sector. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Carrot 

River Valley: 

 

That this Assembly supports the continued use of fracking 

(or hydraulic fracturing) in the Saskatchewan energy 

sector. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to enter into this debate on fracking. Of course it is an 

important one. And it’s interesting we talk about these issues 

that are clearly so important to the economy of Saskatchewan 

and the energy sector, which we know is a major, major driver 

of the economy in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I appreciate the comments that the member had made 

earlier about the work around royalties and the good work that 

the former Premier Calvert did around that, recognizing that we 

have to use the resources that we have in this province to make 

sure we get out of being a have-not province and become a 

have province that we truly should be. 

 

And we have the resources to do that. We truly do have the 

resources to do that. And he was quoting from an article. And 

I’ve read the article, and I found it a very informative article, 

talking about the history of hydraulic fracking in Saskatchewan 

over the past 50 years and the relative safety of it and the work 

that we’ve done to make sure it is safe. And so in preparing for 

this debate, I do want to review some of the comments that 

have been made about this. 



3914 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

But I do want to say that one thing about the energy sector and 

people in the mining sector, in large I can say business or 

entrepreneurial sector — I would say it in the education and 

health, right across the board — we have people who, in this 

province, who are clear innovators, who see the challenges that 

lay before them and say, we can do this better. We can do this 

better. And there’s a lot of reasons why they say that, a lot of 

reasons. And one of it is profit. If you can do it more cheaply 

and more effectively, the bottom line improves. And that’s a 

good thing. 

 

But also I know in this sector, the energy sector, there is a lot of 

pressure to improve because of the issues around the 

environment. And I do want to talk a little bit about what 

CAPP, the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, have 

released in terms of making sure that they’re environmentally 

responsible. 

 

Now the member before had talked about David Suzuki and 

some of the fearmongers. I don’t want to use that kind of 

language. I think what we need to do is think about having a 

responsible way, a sustainable way of making sure we make 

full use of our resources in this province. 

 

And I just want to quote . . . I wasn’t here for the speech, but I 

was interested in hearing the Minister of Environment’s 

comments about the Environmental Code that he’s about to 

release in the next few weeks. And I think this is going to be 

very interesting, and I am really looking forward to it. I know 

they’ve been working on this for several years, and I think that 

we’re anxious to see it. 

 

I do want to say, what’s interesting about the work that the 

Ministry of Environment has been doing, we have not heard 

nearly the concerns, the clamour from different stakeholders 

like we have in labour, particularly last year when Bill 85 was 

introduced, people talking about, whoa, why are we going so 

fast? I see Environment taking a much more responsible 

approach to it. We have not heard the same level of concerns. 

We’ve not seen the letters in the newspaper that we did around 

the Environmental Code that we did around the new 

employment code. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And I wonder, why does this government have two ways of 

approaching issues that drive our economy to such an extent? 

We know the workers here . . . You know, when we left the 

have-not status of the past, it was because of the good work the 

people who work in this province do to drive the economy.  

 

We also used the resources. And that also, to a huge extent — 

whether it was potash, oil, uranium, natural gas — that drove us 

out of that have-not status. And we’re really glad to see that. 

 

But I want to just quote from the member from Silver Springs, 

Saskatoon, the Minister of Environment. And he said: 

 

We don’t see it as black and white, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 

mutually exclusive. We can’t have one without the other. 

We want to respect the environment, and we want to 

ensure that industries and businesses will provide jobs and 

economic stability for our province. 

So he’s recognizing that we can both have environmental 

protection in Saskatchewan and a strong economic growth. And 

we think that can happen in oil and gas as well. And we look at 

the strong drivers of innovation that we have in oil and gas, 

particularly when it comes to fracking and doing it in the right 

way so we don’t have catastrophes. And so I think it’s going to 

be interesting to hear what the Minister of Environment puts 

before us. 

 

So he says, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, this is from November 

4th: 

 

. . . another area that we’re leading the way in is the 

Environmental Code. It’s something that we’re going to 

be introducing in the legislature very quickly. The code is 

being developed as a collaborative and a consensus model. 

It’s based on an unprecedented level of stakeholder 

involvement and leadership. We are working with 

industry, and we are working with environmentalists — 

those that value the environment — to come together with 

a creative, innovative, results-based regulation that allow 

for greater flexibility for industry while requiring very 

high environmental standards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if this is the case, this is going to be good work — if this is 

the case. So we’re looking forward to it. And we think maybe 

we should be having this debate today after seeing the 

Environmental Code, but I know sometimes that timing can’t 

quite work out. But we want to see that this happens, that you 

can have economic development and environmental 

sustainability at the same time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you would have remembered we had a green 

strategy that we were trying to release before the election in 

2007 that really built on that. And I’m really hoping that that 

continues on with this. 

 

And I just want to quote from the Petroleum Services 

Association of Canada when they released their hydraulic 

fracturing code of conduct for the Canadian oil and gas sector. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this was released October 30th, 2013. So 

that is just about, just eight days ago, just before Halloween, 

October 30th, 2013. So they have a code of conduct for industry 

when it comes to using fracturing, a fracturing code of conduct. 

But what he says, and I think this important, and I quote . . . 

This is Mark Salkeld, president and CEO of PSAC [Petroleum 

Services Association of Canada]. He says: 

 

Working closely with stakeholders is critical to building 

trust in oil and gas operations. We’ve seen public concern 

surrounding hydraulic fracturing operations increase over 

the past years. 

 

It was definitely time to address that in a proactive and 

positive way, but we knew talking to community members 

wasn’t going to be enough. We had to act. That’s why we 

created the hydraulic fracturing code . . .” 

 

And so industry is being proactive and understanding that there 

is concerns, you know, in the public. When you see things that 

happen like we’ve seen . . . Because we’re so busy doing work, 

we’re seeing different things that happen to cause people to 

have concerns. We saw this summer the horrific train accident 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3915 

in Mégantic, and we’re understanding now that part of it might 

be related to the contents of the oil, what was in the oil when it 

was being brought up, the fracturing contents. So you 

understand where people are getting the concern. 

 

So I really appreciate it when the organizations like PSAC here 

can take a proactive lead and say, we’re going to take . . . We’re 

going to get in front of this. We’re going to acknowledge that 

people have concerns. They have concerns, but we’re very 

proud of the work that we’ve done and the work we’re going to 

do. And they’re going to do it even better, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think this is really, really important. 

 

And so some of the things that they’re going to do better. And I 

just, I see I’m running out of time. And this is the guiding 

principles for hydraulic fracturing from CAPP: 

 

3. We will support the development of fracturing . . . 

additives with the least environmental risks. 

 

4. We will support the disclosure of fracturing fluid 

additives. 

 

5. We will continue to advance, collaborate on and 

communicate technologies and best practices that reduce 

the potential environmental risks of hydraulic fracturing. 

 

So I think these folks are on the right track. This is good stuff. 

So we have a record that we can be proud of in Saskatchewan 

when it comes to hydraulic fracturing. We feel that’s an 

important piece of work. The member has talked about the 

number of people working in it. We think that’s a good thing, 

but we want to talk more about the environmental codes to 

make sure we can continue with this. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

join in on the debate on fracking or hydraulic fracturing, as it 

may be called in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, contrary to many 

media reports, hydraulic fracturing is not a drilling process. 

Hydraulic fracturing is used after the drilled hole is completed. 

 

Put simply, hydraulic fracturing is the use of fluid and material 

to create or restore small fractures in a formation in order to 

stimulate production from new and existing oil and gas wells. 

This creates paths that increase the rate at which fluids can be 

produced from the reservoir formations, in some cases by many 

hundreds of per cent. 

 

The process includes steps to protect water supplies, to ensure 

that neither the fluid that will eventually be pumped through the 

well nor the oil or gas that will eventually be collected enters 

the water supply. Steel surface or intermediate casings are 

inserted into the well to depths of between 1,000 and 4,000 feet. 

The space between these casings — strings, as it is known — 

and the drilled hole wellbore, called the annulus, is filled with 

cement. Once the cement has set, then the drilling continues 

from the bottom of the surface to the intermediate cemented 

steel casing to the net depth. 

 

The process is repeated using smaller steel casing each time 

until the oil/gas bearing reservoir is reached, generally around 

6,000 to 10,000 feet. With these and other precautions taken, 

high volumes of fracturing fluids are pumped deep into the well 

at pressures sufficient to create or restore the small fractures in 

the reservoir rock needed to make production possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote parts of a study and a 

StarPhoenix report that Kent Campbell, deputy minister of 

Energy and Resources did in February of 2012. He states: 

 

. . . Multi-stage fracking is used in our province only on 

horizontal wells to produce oil from a number of 

important formations, including the Bakken, Shaunavon 

and Viking. 

 

While use of this technology has increased, it has been 

applied safely in Saskatchewan for more than 50 years on 

roughly . . . [40,000] oil and gas wells. It is the combined 

technologies of horizontal drilling and fracking that have 

unlocked the energy riches of the renowned Bakken in 

southeast Saskatchewan — a formation that otherwise 

would have gone largely undeveloped. 

 

Bakken is now recognized as one of the largest remaining 

conventional oil pools in North America. Technologies 

such as fracking are important to the future growth and 

development of Saskatchewan’s oil and gas sector, which 

currently accounts for about 20 per cent of provincial 

gross domestic product and provides jobs for more than 

. . . [34,000] people. 

 

. . . [Mr. Speaker] No fresh water can be used in the 

process in Saskatchewan without receiving appropriate 

approvals from provincial water agencies. 

 

Once a fracking operation is complete, the residual fuels 

that typically are 99 per cent water and sand, are recycled, 

disposed of at provincially . . . [owned] waste processing 

facilities, or stored deep below the surface. In all cases, 

strict environmental criteria must be met. Any discharge 

or storage of . . . fluids into the surface environment is 

strictly prohibited in Saskatchewan. 

 

[Mr. Speaker] Overseeing industry practices such as 

fracking is a shared responsibility that includes the 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, Occupational Health 

and Safety, the Environment Ministry, the Saskatchewan 

Water Corp., and the Ministry of Energy and Resources. 

 

Various provincial regulations are in place to ensure 

fracking is done safely. The Oil and Gas Conservation Act 

and Regulations, (Ministry of Energy and Resources) are a 

prime example. In addition, there are 

industry-recommended practices in common use to ensure 

safe, responsible development — for example, the 

recently released environmental reporting guidelines from 

the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. 

 

Fracking has been safely applied in oil and gas operations 

in Saskatchewan for decades. 

 

The comprehensive regulatory system we have in place 

ensures that the practice helps us continue to realize 



3916 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

significant economic benefits from our oil and gas 

industry while we maximize environmental protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan takes its 

responsibility to protect the environment and public very 

seriously. High environmental standards are maintained for all 

energy resource development projects. Mr. Speaker, the 

Ministry of the Economy legislative authority pertains to the 

regulating, the operation of oil and gas industries so that it does 

not contaminate the existing groundwater or surface water 

reservoirs during the drilling or production from oil and gas 

wells. Saskatchewan has had strong regulations and guidelines 

in place for decades pertaining to the proper design of wells that 

provide protection for groundwater and aquifers for all 

operations including hydraulic fracturing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the use of hydraulic fracturing has revolutionized 

Saskatchewan’s oil fields. Oil trapped in the Bakken reservoirs 

was not recoverable in significant volumes and produced by 

conventional means. Bakken production had dwindled to a few 

hundred barrels a day as recently as 2001. With new 

innovations such as improved horizontal drilling, multi-stage 

fracking, CO2 enhancement recovery, and a wealth of new 

equipment, production from Saskatchewan’s portion of the 

Bakken has expanded to over 69,000 barrels a day. The same 

new technologies that have opened up the Bakken have also 

been applied to other tight oil formations in our province such 

as the Lower Shaunavon and Viking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just now move to speak a little bit about 

what the effects of the energy sector has done to the Cut 

Knife-Turtleford constituency. Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk 

about the federal leader, Thomas Mulcair, and how he attacked 

Canada’s resource sector by saying, “It’s by definition Dutch 

disease.” Quoted from a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] radio article, May 5th, 2012. I can see I’m going 

to run out of time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to try and explain what this disease has 

done to the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency. While 

agriculture is still a very important economic driver in the 

constituency, the energy sector has just simply backstopped 

everything. There are good-paying jobs locally now for farm 

families that can work at and not leave the family farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many farmers and ranchers not only receive 

monies from oil and gas leases. Many do custom work such as 

snow clearing, towing, weed control, trucking, etc. Mr. 

Speaker, rural municipalities partner with oil and gas 

companies all the time. This enables the municipalities to 

upgrade roads with the assistance and sometimes contractor 

assistance also. 

 

The resource sector adds significantly to the tax base of 

municipalities, along with load haul agreements which enables 

municipalities to upgrade their infrastructure. It gives 

municipalities the opportunities to be more diverse with 

business opportunities, acreage developments, and basically 

more stability. Mr. Speaker, in the constituency, we have 

approximately 120 oil-related businesses throughout the 

constituency, a significant employer and is as strong as ever. 

 

[11:45] 

Mr. Speaker, towns and villages have seen unprecedented 

growth in jobs and business opportunities. Many communities 

have seen new homes being built, new industrial buildings to 

house oil- and gas-related equipment. Vac trucks, flush-bys, 

service rigs, welding rigs, graders, gravel trucks are 

everywhere. The spinoffs are in every municipality — new tire 

shops, restaurants, grocery stores, and so on — and every one 

of these businesses needs employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the energy sector’s strength, 

companies are giving back to their communities by way of 

hockey rinks, curling rinks, sports grounds, and so on. One is 

the new business plan for Altex at Lashburn, where the RM of 

Wilton and Altex and CN [Canadian National] have come 

together. And in that loading dock operation, CN has donated 

$300,000 to the town of Lashburn to retire the mortgage on 

their rink, Altex has donated $50,000 to remodel the kitchen at 

the community hall, and the RM of Wilton has donated 

hundreds of thousands of dollars towards the infrastructure of 

Lashburn and Marshall, I may say. 

 

Oh, oh, here we go. Our plan for growth is working just as laid 

out in the Speech from the Throne. I look forward to a plan of 

any kind from the members opposite. And this disease, as Mr. 

Mulcair says, we welcome it in Cut Knife-Turtleford. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased to enter into the debate. And I want for the record, 

Mr. Speaker, to send over to all the members from across the 

way that spoke about fracking and how they’re trying to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that the NDP are against development 

and against responsible development of all the resource sector, 

Mr. Speaker, this is an article from a year and a half ago, 

Friday, February 10th, 2012, in which the article by Kent 

Campbell of The StarPhoenix says, and I quote the top 

headline, being, “50 years of safe fracking in Sask,” Mr. 

Speaker. So for the record I want to share that with all the 

speakers. 

 

So the motion that they’re bringing forward today, Mr. Speaker, 

is only attempting, on their part, to suggest that the NDP are 

against fracking and that the NDP are against responsible 

resource development, Mr. Speaker. That could be the furthest 

thing from the truth, Mr. Speaker. For the last 50 years, Mr. 

Speaker, for the last 50 years, we have worked very closely 

with the industry, very closely with many environmental 

groups, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that resource development 

has to be sustainable. It’s got to be economically aware of some 

of the challenges attached to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the last things that people of Saskatchewan need 

and industry needs is silly political games by that Saskatchewan 

Party government trying to point the fact that the NDP are 

against development, responsible resource development. Mr. 

Speaker, not true. The NDP have been doing this for years and 

years. As long as it’s done responsibly, Mr. Speaker . . . And 

this article done a year ago will prove to the Saskatchewan 

Party that your cheap political ploy, as a result of today’s 

motion, is going to fall on deaf ears. 

 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3917 

And from the NDP’s perspective, we would say to them, we 

don’t listen to anything in terms of advice from that particular 

party, Mr. Speaker. And this fracking motion is silly political 

games on their part, and shame on the Saskatchewan Party for 

trying to play that silly political game at the expense of a very 

exciting industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I want to point out is the article, and I’ll ask one of 

the Pages to bring me . . . to share the article with some of the 

speakers. And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, this is an article 

that came a couple of days ago, and I quote, “Broten criticizes 

Wall over environment.” Now the reason why our leader 

criticized the Saskatchewan Premier is because the 

Saskatchewan Premier goes to Washington and tells 

Washington and the people in the industry there that yes, we 

have to do a better job when it comes to environmental 

safeguard . . . or safeguarding our environment overall. Got to 

have a little bit more elbow room, I think was the phrase that 

the Premier used. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, from the perspective of the NDP, it’s 

absolutely crucial that we have that balance in between 

responsible resource development and making sure that the 

environmental aspect is a big part of that, Mr. Speaker, that the 

environmental aspect is a big part of it. And also that we make 

sure we derive as many benefits as we can, for not only jobs, 

but to make sure that the industry stays here for many, many 

years and to make sure that it’s a huge benefit to the people 

overall, Mr. Speaker. There are so many components when you 

look at how you do responsible resource development that a 

government has to get it right. 

 

And when I see as an MLA here in the Assembly, when I see 

irresponsible positions put forward by the member from Carrot 

River, at probably the request and support of their House 

Leader saying, oh what’s fracking all about? Do you guys 

support it or not? Let us be absolutely clear. As the article says, 

50 years of fracking has been going on in Saskatchewan. So 

what is the motion about today? Silly political games. Let me 

say it again — 50 years of fracking. 

 

So when the Premier goes to Washington and says we need a 

bit more elbow room on the environmental front, he needs to 

back up his talk, Mr. Speaker. He has to make sure that there is 

action, that there is action in Saskatchewan to convince our 

customer, who are the Americans, that we’re doing things 

responsibly, that we’re doing things responsibly, Mr. Speaker. 

He has to improve the image of Saskatchewan in the sense of 

saying to the American people, we do have clean energy. We 

do have responsible industry. We do have forward thinkers in 

our province that’s going to make sure that any development 

we have is going to be responsible. It’s going to be done for the 

benefit of Saskatchewan people, and it’s going to be to ensure 

that the customer is satisfied that the product we send them has 

got all the aspects covered, including the stewardship of the 

environment, which is really important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the Premier needs to walk the talk. You don’t go there and 

do it a spin in the PR [public relations] and sound good. We’ve 

got to back it up with actions, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got to do it 

with solid actions, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why today, today 

we see the activity of this particular government, Mr. Speaker, 

(a) bringing forward silly little motions like this to waste the 

time of the Assembly for their own political ploy, their political 

gain, Mr. Speaker, is a waste of this Legislative Assembly’s 

time, Mr. Speaker. We should be looking at ways in how we 

could responsibly look at the environmental stewardship that is 

required by the American partners, by our American customers, 

by the industry. 

 

Now I look for leadership on this front, Mr. Speaker. I see 

more, more leadership from the corporations that are doing 

exactly some of this work, Mr. Speaker. I see more responsible 

actions by CAPP to address the fracking issues than by this 

entire government, Mr. Speaker. They are the ones that know 

that the customer has to have the assurance that fracking is done 

responsibly, that fracking is done ethically, and that fracking, 

the way we do fracking in Saskatchewan, that the world can see 

how Saskatchewan does it. 

 

So for the last 50 years we have been doing fracking. You 

know, news flash to the Saskatchewan Party: fracking has been 

going on for the last 50 years. And of the last 50 years, Mr. 

Speaker, how many years were the NDP in power in those 50 

years? A great number of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And today, today responsible resource development is really 

helping out the Saskatchewan Party. All those billions of 

dollars that are going into the provincial coffers, Mr. Speaker, 

they simply inherited. And I’ll say one thing to the right wing 

party called the Saskatchewan Party. I’ll say one thing to that 

party, Mr. Speaker: that you inherited a booming economy, 

money in the bank, a growing population, and you’re still 

making a huge amount of mistakes when it comes to our 

teachers, to working with our families, to working with the 

Aboriginal people, to working with the North, to working with 

a number of sectors, Mr. Speaker. You’re still making a lot of 

mistakes. 

 

Now what is beyond me is that there’s no, there is no province, 

there’s no province in the history of Canada that received so 

much as a new government. Everything was gift-wrapped and 

handed to the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely 

everything was gift-wrapped and handed to the Saskatchewan 

Party. And all we asked, all we asked, all we asked is don’t 

mess it up. 

 

So don’t bring those silly little motions here in the Assembly 

talking about fracking because it’s just a total waste of our time 

in this Assembly. We should be talking about conservation 

efforts. If you want to prove to the Americans that we’re good 

business people, let the industry lead that, Mr. Speaker. If you 

want to prove to the Americans that we’re good, responsible 

stewards of our environment, then bring forward green energy 

plans. Look at the retrofits of homes, Mr. Speaker. Start doing 

some exciting, innovative things instead of going to Ottawa and 

saying, well we need more . . . or to Washington to tell the 

people, well we need more elbow room. 

 

We need to back up our words with solid action, Mr. Speaker. 

We don’t need spin PR, and we certainly don’t need a headline 

saying we should develop more elbow room when it comes to 

the environment. We need solid action, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 

not getting any of that action from this Premier or that 

government when it comes to responsible resource 

development, Mr. Speaker. 



3918 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

So I say again today, I’m very proud to be part of the debate 

here today to talk about responsible resource development. And 

there’s four things that people ought to know. Number one, 

we’re wasting our time with motions of this sort brought 

forward by the member from Carrot River, supported by the 

House Leader from Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, when it’s a 

total waste of time. Fifty years fracking has been going on in 

Saskatchewan. The industry has been leading the file on 

fracking. NDP supported the fracking as long as it’s done 

responsibly. 

 

We brought resource development into this province. We’ve 

done a great job of rebuilding the tattered, the tattered financial 

woes of our province left by the Conservatives in the early ’90s, 

Mr. Speaker. We fixed all that. It took us time to fix it. And 

what really upsets the right wingers over there, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s all the great, all the great opportunity we have in 

Saskatchewan, all the abilities we have as a province today, all 

the wealth we have as a province today, all the growing 

population, the investment, the opportunity we have in 

Saskatchewan today, what really upsets the right wingers over 

there, Mr. Speaker, is that they didn’t create that. They simply 

inherited that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So once again, stop playing these silly games. Fracking has 

been going on 50 years. And be thankful you had an NDP 

government to bring this province out of despair and bring it 

into the opportunity we see today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I’m proud to stand up and take part in the debate on 

fracking. I’m not too sure what my hon. colleague from 

Athabasca talked about for 10 minutes but I’m going to talk 

about fracking and the role it plays in our economy and how the 

oil and gas industry plays a large part, a large role in our 

economy. 

 

I don’t think this is a silly motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think 

it’s an important role. It plays a huge role in our economy. 

Thirty-four thousand people are employed in our province 

today because of the oil and gas industry, Mr. Speaker, so I 

think to belittle a motion that talks about that industry and say 

it’s a silly motion is not proper; it’s not right. And I think the 

people that belong to CAPP, I’m not sure they’d appreciate the 

Athabasca MLA insinuating that he knows what CAPP’s 

thinking. I’ve had a few meetings with CAPP but I haven’t seen 

him at very many of them. And I’ve talked to a few of their 

association members and I’m not sure he’d be quoting them 

correctly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into the meat of my story, I just want 

to talk about fracking for a bit. And I know there’s a lot of 

misconceptions out there about what exactly hydraulic 

fracturing is, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a type of fracture 

treatment that will use low concentrations, between three and 

twelve additive chemicals. 

 

It’s not a huge chemical process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s 

about 99.3 per cent of the solution used in fracking is water and 

sand, Mr. Speaker. And they have to use these for a few 

reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And a few things that they add, 

the additives are called friction reducers. These friction 

reducers allow fraction fluids and sands or other materials 

called proponents to be pumped to target zones at a higher rate 

and reduced pressure than if it was water alone were used. In 

addition to friction reducers there’s a few other additives, some 

biocides to prevent micro-organism growth and to reduce 

biofuel fouling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hydrofracking is used, as my colleagues have said, 

is used to open up, pumped into rocks to open up holes so that 

the oil can be recovered through those holes. And the sand is 

used to keep those holes open so that it is allowed to flow 

through and the oil can be produced in the well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting environmental conversation we 

have when we have a former environmental minister across the 

way talking about fracturing, and it’s been going on for 50 

years. And he’s right, Mr. Speaker. Fracking in Saskatchewan 

has been going on for 50 years. And actually he doesn’t have to 

send over the article. I read it as well, from our deputy minister 

of the Economy, Mr. Speaker. And he said fracking has been 

going on in Saskatchewan; it has a 50-year history of safe use 

and one of the most robust regulatory regimes in place to ensure 

responsible and sustainable development. 

 

[12:00] 

 

I listened to a couple of speeches, the speech from the member 

from Saskatoon Centre, and he’s right. We do agree on some 

things. We agree on a smart, responsible development. And I 

think we share those goals. And I think the most important 

thing is to have a plan with smart, sensible, sustainable 

development. 

 

And on this side we do have a plan, Mr. Speaker. We have a 

plan on environmental targets. We have a plan on some smart 

development to ensure that the oil and gas industry can 

continue to grow, can continue to produce jobs, produce 

economic spinoffs, Mr. Speaker, so that the people of 

Saskatchewan who own the resources that we’re talking about 

right now, Mr. Speaker, so the people of Saskatchewan can get 

the full benefit from the resources that we’ve been blessed with 

in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I hear the members across the 

way, especially the member from Athabasca when he gets all 

wound up and they pull a string and let him go, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s interesting to hear about, the conservatives on this side 

don’t like it that the NDP created all this economic glory in 

Saskatchewan. But he misses a couple of things that I think are 

pretty important, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One would be that we 

lived in Saskatchewan under the NDP reign of 16 years, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think our memories are okay. I don’t remember 

birds singing and halos and angels singing on high for 16 years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I do remember every one of my friends graduating from high 

school in Swift Current leaving the province in 2000, which I 

think would be under their reign, Mr. Speaker. And I remember 

our population declined in ’99, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 

2005, 2006. I think that was probably at our lowest population 

in a few decades, Mr. Speaker. And I think people do still vote 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3919 

with their feet, and if people keep leaving their province . . . Yet 

on one history from the member from Athabasca, it’s the 

greatest time in Saskatchewan’s history. It’s the greatest time in 

Saskatchewan’s history. Why would all of our young people 

continue to leave? Which begged the question they should 

maybe ask themselves sometime when they look in the mirror. 

 

We are great. We formed this province. We were able to make 

a solid foundation. The economy was strong. Everyone was 

loving it. But people were still leaving, which should be a 

question they should probably ask themselves every now and 

then. And I think, and I think, I’m not sure, but eventually 

you’re going to have to go through a policy review. I know the 

leader doesn’t want to release his election platform today or 

tomorrow, which I totally understand, but at some point in time, 

they will have to put some policies on their website. And I 

think some of them should be around their environmental 

record, that they actually have a record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there is a couple of former Environment ministers over 

there, and I think the Environment critic should have a 

conversation with them because they always talk about our 

environmental record and what our environmental policy is. But 

they had some of their own which were interesting. And one 

was, over their 16 years, greenhouse gas emissions increased 

nearly 70 per cent. So that’s not good, Mr. Speaker. . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . No, I said nearly 70 per cent. So 

they have their member from Athabasca come over the boards 

and talk about our environmental record, yet their record isn’t 

very good, Mr. Speaker. And I think he may have even been the 

minister back then when they had such a horrendous 

environmental record when it comes in regards to greenhouse 

gas emissions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously when we come and talk about hydraulic 

fracturing in the oil and gas sector, there’s some things we like 

to mention around the environment. And, Mr. Speaker, one is 

we’re proud of our environmental record. We’re going forward 

with the carbon capture sequestration that they put on hold the 

last couple of years of their government, Mr. Speaker. And 

everything they talk about is their green strategy and their go 

green initiative, or whatever they called it. They set up this 

whole emission strategy and didn’t fund it. There was no 

funding there. As the members . . . They had a lot of 

announcements. And I know how they liked to say, we had 

flashy brochures with all of our announcements. But they didn’t 

even have a flashy brochure because they didn’t fund anything, 

so they couldn’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when they start talking about our environmental record . . . 

It’s always interesting that before you talk about someone else’s 

record, you should be sure you have a leg to stand on when 

you’re talking. Because with their record, Mr. Speaker, I think 

if you take it to the people of Saskatchewan and say, you know, 

do you want to look at what we’ve done or what the NDP say 

they’re going to do. Because I think sometimes when they say 

they’re going to do something, they have a history of really not 

following through, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And that’s one of the things that people enjoy about our 

government. And when we go door knocking in the 

constituencies and say, you know, these are some of our plans 

we have going forward and a policy plan — which people like 

to see, a plan moving forward, Mr. Speaker, like a plan for 

growth — I think they say, hey well they have a plan and 

they’re going to tell us some of the things they’re going to do. 

And I think we can believe them, Mr. Speaker, because they’ve 

done what they said they’re going to do. 

 

And I really do think that sometimes when you get to go door 

knocking and every now and then people bring up some of the 

opposition’s critiques — which is fair, because I enjoy talking 

with all constituents across Saskatchewan, not only in Regina, 

but all over the place, Mr. Speaker — and they say, well you 

guys have a plan for some of your critiques. And I said well 

that’s what governments do, Mr. Speaker. You get a plan in 

place and say, this is what we’re going to do if we have the 

privilege to govern again. And so I said, well we do have a plan 

in place, and you know, we’re not perfect and there is more 

work to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But on that same note, I have to say — and I think it’s fair — 

you say, well obviously some of the people that critique us 

may, may support the NDP. I think that’s a fair assessment 

from across the way. I say, well what are your guys’ plans? 

 

When you get going into a policy debate, Mr. Speaker, it’s very 

hard to debate policy with an opponent that has no policies. So, 

Mr. Speaker, when you go back and forth and you’re trying to 

have a lively debate about things like fracking, like hydraulic 

fracking, having a debate about fracking, having a debate about 

the environment — which this involves environmental debate, 

Mr. Speaker, obviously — if you’re going to have those 

debates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how do you do that when there’s 

nothing on the other side? 

 

And then when you try and debate the other side and you talk 

about their record, their record when they were in government 

for 16 years, you say, well you had the go green initiative or the 

green strategy but no money. Your greenhouse gas emissions 

went up nearly 70 per cent when you were in government. Oh 

no, you can’t talk about that because they’re going to do better. 

Well if you’re going to do better, you have to have goals and 

targets, which they don’t like to set either, as we know that 

because sometimes if you set a goal, if you don’t make it, it’s 

kind of a tough, tough sell, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think sometimes when we get involved in these good 

policy debates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very hard to be 

in a policy debate if their side doesn’t have a plan. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to rise to 

speak about this topic and about the plans that New Democrats 

have had for Saskatchewan for many years. And what I want to 

say right off the top is that the Saskatchewan New Democrats, 

the governments over the years, have shown consistently that 

they’ve been very supportive of the extraction of oil and gas in 

this province, and they want to do it in an environmentally 

appropriate way using the best technology that we can do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what’s very interesting about this particular 

discussion being raised by the members opposite is that in some 

ways what has happened in the oil and gas industry is that the 



3920 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

leaders in the industry have said to the Premier and to the 

present government, just stick with what the New Democrats 

put in place because it’s gotten us to a very good place in 

Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to hydraulic fracturing to 

enhance oil recovery, this has been a really important part. I 

was sitting around the cabinet table in 1997 and ’98 when we 

were having discussions about how we could provide economic 

incentives to encourage this kind of horizontal drilling and 

hydraulic fracturing in some of the new, some of the old beds, 

but also some of the new areas of oil in southeast 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we had some very capable advice from 

many people within the civil service, but we also had some very 

clear proposals from industry about how to do this. But 

ultimately it came down for all of us to basically say, we are 

going to do something which hasn’t quite been done before, but 

we need to do it in a way which makes sure that the people of 

Saskatchewan benefit, but also that those people who are 

risking their capital doing this work are going to benefit. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I would say that some of those decisions made at 

that time have shown in the last 15 years a very important 

aspect of development of the whole Williston Basin area.  

 

Now what’s also interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that during the 90s 

there was a group called the horizontal drilling group. And it 

was a technical sharing group between Saskatchewan and North 

Dakota primarily. So the meeting would flip from Bismarck to 

Regina and back and forth each year. In 2001 they changed the 

name from the horizontal drilling conference to the horizontal 

drilling and petroleum conference. And it’s out of that 

particular conference and the work that was done by some very 

smart people both on both sides of the Canada-US [United 

States] border that our oil industry and North Dakota’s 

especially has really benefited. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s specifically related to a smart growth 

plan — and I use that term very directly — that we said we 

want to have the best science, we want to have the best 

engineering to make sure that we can extract petroleum and gas 

from the structures that are part of the province of 

Saskatchewan and use them for the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And what we knew at that time was that this was some risky 

propositions, and so therefore the risk had to be shared both on 

the taxation side and on the capital investment side by the 

industry. And, Mr. Speaker, what we have now today in 

Saskatchewan and North Dakota and parts of Montana, but 

especially in Saskatchewan and North Dakota, is a huge 

economic activity around this whole area. 

 

And I’m very pleased to say, over the years the Canadian 

Association of Petroleum Producers have been partners in that 

project, they have worked very carefully and long at making 

sure that the industry is using the latest science and technology. 

And obviously they recognize many of the concerns that have 

come up. 

 

Ultimately the question is about water. It’s about how we use 

our water in this province. And as we’ve seen over the years, 

the amount of water has decreased in use and also is being 

reused and reused and reused so that you don’t end up with 

huge amounts. And I think it’s very clear from the deputy 

minister in the government, Mr. Campbell, who’s presented 

some information, that that’s part of the long-term policy. And I 

know Mr. Campbell worked very carefully in this area when he 

was working in the New Democratic Party government years as 

well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this has been an interesting week because 

the members opposite in all of their notes that they had from the 

central command, if we can call it that, on the other side, kept 

going after that term, smart growth. But on Monday night we 

had a reception with the Prairie Agricultural Machinery 

Institute, and the people there made a point of saying, this place 

is 38 years old. It was developed by Premier Blakeney in the 

NDP government during the ’70s. And it continued, developed, 

and in 2000 if you looked at their charts, you could see that 

smart growth meant that they could go and expand that 

institution to provide services outside of the agriculture 

industry. And, Mr. Speaker, we praise that because that’s the 

kind of smart growth. 

 

Then on Tuesday night we met with the Canadian Light Source 

synchrotron people and they identified that this was part of the 

smart growth plan of the Romanow and Calvert government. 

And we made sure, even in years of tight money, to make sure 

that that particular project was part of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the same kinds of clear thinking and direct 

use of best-evidence science, technology, engineering is also 

what’s present in the use of hydraulic fracturing as the latest 

method to extract oil and gas. And we will not stand second to 

anything that they say because we know, and they know, that 

they’re just building on the things that have been developed in 

this province. 

 

And I guess what I would say is, let’s make some choices that 

benefit our children, our grandchildren, and future generations 

around how we do these things. And that’s what we’re talking 

about — smart growth. And we raise that point because we see 

a number of choices that are being made by this government, 

whether it comes to use of P3s and basically sending debt out to 

future generations or other kinds of choices like that, that are 

not of benefit for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

[12:15] 

 

We know that we’re going to have a continued discussion about 

oil and gas and the revenues from oil and gas and from uranium 

and from other resources in the province because they’re 

one-time resources. And we can no longer, in Saskatchewan, 

say that we’re just going to spend the money as it comes from 

extracting all these resources, because there is a finite point 

where that revenue is coming. And part of the political 

discussion in Saskatchewan that this motion raises, that this 

discussion raises is, what are the choices that we’re going to 

make about how we finance the things that people need in the 

province, and how we do it in a way that’s accountable, above 

board, that’s transparent, and how we do it in a way that 

recognizes we are the trustees. This generation is the trustees 

for future generations of how we use our resources. 

 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3921 

And, Mr. Speaker, using the best science, using the best 

technology, the best engineering that’s possible has allowed us 

to gain access to a resource which for many decades we thought 

was not able to be extracted. And so we will continue to support 

the industry as they support and work with us, but we will make 

sure we do it in a way that protects the environment and 

protects future generations. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the debate has expired. I 

recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to ask the first question here and 

it’s a question I want to ask the member from Nipawin. You 

know, I find this resolution . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Carrot River. My mistake, my mistake. I want to ask him, this 

resolution seems to be a bit of a Trojan Horse. You know, it 

says a lot of things that we have an agreement on, but what 

really lies beneath the resolution? I want to know if he can 

guarantee us, guarantee this House that this government will 

not water down or weaken any regulations when it comes to 

fracking in our province. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — I thank the member for the question. Mr. 

Speaker, this government takes environment very seriously, and 

we believe in doing the best possible job and having the best 

rules put forward as we can possibly have to ensure that we can 

continue on producing our oil and gas in this province in a safe, 

in a very safe manner. 

 

I guess what we are concerned about, we’re concerned about 

the NDP and are they going to support their cousins on their 

so-called Dutch disease and try and send . . . put on a carbon tax 

on our oil and send it back down east to help out their cousins 

in Eastern Canada? Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, technology such as fracking are important to 

the future growth and development of Saskatchewan’s oil and 

gas sector which accounts for about 20 per cent of our 

provincial GDP [gross domestic product] and provides more 

than 35,000 jobs for hard-working people. Fracking has been 

used safely in Saskatchewan for roughly 50 years without a 

single documented case harm to groundwater. Yet the Council 

of Canadians and David Suzuki have been attacking fracking in 

the industry, opposing fracking directly, and calling it unsafe. 

 

To the member from Athabasca: do you disagree with the 

Council of Canadians and David Suzuki who’ve been attacking 

fracking, the oil and gas sector, and the 34,000 people in the 

industry employ? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — What’s really important is that the economy 

of Saskatchewan is strong. The NDP want to continue seeing 

that economy stay strong, Mr. Speaker. We want to continue 

seeing investment in all sectors of our province. Putting that 

investment in every basket, or every egg in that basket, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that from 

our perspective you also have to make sure the people of 

Saskatchewan know that there’s also an environmental balance 

that one must maintain when we look at the development of any 

resource, Mr. Speaker. That’s why, on this side of the 

Assembly, we ask the Saskatchewan Party, why did you cut the 

green budget by 73 per cent? Why did you cut the green vehicle 

rebate and energy efficiency home retrofit program? Why did 

you cut that, Mr. Speaker? Why didn’t you decrease our 

dependence on the non-renewable energies, Mr. Speaker? Why 

didn’t you talk about the green energies, the exciting 

opportunity that young people want to talk about, which is a . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re quite curious why the 

opposition has raised this question here in this debate. Because 

it’s quite clear that New Democratic governments over the 

years have worked very closely with the petroleum industry, the 

oil and gas industry, to develop this. So my question to the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres is, is this a signal that your 

government is intending to water down rules as it relates to 

hydraulic fracturing in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And first and foremost I’d like to say that we’re very proud of 

our environmental record as a government. And our 

government, with the Water Security Agency, conducted a risk 

assessment of fracturing operations, and we’ve done a lot of 

due diligence in making sure that fracking is safe in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of things I’d like to talk 

about right now. For one for this answer is that, Mr. Speaker, 

when a quote from a former leadership candidate for the NDP 

. . . And I quote: 

 

We came out of government for the past 16 years and we 

hadn’t reduced carbon emissions or reduced poverty and 

we’re the socialist party. That’s supposed to be our 

priority and instead emissions and poverty increased. 

 

Former NDP leadership candidate Yens Pedersen. Mr. Speaker, 

when you have a former leadership saying, we failed on all 

fronts as a socialist party, on environment and on poverty, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a failure of 16 years. And that’s why we’re on 

this side and they’re on that side. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — [Inaudible] . . . revitalization of several oil 

fields in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, including the Bakken, the 

Shaunavon, and the Viking Formations. Mr. Speaker, the 



3922 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

technology is fuelling a large part of Saskatchewan’s economic 

successes. Indeed the economy is strong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the member from Athabasca: does he agree that fracking is 

crucial and a crucial . . . important to the oil and gas industry in 

Saskatchewan and therefore our economy, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, fracking has been a part of our 

history. As we mentioned today, 50 years of fracking. The 

industry knows what they’re doing when it comes to fracking. 

It’s got to be responsible. So the answer to the question, 

fracking is going to be a big part of our future as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And any threat to the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, this opposition will stand up to that threat and we’ll 

continue building that brave, bold, new Saskatchewan that we 

talk about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And once again I would remind those members, all the good 

news that you inherited — the booming economy, growing 

population, record money — please don’t mess it up. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

government seems only focused on the non-renewable 

resources, and we can tell that from the debate today. And of 

course we value the 34,000 jobs it creates, but we have to think 

about expanding into other areas in our economy. And so I have 

a question for Cut Knife-Turtleford: why won’t this 

government take steps to really diversify this economy? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member for the 

question. Anyway it just seems a little silly that he would ask 

that question. However there’s more people working in 

Saskatchewan now than there ever has been. 

 

And also in reference to the member from Athabasca about 

fracturing being 50 years or whatever, the difference is nobody 

came here to use it. We’re using it now. We’re producing more 

oil and gas than we ever have. That’s the difference. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

from Saskatoon Centre in his address mentioned the reference 

to the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. Last year, 

Mr. Speaker, Thomas Mulcair said that CAPP was “pulling a 

con job” in regards to hydraulic fracturing. Does that member 

agree with his federal leader? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to see the quote that he’s 

referencing. I can tell you that I have worked with CAPP as a 

former minister of Environment and had a good relationship. 

When we were in government we had a great working 

relationship with CAPP. So I look at the principles and I think 

that they’re strong and there’s something we can work with. 

 

But the question we really have is, why have we not seen the 

Environmental Code from this government yet? The minister 

talked about this a couple of days ago. We need to see this 

before we really start talking about whether we can accept the 

guarantees about watering down or strengthening the 

regulations around fracturing. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 

simple question for the member from Regina Walsh Acres. Last 

week the Premier came back from visiting in Washington, DC 

[District of Columbia], and basically he said that what he had 

done down there was talk about environmental issues. But then 

he pivoted; he talked about the word pivot. So do you agree that 

it appears that the Premier of our province has two different 

positions when it comes to the environment? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no problem to 

stand up and talk about our government’s position on anything, 

because we have policy, Mr. Speaker. And we have policies in 

environment and we have policies in energy resources and we 

have policies going forward. We have a 2020 plan for growth, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re looking five, ten years into the future. And, 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the opposition, you can’t see a 

policy for tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 605 — The Public-Private Partnerships 

Transparency and Accountability Act 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to move second reading this afternoon and to speak to 

Bill 605, An Act respecting the Transparency and 
Accountability of Public-Private Partnerships, a private 

members’ bill that I’ve brought forward, that we’ve brought 

forward as a New Democratic Party opposition. 

 

We do so with respect to Saskatchewan people who go at 

looking at the issues before them in a very common sense sort 

of a way, and we do so knowing that Saskatchewan people 

deserve nothing short of all of the facts. And that’s what the 

aim of this legislation intends to provide. This legislation is 

necessitated by a new penchant of this government to push 

forward with private P3 schools in Saskatchewan — something 

that they never articulated or discussed in the last election, Mr. 

Speaker, and something that has significant consequences to 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3923 

both the treasury of this province, to generations moving 

forward, and certainly to the schools within this province. 

 

And when we’re talking about infrastructure in this province, 

we need to always look at it from a perspective of bringing 

forward plans that are as effective as they can be, as affordable 

as they can be, and we have to understand what they mean to 

communities. 

 

And when we look at schools, Mr. Speaker, we need to 

understand that schools are the heart of a community, or the 

hub of a community. They’re where families and people 

connect. They are places that allow a community to come 

together. And a school isn’t simply a place that’s 9 to 5. It’s a 

place that, you know, is operational in bringing together 

community from their earliest moments in a morning to the 

latest hours in the evening and all through the weekends, all 

through the summers, Mr. Speaker. And we need to make sure 

that the schools that we’re building reflect the unique and 

distinct needs of communities across Saskatchewan. 

 

So it’s with that context — a government that’s stubbornly 

pushing forward with a P3 agenda that they have popped on 

Saskatchewan people without any proper consultation — that 

we need to make sure that the proper transparency and 

accountability of that plan is in place. 

 

We know the concerns around P3 schools and P3s for 

infrastructure around P3 schools. We learned from the 

experiences of other jurisdictions where they’ve cost 

significantly more, costing taxpayers for generations, tying the 

hands of taxpayers for generation, Mr. Speaker, where we see 

the circumstance where they’ve denied or caused communities 

to forfeit access to those schools, control of those schools, and 

influence of those schools. Or the fact that we know we need 

the schools that we’re calling for here today not to be delayed. 

And we know that the complex process of establishing P3s, 

often with private sector international consortias, is a slow and 

delayed process, and we need to have shovels in the ground as 

soon as possible. 

 

We also need to recognize some of the concerns that relate to 

local economic impact, understanding the valuable role of 

Saskatchewan companies in our economy, Saskatchewan 

construction companies who have worked incredibly hard to 

deliver the infrastructure that we need in this province. And 

they deserve to be a part of the infrastructure build as we move 

forward, and recognizing that in many experiences of bundled 

P3 builds, that that economic activity has bypassed the local 

contractors. 

 

So it`s through some of these lenses that we have concern in a 

common sense way to the P3 agenda of this government. And 

it`s through that lens in hearing the concerns of Saskatchewan 

people that we bring forward a piece of legislation that aims to 

bring deserved accountability and transparency to the plan 

that`s being pushed forward in a rather stubborn way by their 

government. 

 

[12:30] 

 

The bill itself is really straightforward. It`s all about ensuring 

that there`s some truly independent, upfront analysis, 

evaluation, and then public reporting to Saskatchewan people, 

and ensuring that all the costs — the full costs, the full life 

cycle costs — are captured within that analysis. It also calls on 

government to ensure that there`s work done to analyze the 

local economic impact. What`s the impact on jobs? What’s the 

impact on Saskatchewan companies who have worked here for 

decades, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So this bill in itself is just simply allowing Saskatchewan 

people to have all the facts on the table and causing the 

Saskatchewan government to have all of the facts on the table, 

to allow both the government and Saskatchewan people to look 

at what’s being pushed for with their eyes wide open, with all 

of the consequences laid out and with all the facts understood. 

It’s a bill to improve transparency and accountability of a 

process that to date has been secret, Mr. Speaker, and making 

sure that Saskatchewan people have access to the information 

that they deserve. 

 

The value in making sure that this is done upfront is of course 

straightforward, and common sense is that we need schools. We 

need to get shovels in the ground. And we need to make sure 

that we get that analysis done upfront so that when all of the 

true costs, all of the consequences, all of the impacts are laid 

out to Saskatchewan people, if government listens and chooses 

the appropriate course forward — which would be a more 

traditional build process — that we’re not delaying the process 

of getting those shovels in the ground, and that government 

provides Saskatchewan people that view of all of the 

information, all of the impacts, all the consequences before they 

enter into deals that lock future generations in for the long term, 

these deals in most cases lasting 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is a bill, I guess, in support of no secret deals. It’s a bill 

that ensures that the upfront analysis and accountability will 

occur and that it will occur in an independent way. And 

independent is another important piece of this bill. The 

government opposite suggests that at some point in time they’re 

going to start to detail their purported savings and claims in 

numbers. They haven’t done so yet. In fact it seems that when 

the minister and the government has been speaking about its 

projections, it seems to be off sort of almost a napkin-type 

approach to planning with no evidence of any detailed analysis 

to support or to substantiate some of the claims that government 

has been boasting. 

 

So what we need to have in place is something that’s truly 

independent that reports back to the public and independent of 

government, which is why what we’ve put forward would be 

appointed by a committee of the legislature in a unanimous 

fashion, respectful of all sides of the Assembly and not simply 

an appointment of Executive Council or of government, for 

government to set parameters, for government to set terms of 

reference, for government to receive the information, and for 

government to pick and choose what it’s going to share with the 

public. That’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when it relates to the schools of our children, when it relates 

to the dollars of taxpayers, Saskatchewan people deserve better 

than a government that’s simply going to bull forward, to push 

forward without ensuring they have the answers and facts that 

they deserve. And quite frankly there shouldn’t be public 

expenditure of this sort, locking into long-term secret deals 



3924 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

without full disclosure of the facts, full understanding of the 

consequences, and done so in an independent way. 

 

Right now we have a government that’s simply making claims. 

And in many cases where we’ve heard the minister who’s been 

responsible for the file . . . And I find it interesting in some 

ways that it’s the Minister of Highways that’s responsible for 

the schools that our province needs. But the Minister of 

Highways has been making all sorts of claims, Mr. Speaker. He 

was on CBC radio this week making suggestions that facts just 

simply don’t support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so what we’re calling for is some straight talk and all the 

evidence and to learn from the experiences of other 

jurisdictions. And when we think of other jurisdictions, Mr. 

Speaker, we of course can think of what’s gone on in Nova 

Scotia where the P3 school plan turned into be one of the 

biggest boondoggles of taxpayers’ dollars in the history of 

Canada in many ways. 

 

And what we learned when we read the auditor’s reports, the 

independent provincial auditor of Nova Scotia’s reports that 

followed on the heels of the private P3 plan at the time it was a 

Liberal government, I understand, that put this plan forward, 

and this plan went off the rails. It ended up not delivering what 

government was pretending or claiming or boasting that it was 

going to provide. And there were many issues. One of the 

issues that’s certainly paramount and one of the issues that’s 

likely the biggest part of our concern is the massive cost of P3s 

as opposed to the more efficient, more affordable traditional 

approach. 

 

And what the provincial auditor found in Nova Scotia, Mr. 

Speaker, is that actually when the Conservative government 

that replaced the Liberal government came in and scrapped the 

P3 plan — the costly plan, the plan that was off the rails, the 

plan that never delivered what government was promising — 

when they scrapped that plan, the auditor found that the savings 

were actually $2 million per school, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well $2 million is not small. It is not insignificant. And those 

are $2 million that were going to expensive private sector 

consortias and structures as opposed to going directly into the 

classroom where they count, where they make a difference, or 

for building more schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we can’t afford those sort of overruns here in 

Saskatchewan. We realize that we need to handle the resources 

of Saskatchewan people, the dollars of taxpayers in the most 

effective way possible. And quite simply, if we’re choosing a 

route as government’s pushing forward, a more expensive 

route, a private route to build our schools, those dollars that are 

flowing into those private sector schemes and structures and 

consortias are dollars that aren’t going to where they count and 

where they matter in the classroom. And this is a government of 

course that has a failed agenda on education, a government that 

has a poor track record on supporting the learning of students in 

this province. And so those resources certainly could be much 

better used hitting the front lines where they count in the 

classroom. 

 

But it wasn’t just Nova Scotia in Canada that’s had bad 

experiences with this. I know the Highways minister has been 

holding up Alberta as a rosy example of P3s. And it’s, you 

know, it’s past time for that minister to actually clue in with 

what’s going on in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, because the 

circumstance in Alberta is not rosy as he suggests. It’s 

something that has come under great opposition from both, all 

political parties in Alberta, from communities across Alberta, 

from school board members, and from the Alberta school 

boards themself, recognizing big challenges. 

 

So in Nova Scotia you saw the massive cost overruns, the more 

expensive schools costing more than $2 million per school. But 

when we look in Alberta, their example’s been different. Of 

course it’s early to assess any purported or claimed savings that 

government may be suggesting there. I know that those 

purported savings are being investigated right now by the 

provincial auditor in Alberta, and that’ll be interesting to see 

what that report is. 

 

And it’s also interesting when the Highways minister gets up 

and points to Alberta and suggests that there were savings in 

one of the bundles. Of course that same bundle is now being 

evaluated and investigated by the provincial auditor. And I 

understand that any value-for-money analysis, if it did go on, 

hasn’t been shared with the provincial auditor which is certainly 

less than transparent and accountable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I understand as well is that bundle itself, or a set of 

schools that were stripped down and bare bones and didn’t 

provide communities what they needed. And we have heard the 

outcry from communities as it related to those schools that were 

brought forward and how bare bones, how simple those schools 

were, and how they simply didn’t meet the needs of 

communities. So it’s rather interesting that the Highways 

minister —again I find it strange that it’s the Highways minister 

talking to this instead of the Education minister — but the 

Highways minister that’s holding that up as some sort of 

shining example. 

 

So when we look at Alberta, certainly there’s big questions 

around cost. And we know the experience in Nova Scotia where 

they cost more than $2 million per school. We know in Alberta 

that there’s been big access issues or issues as it relates to the 

needs of communities. And we know that there were 

circumstances where portables weren’t able to be added on to 

schools, where child care facilities weren’t allowed to be a part 

of the privately maintained and owned and operated school, or 

where extracurricular and community activities were prevented 

from occurring. 

 

Well you know, we’re building schools not simply for the work 

during the school day. We’re building a school for a 

community. And that school needs to be the hub and the heart 

of a community, a place that brings together community, young 

and old, and families from across a community. And certainly 

in the case of Alberta, the lack of access, the control issues, the 

lack of influence of communities is disturbing and something 

that we should be heeding as a significant concern here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We also recognize the lack of competition currently going on in 

Alberta. And this is happening right now as this government’s 

pushing forward in a stubborn way, not looking at the facts with 

their own plan. We look at the lack of competition, and right 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3925 

now there’s a tender that was put out or RFP [request for 

proposal] that was placed out and there was only one bidder, 

one private sector consortia that was bidding on this. And this 

has been identified as a massive challenge for ensuring value 

for money for taxpayers. You can understand why. How do you 

gain proper value when there’s no competition to the bidding 

process? That’s happening right now. 

 

And so you see the disarray then that’s occurring in Alberta 

where officials and boards and communities are scrambling to 

piece together a plan that’s going to work because it seems to 

be identified in a united fashion in Alberta that that is not 

acceptable, that one bid doesn’t cut it. And we should be 

mindful in learning from that example, not as we see the 

government where they’re sticking their head in the sand on 

this front and not looking at the facts or realities that are going 

on. 

 

We also know in Alberta that the school boards themselves 

have spoken out in a significant way, saying that certainly it’s 

their view that they would value publicly-owned, operated 

schools into the future and not the privately schemed structures 

that have been put together by government. 

 

So as it relates to the legislation, of course I’ve spoken about 

the upfront analysis that needs to occur — the value-for-money 

analysis, the full understanding of the cost of credit both public 

and private, the full understanding of all life cycle costs, 

understanding of nominal costs, not simply assuming discount 

rates that allow government to support their agenda — making 

sure all the facts are on the table. 

 

And we also have built into that legislation a few other 

safeguards. If government continues to push forward with that 

P3 agenda following the upfront and independent analysis and 

with all the facts and consequences and impacts on the table, 

we have a process to properly oversee and monitor and provide 

accountability in the life and throughout the life of a P3. We 

also have a piece of that legislation that would not allow a 

government to move forward with a P3 if they didn’t have less 

than three bidders out of an RFP process. And that’s only 

reasonable, and I know Saskatchewan taxpayers value ensuring 

that there’s a competitive process to get value for their tax 

dollar, and certainly this government should be expecting 

nothing less. 

 

Now we haven’t heard officially from this government whether 

or not they’ll be supportive of the legislation that we’ve put 

forward. I’m hopeful that there’s some consideration from . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, the Premier says no, which is 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, okay. I apologize. I didn’t 

mean to put the . . . He was saying no to something else there. 

 

What we are hopeful of is they are considered, for them to be 

considered in taking a look at this legislation because this 

legislation itself is about ensuring some needed accountability 

to Saskatchewan people, some transparency. And a vote against 

this legislation would be rather strange of a government. In 

essence it would be a vote in support of secret deals. It would 

be a vote in support of less transparency. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And you know, government stands up and boasts and makes 

claims about their P3 school plan, but I guess the ultimate test 

would be some of that independent analysis. So I guess I would 

simply say to government, if they’re feeling so solid with the 

plan that they’ve put together — we certainly haven’t heard that 

plan articulated in any level of detail to date — but if they have 

confidence in that plan, then they should have no fear, no fear 

whatsoever in putting it before an independent evaluation, 

before a very basic test and having some public reporting on 

that front before it proceeds, locking Saskatchewan people into 

long, long-term deals, well over 30 years. 

 

Of course there’s many aspects that end up making P3 

structures cost more. One of the most direct and common sense 

ones is the high interest scheme that are brought in from the 

private sector partners to deliver the infrastructure that we need. 

And quite simply the finance rate, the borrowing rates of the 

private sector are much higher than that of government, and 

those costs are ultimately borne back to the taxpayer. And this 

isn’t, you know . . . Government sometimes suggests that its P3 

school plan is some sort of a gift from the private sector. Of 

course it’s certainly not that. It’s a contract with the private 

sector. 

 

And you know, at the end of the day, I remember the comments 

from the Nova Scotia Finance minister, the Conservative 

Finance minister who was involved when they scrapped the 

expensive and train wreck of a program that the P3 school plan 

was in Nova Scotia, saving them $2 million per school. What 

he described was this was simply a way for government as well 

to not own up to its full liabilities, to not own up to its debt, and 

explained very clearly and correctly that debt is debt is debt. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, and I know Saskatchewan people, 

whether they’re in a business, a farm, or their home, they 

understand that if you’re tying the hands of your treasury for 

30-year periods, long-term agreements, long-term capital lease 

agreements, these are liabilities. These are debts ultimately on 

the books of the province. And so whether you have 4 or 5 or 

$600 million owed to a private sector consortia, with a higher 

interest scheme built into it, or whether you have a more 

traditional representation of that liability on your books, I go 

back to debt is debt is debt. 

 

And we do know that this government likes to play fast and 

loose with the reporting of our finances. We do know that this 

government fails to comply with public sector accounting 

standards. We do know this government is unwilling to provide 

Saskatchewan people full transparency on the state of their 

finances. And so certainly it’s concerning to see a government 

pushing forward in an approach that in most other jurisdictions 

when government has it’s been identified very clearly as a way 

to not fully portray the state of debt or of finances. And we 

know the Provincial Auditor has weighed in on this in a way 

that says that that government is both misleading and wrong in 

how they account for our province’s finances and that they’re 

hiding billions of dollars of debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what Saskatchewan people deserve is to have a full 

understanding of the true, full state of our finances. And they 

also deserve to understand the state of our debt, Mr. Speaker. 

So that’s important. 

 



3926 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2013 

Because Alberta’s been held up as such a shining example, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s important that what government pretends is 

P3 success, it’s important to maybe just touch on a few of the 

issues that are going on there. I know that we spoke already, or 

I spoke already, a bit about the lack of P3 bidders in Alberta. 

There’s an article from the Calgary Herald dated October 28th, 

2013, titled “Lack of P3 bidders could delay 19 new schools.” 

Delay 19 new schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what we don’t need in this province is further delays. Let’s 

be frank. This government’s been late coming to the scene to 

address the schools that we need. That this announcement to get 

shovels into the ground is late, Mr. Speaker. And that this New 

Democratic Party opposition has been repeated and strong in 

our calls to build the schools that we need. What we don’t need 

is delays as we’re seeing in Alberta. We need to learn from the 

experience next door. And it’s disappointing that this 

government’s choosing to stick its head in the sand instead.  

 

Just a comment from the Liberal education critic, Kent Hehr, in 

Alberta. He says, “The only good thing about P3s is that it’s a 

way for governments to hide debt.” Well I don’t agree with his 

statement because I can’t see that being a good thing at all, but 

certainly it is a way for a government to try to manipulate the 

books and to hide debt. And Saskatchewan people of course are 

brighter than that. They’re more common sense than that. They 

see through those sort of schemes and ploys of government. 

 

We also recognize from that article that when the Highways 

minister gets up and makes his confident claims about 

purported savings next door, that in fact it’s being . . . it’s just 

that. It’s just that. It’s just purported savings. And I quote from 

this article: 

 

. . . the province’s financial watchdog noted with caution 

that the government had not retained the documents it 

used to estimate maintenance prices over the contract nor 

had it validated its estimate of cost overrun . . . if it built 

and operated the schools itself. 

 

So the provincial auditor has said that they basically didn’t have 

the information that they needed to validate the assertions of 

that government around purported savings. We know the 

realities in jurisdictions that are more mature into this process is 

that the P3s cost far more. So I think we should be heeding 

caution from that sort of statement from the provincial auditor 

in Alberta who now is, I understand, investigating and going to 

be bringing forward a full review and report in February of this 

year, the actual costs of P3s in Alberta. 

 

Another article from Alberta quoting the . . . From right across 

the political spectrum there’s concern, Mr. Speaker. I quote, 

“Wildrose urges Tories to pay cash for new schools as P3 plans 

falter.” And I go on with that article. This is from the Calgary 

Herald on October 29th, so just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker. 

These are recent examples that this government should be 

listening to: “The Wildrose opposition is calling on the 

province to scrap its private financing plans and instead pay 

cash to construct much-needed schools.” 

 

And then it goes on to talk about the only one consortia, one 

private-sector consortia that’s bidding on those projects. And it 

says that the “infrastructure critic is worried taxpayers will be 

fleeced,” Mr. Speaker. That’s strong words. 

 

I quote further: 

 

“If we have a sole-source contract for schools, I hate to 

think what we would end up paying,” Drew Barnes said.  

 

“Where’s the competitiveness for taxpayers and where’s 

the results for kids who need these facilities?” 

 

The concerns are many from across Alberta. They’re noted by 

the provincial auditor. They’re noted by school boards. They’re 

noted by community leaders. 

 

As I quote from that same report here, “Alberta’s auditor 

general is currently investigating whether the P3 schools offer 

value for money to taxpayers.” We know already from the 

report I read before, the statement I read in, that the auditor was 

denied any value-for-money or analysis and they needed 

documents to support any sort of claims of that government. 

 

But when we’re looking at all of this, we know the experience 

of Nova Scotia. We know the experience in the United 

Kingdom, Mr. Speaker. We know the experience of P3s costing 

far more to taxpayers. 

 

One other quote here from this one is, “People do not want to 

saddle their kids and grandkids with debt.” And when we’re 

going into building the schools that we need, we need to be 

doing so in a way that makes the most sense. And that’s where 

we come at this issue of P3s. We know we need schools. We 

know that the public sector can build those schools more 

affordably. We know that they can get shovels in the ground 

faster by tendering out to the private sector to get those schools 

built and that those schools should be owned and operated by 

the public sector. 

 

And you know, this isn’t . . . You know, it’s interesting as well. 

This isn’t just any infrastructure. I mean these are important . . . 

The analysis of this legislation is important for infrastructure 

decisions of this province, but we need to take it, you know, 

with . . . even to understand that schools are something unique 

and schools are something different, and looking at what they 

mean to a community, being the heart of the community. 

 

I think of the Premier who is talking about the grade 6 — I like 

the story — the grade 6 tuba player in Swift Current who had 

an influence on the music room within the new school that was 

being built. That’s the kind of community input and influence 

that builds a school that’s of pride and purpose for a 

community. All that will be lost when you bundle, bulk-buy, 

and put together these cookie-cutter schools where we see in 

Alberta clearly didn’t meet the needs of communities. So I 

think he should be listening to his own considerations there. 

 

I think of in Regina here where you have an award-winning 

design of Arcola School, where you have P3A Architecture, a 

firm here in Regina that worked directly with the community, 

that built a community that reflected needs, that reflected 

visioning, and that reflected a community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a school then that a community can be 

proud of. And I recognize that that architecture firm, a local 



November 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3927 

architecture firm, was recently awarded and recognized for their 

ability to work with community to build infrastructure. That a 

school that community and kids are proud and excited about, 

that’s all lost when you bulk-buy this cookie-cutter, bare-bones 

approach to schools. And certainly there’s distinct differences 

in communities across this province, and the ability for a 

community to have input, influence that design, is important. 

Just as it’s important, as I say, that we understand the 

consequences of pushing out the construction industry in 

Saskatchewan or pushing out the design industry in 

Saskatchewan, which is a direct consequence of this P3 school 

approach being put forward by this government. 

 

So it’s past time that this government start listening to the 

leaders within our province in education, looking to the 

experience of other jurisdictions, that they understand the 

impact on Saskatchewan companies in construction, in design, 

that they understand the loss of control and influence of 

building schools that we’re proud of, that serve communities 

for generations forward. And it’s past time that this government 

continue to push forward in a stubborn approach without 

providing Saskatchewan people the details of their P3 private 

plan, and that they allow some daylight to be shone upon that 

plan. 

 

You know, and I look to members opposite and, you know, the 

Highways minister, he jumps up, makes claims, goes on CBC 

and makes statements that aren’t held up by the facts and 

realities in other jurisdictions. But I say to that government, if 

they have such confidence in the plan that they put together, in 

the full value-for-money costing that should have occurred, in 

the full business case analysis, in the full understanding of the 

long-term costs of these agreements, the private sector 

borrowing, the local economic impact, Mr. Speaker, and the 

nominal and real costs of these agreements, then they should 

have no issue supporting what’s a very common sense and 

constructive piece of legislation that Saskatchewan people are 

calling for. 

 

And we’re hopeful that in the days to come . . . And I’m 

pleased to meet with and talk to whoever on the other side of 

the Assembly, with government, to speak about the legislation. 

But we’ll be looking for their support. And as I say, to not 

support legislation or the principles of this legislation, and to 

move a piece of legislation to ensure upfront, independent 

evaluation, analysis, and reporting, would be to deny 

Saskatchewan people with the transparency that they deserve. 

 

We’ve had some local columnists weigh in as well, Mr. 

Speaker, on this debate. And I know that one being Murray 

Mandryk, I quote: 

 

Notwithstanding a couple of hindrances in the NDP’s bill 

that the government could easily . . . tweak or eliminate, 

why would anyone oppose made-in-Saskatchewan 

legislation to govern P3 use and ensure . . . 

[Saskatchewan] is getting . . . the best value for money? 

 

We’re ready to work with government. We’re ready to be 

constructive. We’re ready to sit down. And if they have any 

specific concern with the legislation, we’ll be ready to hear it. If 

we need to accept some friendly amendments, we’ll be 

potentially ready to do that as long as the principle and integrity 

of the process in the bill is kept intact. I know that there’s been 

concerns relayed from our business columnist Bruce Johnstone 

who’s simply suggesting that this shouldn’t be a simple 

discussion and that there’s a broader understanding that’s 

important to doing so. And then I notice as well that there’s just 

so many voices from school board members and community 

leaders in Alberta that are very recent. And I have quote after 

quote after quote of those individuals who are standing up and 

speaking out and calling for a better way forward, one that 

doesn’t tie their hands with the private P3 school schemes that 

they have been pushing forward. 

 

So it’s time for us to learn from other experiences. It’s time to 

build the schools that Saskatchewan people deserve. And we 

believe that this legislation assists us to do so. We call on 

government to support this legislation. 

 

But at this point in time, I would now move second reading of 

Bill No. 605, transparency and accountability of private, 

public-private partnerships Act. And I’d like to thank you, Mr. 

Speaker, for allowing me the opportunity to enter the discussion 

here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Rosemont that Bill No. 605, The Public-Private Partnerships 

Transparency and Accountability Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Which committee? Help me out here 

folks . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry. Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

It now being after the hour of 1 o’clock, this House stands 

adjourned to 1:30 p.m. Tuesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3899 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3899 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3900 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3900 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3900 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3900 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3900 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3900 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3901 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3901 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3901 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3901 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3901 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering Roy Antal 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3902 

Thanking Those Who Serve and Have Served 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3902 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3902 

 New Relationship Between Municipalities 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3902 

 Change of Command at “F” Division 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3903 

 Agribition 2013 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3903 

 Policies and Plans 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3903 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Special Care Conditions 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3904 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3904 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3905 

 Public-Private Partnerships and Provision of Schools 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3905 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3905 

Crop Insurance Claims 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3907 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3907 

Support for Home Ownership in Northern Saskatchewan 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3908 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3908 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Implementation of Traffic Safety Committee Recommendations 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3908 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3909 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3910 

 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3910 

 Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3910 

 Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3910 

 Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3910 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3911 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3911 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3911 

PRIVATE BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 903 — St. Thomas More College Amendment Act, 2013 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3911 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Hydraulic Fracturing in the Saskatchewan Energy Sector 

  Bradshaw ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3911, 3921 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3913, 3921 

  Doke ............................................................................................................................................................................... 3915, 3922 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3916, 3921 

  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3918, 3921 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3919, 3921 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3921 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3921 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3922 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 605 — The Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and Accountability Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3922 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


