




















































Hansard: March 25, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 38B  MONDAY, MARCH 25, 2013, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2893 

 March 25, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume on 

special order. I recognize the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

happy to have a full house back after the supper hour, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m going to continue where I left off, but I think 

there is some more thank yous I’d like to finish off with 

because I got interrupted a bit there at 5 o’clock. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is some people I need to thank, and first 

and foremost would be my constituency assistant, Heather 

Howell-Shiplack. She keeps the office running very well when 

I’m away, Mr. Speaker. And I think very much of the job she’s 

doing and I appreciate the fact that she’s keeping the people in 

the constituency aware of what our government is doing. I 

know that there has been calls about the budget, and people are 

pretty happy with the only balanced budget in Canada. And I 

thank her very much for her job, and we’re going to be able to 

send out some newsletters here in the next couple of days and 

keep the people in Walsh Acres aware of what’s going on here 

in the Legislative Assembly during the session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of people within the community that 

I’ve had some opportunities to build great relationships with — 

some seniors, some young people, first-time homeowners, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to thank all of them for stopping by the 

office and stopping by and really telling me what’s on their 

mind and give me a feel of how they think we’re doing as a 

government and how they think the province is moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to thank the people for 

putting their trust in me and allowing me to stand in my space 

today and give a presentation on the budget 2013. 

 

And right before I get to the budget, Mr. Speaker, once again I 

know that my beautiful wife is watching out there in TV land, 

and I want to say thank you very much. Thank you very much 

for putting up with me. And I know that there’s a lot of time 

pressures in our relationship right now, and I’m going out and 

about in the session, and especially with our baby on the way, 

Mr. Speaker. I just want to say thank you and I really appreciate 

all the time you put in with me, with my job at going to events 

and all the hard work you do here at the building here as well. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Her burdens are heavy. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Her burdens are heavy, as my colleague from 

Greystone just said, but that’s just because she’s seven months 

pregnant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this balanced budget is our sixth consecutive 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. And I want to start by talking 

about some of the investments that we’ve done in the great city 

of Regina, Mr. Speaker. And first and foremost I want to say 

that we’re very proud as Regina MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] to say that we’ve had a strong 

commitment on revenue sharing with the municipalities of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, and it’s gone up to 161 per cent since 

2007-08, Mr. Speaker. And I think the municipality of Regina 

really appreciates that and the fact that they have a revenue 

stream that they can count on year in and year out, and it 

continues to go up, Mr. Speaker. And I know that the 

revenue-sharing agreement we have right now with the city, we 

have a great relationship with the city of Regina and the mayor 

and the council. And we want to thank them for being great 

partners in moving forward some of the infrastructure issues we 

have in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think one of those great projects moving forward is the 

west Regina bypass. It’s something where, for my constituency, 

it’s a thing that’s going to really alleviate some traffic issues in 

the west part of Regina, Mr. Speaker. And we’re very happy 

with the fact that we can look forward to more infrastructure 

investments coming here in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple more things that I think the 

people of Regina Walsh Acres are really going to appreciate. 

And I think one of the best things in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 

is the fact that we’ve had revenue sharing for education . . . no, 

sorry, Mr. Speaker, the education portion of property taxes will 

be remaining revenue neutral. And I think it’s very important 

because this is something that affects people that are on fixed 

income. It affects seniors, Mr. Speaker. It affects first-time 

homeowners. 

 

And I think moving the mill rate from 9 to 5.02 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, is really going to help people be able to manage their 

finances. It’s going to allow them not to have to have the raise 

of education property tax they felt under the previous 

administration. I know that it’s a commitment we made, that 

under our watch, Mr. Speaker, we really didn’t think that we 

would be proud of our record if we’d had tax revolts within 

municipalities across our province. So our main commitment 

was to make sure that we kept taxes manageable, kept them 

low. And I think this budget once again follows through on that 

commitment to ensure that people realize they can have more 

money in their pocket. I know in Saskatchewan the price of 

land assessment has gone up a fair bit, Mr. Speaker, and to 

allow these mill rates to stay revenue neutral was a very firm 

commitment we made, and I think we fulfilled that promise 

once again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a few things I want to talk about. Being 

one of the younger members in caucus, there’s a few things that 

are close to my heart, Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education 

for one. I think the post-secondary education in our province 

over the last five to six years has improved leaps and bounds, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that the fact that we’ve given some, 



2894 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

about 45 per cent more income, 45 per cent more income to 

universities over our first six years in government, Mr. Speaker, 

I think that speaks volumes of what our commitment to 

post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also in this budget very proud to say that 

we’re providing $10 million for a student residence at the 

University of Regina. It’s something where the University of 

Regina has asked for some infusion and capital funding, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think it’s something that really speaks to our 

commitment to post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make some comparing and contrasting 

and comments. Mr. Speaker, I know that we’ve got six years of 

government under our belt now, and the side opposite always 

says, oh well you can’t look back at what we did. That’s not 

fair. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think in any situation where there’s 

two different sides, you’ve got to look at both different sides 

and look at the record of the side that you’re really comparing 

yourself to. 

 

So between 1994 and 2007, tuition increased at the University 

of Regina by 88.6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And we hear some 

rhetoric over there from the member from Rosemont and the 

member from Regina Elphinstone, and they always talk about 

how post-secondary education’s unaffordable under this 

government, Mr. Speaker. Well I think if you compare our 

record to the members opposite when they were in government, 

and a tuition increase of 88.6 per cent, I think that might be 

unreasonable, Mr. Speaker. And I think the commitments they 

made, the commitments they made to post-secondary education 

actually would pale in comparison to the commitments we’ve 

made to post-secondary education. 

 

I know that there’s a couple of years where the members 

opposite maybe forgot about post-secondary education, so I’d 

like to run through their commitments. Some examples of the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] commitments when they were in 

government, Mr. Speaker: 1993-94, minus 1.3 per cent. That’s 

a reduction, Mr. Speaker. 1994-95, minus 4 per cent — that 

would also be less, Mr. Speaker. ’95-96, zero per cent; ’97-98, 

a reduction of point six per cent, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 

that was a good year. Some post-secondary universities would 

consider that a good year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, under our government, the universities of 

Regina and Saskatoon have never experienced a reduction in 

their funding, despite some of the spinning by members 

opposite and some of their rhetoric, I would say, probably 

empty rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. I think that they try and spin some 

examples of how things may be for post-secondary education. 

You say 2.1 per cent; maybe that’s not much. Well I think if 

you’d asked the U of C [University of Calgary] and U of A 

[University of Alberta] if you got a 2.1 per cent increase in 

revenue this year from the government, I think they’d take that 

as a pretty good year, Mr. Speaker, seeing that post-secondary 

education in Alberta took a $170 million hit. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know 2.1 per cent . . . everyone would 

probably like a little bit more funding from a government, but 

you’ve got to remember all of this is within a balanced budget, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that as long as you can keep a budget 

balanced, Mr. Speaker, and fulfill some of the commitments 

you’ve made, people of the province are going to respect what 

you’ve done because you’ve kept your word. You’ve kept a 

balanced budget and you’ve done as much as you can for very 

important ministries, institutions like post-secondary education, 

Mr. Speaker, like education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that the Minister of Education has done a fantastic job 

since he’s become minister. Education is a very important 

portfolio for us. You know, looking into the future, we’re going 

to need about 60,000 more workers by 2020, 2020, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s in our plan for growth, which is our North Star 

which makes us . . . That’s how we make our decision when it 

comes to budget time. 

 

And we have our plan for growth, and that’s what we’re going 

to do moving forward, is continue to look at that plan for 

growth — 1.2 million people by 2020, 60,000 more people 

working in the province by 2020, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 

going to do that through keeping investments in post-secondary 

education and secondary education, Mr. Speaker. And the 

ministers of both those files are doing a fantastic job, and I’d 

just like to give them kudos on a job well done. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, there’s a 

few other things I’d like to get to before my time runs out, Mr. 

Speaker, and one of them is we have some differing opinions, 

Mr. Speaker, on how this side of the House feels about Crown 

corporations and how that side of the House felt about Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker. We understand that infrastructure in 

our province is one of the most important things and if not done 

properly is a barrier to growth, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they 

wouldn’t understand what a barrier to growth was because they 

never experienced growth under their 16 years of reign, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think that they need to take a couple steps back when 

they start talking about Crown corporations and how they have 

really been the backbone of Crown corporations because, you 

know, an example of how you feel, an example of how you feel 

about Crown corporations would be your investments and how 

much money you think you need to invest into those utilities, 

into that infrastructure, into SaskPower, into SaskTel, so that 

people can maintain the services that they think they deserve 

which are high, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, from 2000 to 2007 on average an NDP 

government committed $568 million to Crown corporation 

infrastructure. You know, that might be okay in a province 

that’s bleeding people like never before, Mr. Speaker, where 

you’re losing 35,000 people. Perhaps you don’t have to invest 

in infrastructure as much because, well, with less people 

obviously there’s more there for the rest of us. So they probably 

didn’t have to put in new tie-ins in for utility, probably didn’t 

have to put more power in at rural Saskatchewan because 

people were leaving. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s a different age and 

since we’ve been in government obviously the population has 

grown by . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave to introduce 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2895 

guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tonight I would like 

to introduce someone special to this Chamber. And it’s 

someone that we all share a common bond, and it is our family 

that allows us leave to serve the province. And I’d like to 

introduce Gracie McMillan who is in your . . . Gracie is the 

daughter of Tim McMillan and Ali from . . . the member of 

Lloydminster. And we’re so grateful that Gracie would allow to 

share her father with us in here. Once again I’d like to have 

everyone in this Chamber please welcome Gracie to her 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to say hi to Gracie as well and thank you for coming to our 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to continue on our conversation about 

Crown corporations and the lack of investment that the other 

side put into our Crown corporations over there in their term, 

their 16 years, Mr. Speaker. And maybe it might shed a little bit 

of light on why sometimes we, why sometimes we feel we have 

a little better record when it comes to Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. Well maybe not a little bit; maybe a fair bit better, Mr. 

Speaker, as my hon. colleague from Regina Dewdney would 

say. Mr. Speaker . . . Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so I would like to say that since 2008 to 2012, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve invested on average $1.1 billion into Crown 

corporations, into the infrastructure of our province, into 

SaskPower, down at Boundary dam, Mr. Speaker, into SaskTel 

so we can run high-speed Internet across this province, Mr. 

Speaker. Investments for growth, Mr. Speaker, that’s what it is. 

 

It’s something where, when it comes down to it, it comes down 

to a choice between managing decline and managing growth, 

Mr. Speaker. It comes down to wanting people to come to our 

province, shooing people away from the province, Mr. Speaker. 

It comes down, Mr. Speaker, to wanting our young people to 

stay or having to have our young people go across the country, 

across North America, Mr. Speaker. So that we really need to 

be able to understand why this province is growing at the rate it 

is right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes down to it, our Crowns are very 

important. They are important to us. They are important to 

delivering service. They’re important to delivering power to our 

province. They’re important to deliver the services our people 

need. They’re important for growth for businesses, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think our investments show, pale in comparison, 

show how we really care about moving our province forward. 

 

There’s a couple of things I would like to go through and, you 

know, they talk about Crown dividends. Well fancy that. I 

found some information here when I was researching my 

budget speech. And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to go through a 

couple of years where there is an exponential increase in the 

percentage of money taken from Crown dividends. And 

actually in 2003 there was 89 per cent of dividend earnings 

were taken from Crown corporations — 89 per cent. And I am 

pretty sure we weren’t in power in 2003, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think that might be one of the highest dividends ever taken from 

Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, 2004, 76 per cent of earnings 

were taken from the Crown dividends. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, so when you look at our record versus their record 

and other situations, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s amazing that 

members over there can sit atop their pedestal and preach about 

how the Crowns are so sacred, yet they continued to strip 

money from them to balance their budgets. They refused to 

invest in the infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, because the province 

was in a free-fall decline under their reign. And they wouldn’t 

allow the Crowns to fulfill their mandates because they didn’t 

allow . . . give them enough money to do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when Crown corporations are a topic, Mr. Speaker, 

sometimes maybe the members opposite should take a step 

back, get off their high horse, do a little research into their 

records, Mr. Speaker, and actually see if their investment could 

even come close to matching ours. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of comments about our 

budget that I’d like to go over and some third party 

endorsements, one might say, that I’ve read over the weekend, 

Mr. Speaker. And you know, there’s some post-secondary 

education comments, if I could go back there for one second, 

Mr. Speaker. I know that the post-secondary education file is a 

file very close to my heart. And, Mr. Speaker, the U of R 

[University of Regina] president, Ms. Vianne Timmons, said 

when she looked at our budget, she said, and I quote, “When I 

look across the country, an investment at all in post-secondary 

education is good news.”  

 

You know, sometimes when you look at budgets, you can look 

at budgets in a context of other provincial budgets — ours 

balanced; theirs not, Mr. Speaker — but you can also look, you 

can look at some fantasy wish list that an opposition might 

bring forward. And when you can pick . . . obviously when you 



2896 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

compare something to a wish list, it might be pretty hard to 

compare that. But when you compare a budget, like most 

people do — the budgets in Alberta, budgets in Manitoba — 

you look at investments in education, post-secondary education, 

a vast majority of people are going to look at Saskatchewan and 

say, they made the investments where they’re supposed to make 

the investments. It balanced their budgets and their people are 

going to be better off for it. And they’re on a solid financial 

base, a solid base for moving forward into the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make a couple more comments about 

Ms. Timmons’s comments. She goes, “We’ve been working for 

the last three years on efficiencies and trying to change our 

campus so we were actually very well prepared for a 2.1 per 

cent increase.”  

 

People around the whole province know that, that they’re trying 

to find efficiencies. People are trying to work within a good 

budget, Mr. Speaker, and they appreciate a government’s doing 

the same things. And I think that when people trot out fantasy 

wish list, investments like they trot out in their platform in 

2011, trotted out a platform written by their current leader, 

prepared by Dwain Lingenfelter, Mr. Speaker, and that platform 

called for $5 billion of spending that no one had. The money 

wasn’t there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with the I have a dream platform that they ran on, Mr. 

Speaker, people realized it just wasn’t able to happen. It wasn’t 

able to happen. The money wasn’t there. They were going to 

spend our province into a deficit, put that debt on the backs of 

the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And I really think that 

that’s why the situation’s like it is now, and there’s nine over 

there and 49 over here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that platform, they should maybe just recycle that 

and start over, Mr. Speaker. But I think with the leader they’ve 

got now, you might just continue on that tradition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a few more things I’d like to speak about 

our budget. Some that are . . . another one, talk about some 

health care investments, Mr. Speaker. And I know, working 

with the former MLA from Melfort who’s now not with us 

anymore — we’ve got a great MLA from Melfort now — but 

delivering the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 

program to Saskatchewan a couple years ago was probably one 

of the high points of my career as a researcher in this 

government, Mr. Speaker. It’s a program the helps everyone in 

rural Saskatchewan, helps people when they need it the most, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s an investment that we’re continuing to 

do with a $10.5 million investment into STARS. 

 

And I think it’s a program that we’ve seen we needed, Mr. 

Speaker. STARS based in Regina has made the most trips of 

any STARS base since they opened up, Mr. Speaker: since 

inception I think around 250 trips. And that’s a lot of lives 

being affected right here in our province. And especially in 

rural remote areas, that program some of the people really, 

really were looking forward to. And we’re proud that the 

STARS, based in Saskatoon, is going 24-7 now, and it is saving 

people’s lives. And it’s something that’s a fantastic program, 

and we’re very proud to have in our province right now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

I know that those members over there, when they were in 

government they said it couldn’t be done. It couldn’t be done. It 

will never be done in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

similar to when you set goals, Mr. Speaker. You shouldn’t set 

goals because what happens if you don’t make them. That’s 

kind of the mentality that they’ve had over there for a while, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s what you would say, my colleague from 

East said this is a defeatist attitude. And I think that’s 

something what the people of Saskatchewan just don’t want to 

put up with any more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s a few more. I know that our Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley Regional Health Authority has made some investments 

in the surgical wait time, Mr. Speaker, another $10 million into 

surgical wait time. Mr. Speaker, these are affecting people’s 

lives. It’s letting people get surgical care faster. We’re putting 

the patients first in health care right now, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think initiatives like this are really bringing people’s 

expectations of health services up, and I think that’s a very 

good thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a few more things I’d like to speak about, 

and that would be our investments into student support and 

post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. And one of the best 

things our government has done so far is that we’re able to keep 

people in Saskatchewan, keep our young people in our 

province, is our graduate retention program, Mr. Speaker. Our 

graduate retention program is the most effective, the most 

efficient graduate retention program in the country. Young 

people are coming here in droves, Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud 

to say our government has brought that program in. And right 

now, Mr. Speaker, that program is a $63.9 million touch, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s a value-added proposition that brings people 

to our province and brings talented people to our province and 

adds to our workforce, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, funding to universities, federated and 

affiliated colleges, has gone up 7.7 per cent; funding to 

technical institutes, up 3.6 per cent; funding to regional 

colleges, up 2.6 per cent. Mr. Speaker, this needed to be done 

for our growth plan. Our growth plan says you want to have 

60,000 more people working in our province by 2020. And 

these investments in post-secondary education is adding 300 

positions at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology]. Mr. Speaker, those are investments that are 

going to keep young people in our province, have more people 

working in our province, add more First Nations and Métis 

people to our workforce, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 

commitment that we’ve made, and that’s the commitment that 

we’re proud that we’ve delivered on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, Mr. 

Speaker, is a $4.6 million touch to the budget. Mr. Speaker, we 

fulfilled our commitment on the Saskatchewan advantage grant 

for education savings so parents are able to plan for their 

children’s education. Honestly this is something that is very 

close to my heart. My son, when he’s born, we’re going have to 

obviously start an education savings grant, Mr. Speaker. We 

want to be prepared for wherever that might lead him. 

Hopefully it leads him down a path to a hockey career, but if 

that doesn’t happen, well we’ll have the education savings plan 

as a fallback plan so he can go to university, Mr. Speaker, and 

find a great job in Saskatchewan because it will still be a very 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2897 

prosperous province at that point in time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more things I’d like to talk about, but 

I’m probably going to end off speaking about our budget 

allocation of $6.5 million to the Creative Saskatchewan fund, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s something where the minister 

worked very hard on this file, and he brought in a great program 

that many people across the arts community was very much in 

favour of. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of people over there with the 

negative nine that were probably a little bit upset about this. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the critic, the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, and I quote, said that this “. . . shows that the 

province hasn’t listened to filmmakers.” Mr. Speaker, it said: 

 

. . . there are lots of details that remain to be seen, but in 

general the new fund shows that the province hasn’t 

listened . . . with the new fund is that it divides money 

with other arts and “is not going to stimulate the film 

production here in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not really sure where she’s coming 

from. She just says it’s not going to stimulate the film industry, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot of other industries in the art 

community, I believe. And I think there’s a lot of industries — 

music, digital, Mr. Speaker — and I think there’s a lot of 

industries that find it interesting that one person over there only 

cares about one part of the arts industry, and that’s the film 

industry, Mr. Speaker. And I think that this is a good program 

for the whole arts community. And I think it’s something where 

people need to really take a look at it and see how it affects the 

whole group, not just one portion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a few other things that I’d like to get on 

record, Mr. Speaker, but for now, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be 

able to be here to represent the people of Regina Walsh Acres. 

I’m proud that I’ll be supporting this budget and not the 

amendment, Mr. Speaker. And this is the sixth consecutive 

balanced budget for our government, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

the people are proud to have one of the only balanced budgets 

in the country. And I think the people of Saskatchewan are 

going to accept this budget and be very happy with it going 

forward. It sets a solid foundation for our province moving 

forward. And I’m very proud to be a part of this government. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to make a few comments on this balanced budget 

that was released by our Finance minister last week, Mr. 

Speaker. The theme of the 2013-14 budget is one of balanced 

growth. Mr. Speaker, I might add that this is this government’s 

sixth consecutive balanced budget that they’ve tabled in this 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this balanced growth budget controls spending 

and continues to make investments to ensure a better quality of 

life for all Saskatchewan people, and it delivers on the 

commitments that we made in the growth plan that was released 

last fall. Prudent fiscal management, Mr. Speaker, is the key if 

we are to achieve the initiatives laid out in our growth plan, the 

initiatives like achieving 1.2 million people in our province by 

the year 2020, Mr. Speaker. And we are on track to do just that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year in 2012 there was over 21,600 people 

that now call Saskatchewan their home. The total population in 

our province now, Mr. Speaker, is over 1,089,000 in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the outset here I would just like to take a 

moment and say a few thank yous. And first of all, I’d like to 

thank just the staff in this building that make all of our job a 

little bit easier each and every day — the caucus staff, Mr. 

Speaker, the ministers’ staff, and all the other staff that help all 

the MLAs get their job done and help them represent their 

constituents in their everyday life. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take a minute and thank 

my constituency assistant, Sally Fitch. She works hard. She’s 

efficient in our office there, and she’s just a comforting voice 

on the other end of the phone when people contact the 

constituency office in Rosthern-Shellbrook. I would like to take 

a moment to thank her for all she does. 

 

And I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, representing a 

constituency and living four hours away, which requires some 

time away from home, if I didn’t take a moment to thank my 

family: my son, Carter and my daughter, Taryn and my wife, 

Krista. It is truly an honour each and every day to represent the 

people of Rosthern-Shellbrook here in our province’s capital, 

and I thank my family that allows me time to do that. 

 

And lastly but definitely not least, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

take a moment to thank all the municipal leaders and the 

volunteers, not just in Rosthern-Shellbrook but across this great 

province, that they are really and truly the people, Mr. Speaker, 

that where the rubber hits the road and our government 

initiatives and programs from all levels of government are 

enacted, these are the people that really put it into place in an 

efficient manner. These are the people, Mr. Speaker, that lend 

their time and their expertise and their efforts to many of the 

programs and make Saskatchewan the great place that it is here 

that we know today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the outset I’d like to enter some comments with 

last week’s balanced budget that was tabled in this House as 

they regard to health care. Mr. Speaker, overall the health care 

budget was increased by three and a half per cent or $162 

million. This includes expansions for such programs as the 

Alzheimer Society First Link with four additional sites for that 

program: North Battleford, Swift Current, Estevan, and Prince 

Albert. Mr. Speaker, North Battleford and Prince Albert are 

communities that will be utilized by patients in the 

Rosthern-Shellbrook area, and this significant investment in the 

Alzheimer Society First Link program is greatly appreciated by 

the residents in our constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency also has a boost 

in funding this year. Mr. Speaker, cancer is a disease that 

affects most if not all of our families in this province, and 

investment in its research and its treatment, Mr. Speaker, is 

money that is appreciated by many. As well, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s $10 million additional made available for the 



2898 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

Saskatchewan surgical initiative which will enable us to get 

closer to our goal, Mr. Speaker, of ensuring that no patients in 

this province wait more than three months for their surgery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s close to $10 million that have been 

available for primary health care, and this includes such new 

and innovative initiatives as collaborative emergency centres. 

Mr. Speaker, these collaborative emergency centres have got 

rural communities excited. They’re a new and innovative way 

to look at providing access to health care in our rural 

communities. And I know in Rosthern-Shellbrook there’s 

communities that are looking at them with excitement and 

building towards the hope of opening one in the near future. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s new money to continue building our rural 

locum physician pool. Mr. Speaker, the rural locum physician 

pool is a great benefit to our rural communities where we have 

many . . . a smaller number of physicians practising in a group. 

And when one of the physicians leaves for a period of time, we 

were able to draw on that pool and provide the continuity of 

service and thus the access to service for those rural people, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The rural physician recruitment incentive has new money this 

year as well. And again, Mr. Speaker, this is another tool in the 

tool box for health regions and rural communities as they are on 

the hunt for physicians in their recruitment efforts and also in 

their retention efforts, Mr. Speaker. This will go a long way to 

providing access for our rural communities as well as 

sustainability in our rural communities. 

 

And as well, the continued support for our STARS air 

ambulance. Anytime we are travelling or if we live outside of 

our tertiary centres where we have the very best care in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, the STARS air ambulance guarantees us 

that we . . . or provides us with the swiftest access to that 

high-quality health care. 

 

As well in this health budget, Mr. Speaker, there’s been 

significant capital investment with an excess of $160 million 

that has been provided for new and existing capital that is under 

construction across our province. These includes initiatives 

such as the Moose Jaw hospital, Mr. Speaker, as well as the 

helipad at the Regina General Hospital, as well as continued 

funding for the 11 long-term care facilities across our great 

province. Mr. Speaker, I know one of these facilities is in a 

neighbouring community to Rosthern-Shellbrook, in the city of 

Prince Albert. And I know another facility is in the community 

of Shellbrook, an integrated facility that will be opening here 

this summer. And the community of Shellbrook as well as 

surrounding communities are very excited and looking forward 

to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to continue my comments on the balanced 

budget that was tabled in this Assembly last week with respect 

to agriculture. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s contribution to the 

global food supply in 2011 was absolutely staggering. Mr. 

Speaker, 58 per cent of the world’s lentil exports and 55 per 

cent of the world pea exports were produced in this province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, 38 per cent of canola and 34 per cent of the 

world mustard seed exports as well were produced by 

Saskatchewan agricultural producers. Thirty-three per cent of 

durum and 6 per cent of chick pea exports also came from 

Saskatchewan producers. In addition, Saskatchewan is the 

largest beef producing province in the dominion of Canada. 

 

In 2011, our agri-food exports set a record at $10 billion. They 

exceed $10 billion. In 2012 there was an additional 9 per cent 

increase to $11.1 billion in agri-food exports from 

Saskatchewan. This increase, to put it in perspective, Mr. 

Speaker, is 75 per cent above where we were in 2007. 

Saskatchewan agriculture exports and agri-food exports have a 

major impact on our provincial economy as they account for 

over a third of all of our Saskatchewan exports. And 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, remains top of agri-food exporting 

province in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, about a year ago the Premier sat down and talked 

with government MLAs and asked us to go and travel the 

province and talk to Saskatchewan people and discuss the state 

of the province’s economy and our services and ask them for 

their opinion on how we could move forward and keep what 

has been a pretty good thing, to keep it going. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as a result of those consultations, the Premier released 

The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth last fall. 

 

As it pertains to agriculture and the Saskatchewan plan for 

growth, we have four major initiatives that we will look for. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work with producers to increase 

agri-food exports by an additional 50 per cent by the year 2020. 

This is to $15 billion from our 2011 number of $10 billion in 

agri-food exports. We will work with primary agriculture to 

increase their production by 10 million tonnes. And we will 

increase value-added production in this province. 

 

We will establish Saskatchewan as a global leader in 

biosciences, and this has begun with the record budget 

investments in agriculture research in this budget that was 

tabled here last week. Mr. Speaker, agriculture research is at a 

record level at over $27 million, and this includes $3 million for 

the Global Transportation Hub at the University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. It also includes funding the 

Growing Forward 2 agreement, as well as money, $1 million, 

for the rehabilitation of irrigation bridges in our province. Mr. 

Speaker, our crop insurance program is at a record funding 

level of $198 million with this 2013-14 budget. This’ll provide 

our ag producers with $194 on average per acre coverage. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, this agricultural budget is the 

fourth highest budget that this province has ever announced. 

This is in stark contrast to what’s happened just a few years 

ago. Mr. Speaker, the average agriculture budget over the last 

six years since the Sask Party has been in government have 

averaged $405 million dollars. The six years previous to that, 

Mr. Speaker, the last six years that the NDP were in power, the 

average was $273 million. 

 

When the NDP were in government, Mr. Speaker, they refused 

to address the education property tax disparity. They closed 31 

agricultural offices. They cut extension services. They 

eliminated the GRIP program. They literally tore up the 

contracts with their producers, Mr. Speaker. They increased 

crop insurance premiums without increasing coverage. They cut 

spot loss hail twice. They ignored agricultural disasters and 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2899 

they blamed the federal government for all their problems. Mr. 

Speaker, in addition to this they lost taxpayer money in private 

investments such as SPUDCO and Navigata. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while in government, and as they attacked rural 

agricultural producers, they continued to also attack rural 

Saskatchewan as they closed 52 rural hospitals, closed rural 

schools, ignored rural roads and highways, and offloaded costs 

onto their RMs [rural municipality]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the NDP record when they were in power. 

And more recently, last year after the provincial budget was 

tabled, the leader of the opposition was asked for his comments 

on the budget, and I quote, “There are a number of areas where 

they could have left money for films. And one of the things 

they could have done is look at some of the initiatives around 

agriculture and look at some of the things they’ve done for 

municipalities.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they say the best indicator of future behaviour is 

past behaviour and, Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s past behaviour 

while in government and more recently their comments on last 

year’s budget leads me to surmise that if they were ever given a 

whiff of an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, they would pick up 

exactly where they left off with their attack on ag producers and 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

On behalf of the people associated with agriculture and the 

rural constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook and all of the 

constituents therein, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be supporting this budget 

and not supporting the opposition’s amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 

able to crawl out of a snowbank at 7:30, 8 at night. I want to 

thank the particular columnist for putting a tweet out today that 

he hadn’t seen me since the snowfall of the last weeks rose to 5 

feet. So I would like to acknowledge that I worked my way out 

of the snowbank and I’m here tonight to talk about the great 

budget — the sixth consecutive balanced budget, I might add, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now we’ll start off the speech. I mean I’ve always talked 

about the great balanced budgets, amongst other things we’ve 

done as a government, when I’ve been up on my feet, Mr. 

Speaker. But of course I’ve always wanted to thank the people 

that got me here. I want to thank the constituents of Prince 

Albert Carlton who in the first election afforded me the 

opportunity to work in this great Chamber by a 61-vote margin, 

Mr. Speaker. But in the last election, the last election, I want to 

thank Mr. Lingenfelter because, because of him, I am here with 

over 1,600 . . . [inaudible] . . . And you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? That platform of the 2011 election was definitely the 

primary reason why we are . . . I want to thank the member 

from Kindersley. He’s encouraged me to run again and win by 

a larger margin now that we have a new member over there 

who’s in charge of the NDP. So thank you for that. 

 

But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that one thing as a 

government we’ve taken most of our guidance from are the 

stakeholders that have really worked to build this province and 

made this province what it is. And you know, I look at my 

family and my daughters, Alyssa and Mackenzie. They’re the 

next future stakeholder group in this province. Right now I’ve 

got Alyssa in university, first year, studying in arts and science 

to most likely take a path in nutrition or health sciences or some 

endeavour. And my youngest daughter, Mackenzie, will be in 

university next year. She graduates this June and she’s looking 

at working in a science field, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll tell you 

what. I couldn’t be any prouder of my daughters for the 

accomplishments they’ve made in their lives, at school 

academically, their friends, their peer groups that they’re 

associated with. And you know, I think that all of us in this 

House who have children, whether they be very young children 

or, like my seatmate was talking about expecting his first-born, 

or to like yourself, Mr. Speaker, who’ve got grown adult 

children, and other people in this Chamber who’ve got 

grandchildren, and maybe some in this office who’ve got 

great-grandchildren, I’m not sure, in this Chamber. But we do 

what we can in this particular Chamber day to day and as a 

government to ensure that their future is brighter than it was the 

day before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to say that a government that takes responsibility 

like we have to balance the books, to show that we have a very 

strong fiscal responsibility moving forward, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure the quality of life is there for not just our families but for 

the families of everybody and for the future families in this 

province, ones who are moving to this province like no other 

time before, Mr. Speaker, take up the opportunities. Take up the 

opportunities that haven’t been seen in decades in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, that we are seeing these people moving into or 

moving back to Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know one thing I want to talk about tonight is in respect 

to my daughter’s future. But I want first of all to thank my 

lovely wife, Charlene, for putting up, as most of us have 

realized . . . being very patient, but also for all of us in this 

House who’ve got spouses, significant others, family members 

who support us every day that we leave this House and return to 

our constituencies, there’s somebody there always telling us 

that you’ve done a good job. Those are usually people in our 

families because we get some mixed reviews some other time. 

And in my house, Mr. Speaker, I can say that with Mackenzie 

and Charlene, it’s usually 50/50, as my colleague from 

Greystone mentions, that I come home on a Thursday night and 

it’s like, you know, dad, you did pretty good, and well you 

could do better in this. But as overall, I walked out, I left this 

House on Thursday and I come back Monday afternoon and it’s 

still here waiting for me, Mr. Speaker. I love this job and I love 

my family for supporting me. 

 

Again moving on now to the constituency of Prince Albert 

Carlton. My colleagues have already addressed a lot of the 

highlights in the budget. I want to be more specific about Prince 

Albert. I know that my colleague from Prince Albert Northcote 

did a great job today talking about the significant measures 

we’ve done in this particular budget to maintain our focus on 

Prince Albert and the area. You know it’s the few things I want 

to talk about are really significant to the future of the prosperity 

of my riding. 

 

Revenue sharing, of course, is up across the province, Mr. 

Speaker, and in my riding 149 per cent since 2007-08. In this 



2900 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

last budget, due to the great work of the Minister of 

Government Relations and the staff and the individuals in 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], 

and New North, we’re seeing revenue sharing and a new pool 

of money being distributed. And in Prince Albert it means just 

over $800,000 increase. And in Prince Albert that means that 

gives the city council an opportunity to use those monies as 

they see fit unconditionally to better the quality of life for all of 

us in our great city of Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, a budget should also be, you know, forward looking 

in how it does its business going on forward. And I’ve talked 

about my daughters in school, and a lot of people in this 

province have university-age students. Some are in SIAST as 

well, some children who will be going to school in the next few 

years. You know what? And the province that looks at that 

particular growth initiative, what we’re seeing now with 

families, those are the people that are going to fill these jobs 

that we have in this province today, in the future, and also 

develop themselves for the next level of employment skills as 

the job opens up to them in the next three or four years. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? That the Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship is one thing I want talk about, how we’ve 

taken it into consideration, and we’ve been able to, you know, 

advance that cause. I want to thank members in Treasury 

Board, year after year, and the Minister of Finance and the 

previous minister of Finance for recognizing that’s got some 

potential for all of us. 

 

I know the Minister of Finance had his granddaughters here on 

the budget day. You know, we look at what we’re doing as a 

province now, that we’re going make this a stronger province 

for his grandchildren because we want to make sure they stay 

here. They have opportunities and schools, and they have 

opportunities to explore any career they want to and have an 

opportunity to be a dreamer and dream of the future, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And you know, what else is important is that 

once our children finish university, it’s to stay here in this 

province. 

 

And you know what? I think that there was a time, I know there 

was a time that a lot of people left this province. And I’ve 

talked about it before. I’m not going to harp on that. When they 

left university, a lot of my friends took off and went to Alberta 

and BC [British Columbia]. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? 

Now with the opportunities that our children have for the, you 

know, the actual retention portion, the graduate retention 

program that we’re funding year after year, it’s one of those 

kind of initiatives that we are affording these students to stay in 

the province after — start a career, become successful, stay 

within the actual province. And you know, it should work out 

for most of them I believe to get a large portion if not all their 

portion of their tuition back, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And why would you not support that as a government? Why 

would you have to think that wouldn’t be a good idea? The 

previous government didn’t have those kind of programs in 

place. And I’m very proud to be part of a government that saw 

that initiative as a promise in 2007 campaign, and we’re going 

to maintain that promise moving forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

because it gives us a foot up, an edge on other provinces, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to make sure that our best and brightest stay in 

the province. And those others who want to come from other 

parts and promise to help, you know, buoy up our population 

numbers and the booming economy will come here as well, and 

we’re seeing that that particular program is extended to them as 

well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I’m very proud of that as a 

member of this government. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think there’s a few 

other issues that I want to just quickly talk about before my 

time comes to an end here. You know what? In my riding, I talk 

about Carlton Comprehensive High School. We put together a 

plan last year to start funding the gymnasium project. Which I 

might add, the high school in Saskatchewan that has the highest 

number of students enrolled than any other high school: Prince 

Albert Carlton Comprehensive High School. So the third 

gymnasium allows and will afford the opportunity for these 

students to take part in extracurricular activities, sports 

programs. And with the size of this new gymnasium, the 

opportunity is afforded to Carlton to host some provincial 

events as well, I understand. So I want to thank the Minister of 

Education for that funding continuing on. So thank you so 

much for that. That’s an excellent initiative. 

 

You know, there’s one more thing that Prince Albert people 

don’t really understand is the level of commitment that we have 

I think to basic infrastructure needs. You know, we funded the 

— it’s not a sexy, glamorous project — but the water treatment 

plant, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that provides a future of safe 

water for the people of Prince Albert and area. That’s important 

as well moving forward. 

 

This government has the commitment going on, Mr. Speaker, 

that we commit to a project. We see the project to the end. And 

the government asks, okay, that money’s been spent in that area 

now. What’s next? We’re always having a tranche of projects 

that are always waiting for us and the ministers always bring 

forward. I know that, and MLAs do as well. But the 

government sees the future. They’re going to pick those 

projects that have the best and most ready, available, safe water 

supply, which is important for everyone in this province, is 

number one. I understand that. But infrastructure as we’re 

seeing moving on for hospitals, bundling school projects, those 

are all the kind of things that our growing, booming economy 

needs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s important for us to 

recognize that. 

 

You know, there’s other things of course that this particular 

budget has moving forward. And I think there’s going to be a 

lot more members that have a lot better grasp of their own 

ridings, so I’m going to let them talk about what’s in their own 

particular ridings, constituencies. 

 

But there’s a couple of other points that have to be talked about 

within this budget I think are important. It’s the idea that as a 

province we have a responsibility to recognize that there are 

still out there, people out there and families who still need 

support of government. And the Minister of Social Services has 

done an excellent job in her tenure, as the previous minister did 

as well, to provide finances and initiatives for not just families 

but, you know, single mothers and young individuals who need 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2901 

a hand up sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And you know what else? The seniors. I mean that’s the core 

group that built this province for us. The seniors are still 

looking at staying in this province. We want to make sure they 

have the opportunities as well to thrive in a booming economy. 

So I want to thank the minister for increases to the SAID 

[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program and SIP 

[seniors’ income plan] as well. SAID not so much for maybe 

adults right now but it’ll be coming down the road when they 

turn of age. And you know what? The families are being 

supported because of that program right now, and as time goes 

on, they can stay in this province and still have those 

opportunities. We recognize that as a government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think I’m going to 

probably take my seat now because I know other members want 

to spend more time and they want to talk. And you know what, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? I hear by the great encouragement here by 

the members that they wish me to continue for a while longer, 

so I might just do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just a couple of 

minutes, just a couple more minutes. They asked for it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They’re going to get it now. So I’ll tell you 

what — here we go. I just wish . . . I can’t believe the 

encouragement I get from this side of the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It’s a great bonus to be in government, I suppose, and 

have great support from my peers around this side of the House, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But you know what? I think we have to look at the fact that 

every one of us does this job for a reason. I would hope that 

every one of us does this job to make it a better place than we 

found it, and every day you come to work, you should always 

make it a better day than it was the day before. And I think that 

on this side of the House, I know for everyone’s sake on this 

side that we talk at caucus meetings. We talk at coffee time. We 

talk at lunches. You know what? We work hard, as I’m sure the 

other members across the way do, to actually make sure that 

this province is the best province in the country. 

 

And I want to thank the members who took part this year in the 

full budget process. I know it was a gruelling process, but we 

did something very important. We have a responsible budget. 

We kept spending to a minimum, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We still 

provided programs and initiatives moving forward, but we’re 

within the context of a balanced budget, and I look forward to 

support this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and not the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise in the House today to enter debate on the 2013-14 

balanced budget, balanced growth. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I get into my comments in regards 

to the excellent document, budget document, I’d like to say 

thanks to a few people who help me day in and day out to do 

my job and of course first and foremost my wife, April. And 

you hear many of us members at a time like this, we talk about 

the better half, and I would suggest that it has never been more 

true than in my case, and I can never thank my wife enough for 

her support. 

 

My constituency assistants, Laurie and Peggy, keep the office 

running smoothly when I’m in Regina, and they try their 

darnedest to keep it running smoothly when I’m back home, but 

a little bit tough to do. And my constituents, well, they have 

treated me with kindness, with respect, and with friendship in 

every RM, village, reserve, town, and city, and I appreciate that 

so much. In short, the past 16 months have been a great 

learning experience and in general just a great experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the goal of this government is to make 

Saskatchewan the best place to work, to live, and to raise a 

family in the Dominion of Canada. This includes supports 

where supports are needed, helping people to meet their 

challenges, and protecting the vulnerable when protection is 

necessary. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why this government 

works so hard to build an economy. That is why you hear us, 

hear this government talk about the lowest unemployment rate 

in Canada, why we talk about the fastest growing province, 

why we talking about the building industry, why we talk about 

the mining industry, the tremendous jump in weekly earnings 

for all Saskatchewan workers — all this and so much more. 

That’s why Saskatchewan has a growing and vibrant economy. 

 

And I’m very pleased, very proud to be part of a government 

that has produced six balanced budgets in a row, a budget that 

is balanced in government operations — and you can tell that 

by looking at the General Revenue Fund — and balanced in 

overall government operations including Crown corporations, 

investments, etc., in the summary financial statement. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have spent a good part of my time 

on this earth in business, and for the life of me I cannot 

understand why anyone would suggest doing away with the 

GRF [General Revenue Fund], the books that actually show the 

operations of this government. To me it just doesn’t make 

business sense. And that may be the reason why there’s a call 

for it and that would be a lack of business sense. But for the rest 

of us, it’s just plain common sense. This is a balanced budget 

that is recognized by all the major banks, a continuation of the 

budgets that have given this province a AAA credit rating, a 

budget that shows the strength of Saskatchewan, a budget that 

shows the pathway to future growth and a pathway to 1.2 

million people in our province by 2020. 

 

Now one of the items coming from the Melfort constituency, 

one of the items that I take a lot of a pride in this government 

for is the new transition house funded for Melfort. There is far 

too much domestic violence in Saskatchewan, and domestic 

violence is almost always directed at women, and this is the 

first new transition house built in Saskatchewan since 1989. 

You know, it would be the wish of all of us in this Assembly 

that a shelter from domestic violence wouldn’t be needed, but 

the sad fact is is that it is needed in our province and that . . . 

This government is responding to that need. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Louise 

Schweitzer who has lived and breathed this — she’s executive 

director for the North East Outreach and Support Services — 

and the entire board of directors. And I’d also like to 

congratulate the councils of the city of Melfort, the towns of 



2902 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

Tisdale and Nipawin for their support of this regional centre. 

 

In keeping with the North East Outreach, they are organizing an 

international men’s march to stop rape, sexual assault, and 

gender violence. This takes place in Melfort on May 9th, and 

the participating men will be wearing ladies’ 4-inch high heels 

in a beautiful red colour. I will be taking part in this mile long 

walk, and should the Minister of Justice’s schedule permit, he 

will be walking alongside of me. And just for interest sake, I 

checked and apparently there is a pair of size 14 red pumps if 

the member from Regina Dewdney would like to take stroll 

with us on that evening . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Are you 

going to be walking? Good, good. You know, it’s going to be 

fun, and it’s going to be a good cause. And it is going to be 

absolutely terrifying for those 4-inch heels. 

 

And when I speak of terrifying, it brings my mind back to the 

speech in the House last Thursday by the former deputy leader 

of the opposition, the member from Athabasca. The member 

feels that this government should get with the program. I guess 

the program is to run deficits such as our neighbours to the west 

— who he says is good government — a $6 billion shortfall in 

the next two years. And come to think of it, you know, that’s 

pretty close to the $5.5 billion program that they had, so I could 

really see why it would be good government in his mind. 

 

During the member’s speech, he took time out to visit some sort 

of galaxy of revisionist history. He spoke of the crushing deficit 

that stopped the NDP government from providing good 

government during their 16-year reign. And without a doubt the 

deficit . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, to ask 

leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for this 

opportunity to introduce guests. All have been here in the 

legislature this afternoon. They are working with dietitians of 

Saskatchewan. We have Rylan Haas. He’s with the Saskatoon 

Health Region, and he’s a dietitian there. Stacey Wiens from 

North Battleford is also a dietitian. Lana Moore, the registrar of 

the Saskatchewan Dietitians Association, in from Rosetown. 

We have Tammy Ives, dietitian with Dietitians of Canada, and 

she’s also from Saskatoon. Roseann Nasser from a very 

well-known family here within the province works for the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region and is also a dietitian. And 

Candace Kopek with Sun Country out of Weyburn and is also a 

dietitian. 

 

I would ask all members of the Assembly to join me and 

welcome these individuals to their legislature and offer our 

thanks for their important work regarding the health and 

happiness of people right across the province. 

 

[20:00] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

for Melfort. I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Phillips: — It was worth saying twice. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I was just speaking about the member from 

Athabasca. And he spoke of the crushing deficit that had 

stopped the NDP government from being good government 

during their 16-year reign. 

 

And as I was saying without a doubt that the deficit was large. 

However the method used to lower the deficit was to close 52 

hospitals, to break legal agreements with farmers, to cut routine 

maintenance of highways, of schools, of what remained of our 

health care system. They slashed money to municipalities. They 

continued to underfund seniors, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 

whacked and slashed everything in sight, and they hacked it 

too. 

 

I would suggest that they didn’t control the deficit. It was the 

people of Saskatchewan that saw the infrastructure crumbling 

before our very eyes, who saw monster tax increases and who 

saw a government that could not and would not build an 

economy. That government’s idea of economic development 

was to sue the federal government for more equalization. 

 

But the member said, well it was all the deficit. Well let’s look 

at the record. In 1998 the government debt was $8.1 billion. By 

2001, 2002, they had pared the deficit down to $7.5 billion. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s pretty good. They brought it 

down $600 million. Not bad. However during the period 

between 2001 and 2006, they managed to raise the deficit on 

two different occasions, finally lowering it a little bit. At the 

same time, they were collecting hundreds of millions of dollars 

in equalization payments. In fact they were getting paid from 

the have provinces in Canada a total of over $4 billion in their 

16 years. That’s how they fought the deficit: $4 billion in 

equalization. 

 

You know, so often . . . Well let’s go on to what happened after 

that. The $7.2 billion debt was left to the Saskatchewan Party in 

2007. It’s been reduced down to $3.8 billion today with even 

more to drop in the near future. This has been done while we’ve 

been increasing funds to municipalities by 108 per cent. We’ve 

been increasing the seniors’ income program plan from $90 per 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2903 

month, $90 per month to $250 per month, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We have been putting $2 billion into highways. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, there’s more. There’s so much more. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, the opposition always followed the creed 

that Saskatchewan needs help. We don’t need help. Somehow 

they feel that we just can’t measure up. And that fascinates me 

because where does that come from? But let’s look at some 

recent examples and that famous quote of their last leader that 

they would rather have unnamed: Saskatchewan is a wee 

province, and the province will always be in and out of 

equalization. This province with this potash, with this 

agriculture, with this oil, diamonds, uranium, and we’re going 

to be in and out of equalization. I think not. But they throw up 

their hands, and they say that’s not us. No, no, that’s that guy 

who was out of here on election night. Wasn’t us. 

 

But yet we hear that the opposition talked about the education 

system. We’re in a ranking; we’re running sixth and seventh. 

We have excellent teachers. It can’t be our teachers. It can’t be 

our students. So it needs a little tinkering with the system. But 

no, that can’t be done. Their answer is just throw another 

boatload of money at it and that’ll do it. 

 

Or how about their national leader? This is fun. If the Canadian 

dollar is equal to the American dollar, that’s got to be some sort 

of disease caused by Western Canada, that our business and our 

workers cannot compete if the dollars are at equal value. I think 

not. I think they’re wrong, that we can compete any day, any 

time, and we’ll prove that. 

 

The negative nine across the House howl in distress at the 

notion of looking for efficiencies in health care. Of course they 

do. Just close them. That will be the answer. Don’t have to look 

for efficiencies. 

 

And I hope you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will forgive us if we 

burst out laughing when they talk about long-term care beds, a 

need that this government in this budget is working very hard to 

catch up on. But you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opposition 

closed 1,600 long-term care beds. Sixteen hundred. That will 

cost this government around $800 million to catch up on that. 

They talk about a credit card debt. We’re paying the credit card 

off that they left. 

 

After all, who knew that the baby boomers would be coming 

along? Like it seems to me in the last maybe 40 years we saw 

that coming, 50 years. They closed 1,600 beds. And they did 

the same thing with schools. They did the same thing with 

hospitals and highways. And it’s really, really very sad. 

 

This year alone this government will be spending $800 million 

on the infrastructure in Saskatchewan, actually 847.5. An 

incredible amount again this year. But we are paying off the 

credit card debt that they talk about that they ran up during their 

2001 to 2006 . . . And we’re still trying to catch up. And I must 

admit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after only 16 months in the 

legislature, I still wonder why things happen. 

 

Last week in the question period, the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition, second in command of the negative nine, asked a 

question about education finance. And then instead of listening 

to the answer, he heckled, “And you changed the start of the 

school year.” On the budget, really? He wants to go there? I 

don’t think so. I hope that I’m never in this House long enough 

that I understand everything that comes from the negative nine. 

I’m proud of this province. I’m proud of our people. 

 

I was at a STARS gala in Melfort on Saturday evening. We 

haven’t got the final figures yet, but they raised a tremendous 

amount of money for the STARS program. And it’s what we 

do. It’s what Saskatchewan people do. And we don’t need the 

negative nine chewing away at our pride because they have 

done that too many times in the past. 

 

But as I conclude my statement, I am very proud of this budget. 

Is it all things to all people? No. Can it be? No. But it is a 

budget that helps many people. It helps grow the population. It 

helps to grow business. And the Saskatchewan people have 

probably what will be unique in all of Canada — a balanced 

budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this budget with pride, and I 

will be voting against the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Point of order. I 

believe the member has to be sitting at her desk in order to 

speak in the Chamber. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure this evening to rise and speak to the budget 

that was just introduced last week and certainly speak in favour 

of the proposed amendment that our party’s put forward. It 

certainly is an amendment that needs to be considered seriously 

because there’s a number of deficiencies in the budget. And I’ll 

take a few minutes at this point just to provide some of my 

comments on the recent budget that we heard. 

 

First and foremost, like many of my colleagues have been 

doing, I’d like to just take this opportunity to say a few words 

of thanks to some people that are important to me. And first of 

all is to my son Sam who’s sitting at home, often spending a lot 

of nights on his own while I’m here in Regina. And he’s been 

very supportive and not very demanding. So for a 17-year-old, I 

think he’s a pretty good kid. And he’s not all that interested in 

politics, but he certainly is supportive of what I’m doing and 

curious about sort of the goings on and what’s happening here 

in the legislature. So I want to thank him for being patient and 

understanding. 

 

And certainly I think I’m very fortunate to have probably two 

of the best exes that a woman could have. I have very 

supportive ex-partners who are helping out on the home front 

and making sure that Sam’s needs are taken care of. So I want 

to thank them as well because they’re just certainly very . . . 

They’re good guys, and they are helping keeping things going 

at home. As many of my colleagues have indicated, you know, 

we don’t do this alone. We are supported. 

 

And next up of course is my good friends that are there for me 

when I need them, and in particular, the friends that support me 

in the cultural activities I’m involved in. As you know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’m very interested in the music world, and 

certainly being able to play music with my friends is one of my 

great pleasures and certainly gives a different perspective on 



2904 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

what’s going on here in the House. 

 

So for example on Saturday night I was able to play with a 

couple friends at a fundraiser for my constituency. And we had 

a lot of people come out, and we had people with kids . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I hear from the Minister of the 

Environment he wasn’t invited. Well certainly next year we’ll 

make sure he’s on the list, and he can come and dance. I will 

make a point of that, to ensure that he can come and share some 

of the celebrations when we get together with friends and we 

celebrate community and we celebrate our kids and our future 

and certainly connecting with all generations within the party. 

So those kinds of opportunities remind me of why I am here 

and what’s important, and it is being able to have a community 

where we support each other and look after each other. 

 

Saskatoon Nutana is a great constituency, and I just want take a 

couple minutes to acknowledge the people that live in my 

constituency and why I live there and why I chose to live there 

almost 30 years ago now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I settled in 

Saskatoon Nutana largely because of the arts community and 

the vibrant culture that exists right on Broadway Avenue which 

is the heart of Saskatoon, and it’s the heart of my constituency. 

It’s a wonderful place to be able to live within walking distance 

of. And I don’t spend, you know, five minutes on the street on 

Broadway, and I run into many people I know, people within 

the community that are very keenly observant of what goes on 

here in the legislature, what goes on within our party, and what 

goes on within the province. 

 

So there’s a lot of really sharp people in Saskatoon Nutana and 

a lot of really talented people. I often refer to my constituency 

as a triple-A constituency, and in particular we have a lot of 

artists; we have a lot of academics, and we have a lot of 

activists. And sometimes they’re all three. 

 

There’s some really, really involved people in our community 

who are taking on issues well beyond the boundaries of the 

constituency or the city or even the province. There’s people 

involved in world issues, in justice issues. There’s people that 

are heavily involved in all kinds of political movements. There 

are several award-winning novelists and poets within my 

community. And, of course, with the University of 

Saskatchewan being so close, there’s a number of academics. 

 

So it’s such an honour to be able to represent such a vibrant and 

diverse community and one that really, really cares about what 

goes on here in the province, here in the legislature. And those 

are the people I hear from regularly, as I say, walking down 

Broadway Avenue or attending any of the many cultural events 

that occur within the city. And I have to say that I want to 

connect with them as best I can. And that’s what I try to do in 

my role as their MLA and certainly look to them for advice and 

guidance, because there’s some incredibly intelligent, articulate, 

caring individuals within my constituency that are there to 

provide assistance and support when needed. 

 

So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a real pleasure to be able to 

represent . . . More than a pleasure. It’s an absolute honour to 

be able to represent those folks that live in Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Some of the things I hear about more than others in my riding 

are, there’s two issues in particular, and one is the issues seniors 

are facing in my riding and the other is generally lower income 

people that are having difficulty with housing. And that’s one 

of the things I want to speak to as I get into the details on the 

budget, is just the simple oversight and lack of attention that 

this government pays to the needs of those people within our 

city and within our province. 

 

Certainly, you know, we hear for example the member for 

Melfort going on about long-term care and the successes of this 

government in long-term care. I would suggest, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that’s not quite accurate. And indeed we’ll want to 

address that in a couple of minutes. 

 

Also what’s missing I think in this budget is any sort of realistic 

rental housing alternatives for people who are struggling. This 

government seems to pay more attention to people who can 

afford to buy their own homes, and that’s simply cutting out a 

large number of people within our population that are not able 

to do those kinds of . . . to buy their own home. And to not have 

alternatives and release the pressure on the housing market in 

some comprehensive and meaningful way means people will 

continue to suffer. They will continue on fixed incomes to see 

more and more of their monthly income devoted to housing 

pressures and rental pressures. And the sad result of that is that 

they will have less and less available for quality of life, for 

simple things like buying food, medication, clothing. And 

there’s a lot of people that are really struggling in Saskatoon 

Nutana. And I know throughout the city and in a lot of the 

urban areas, this is a real issue for a lot of people. 

 

Now when I look at the highlights of the budget in the news 

release that the government released, there are a couple of 

things that I think really make a lot of sense and I’ll just 

mention those briefly. First off is as always, and I said this last 

year in my comments, we believe that the SAID program is one 

that’s of great value and great importance to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and so any support that this government adds to 

the SAID program is one that I personally think is important 

and commend. As always, given that our role here is to hold the 

government to account, it would be I think always appreciated 

to see more and more support for a program like SAID. 

 

Another area that I’m pleased to see support from this 

government in is the support for women’s shelters. And I know 

the member from Melfort who spoke to the fact that this 

government is opening a new transition house in Melfort, that’s 

a very, very important part of this budget and I think one that 

needs to be commended. Also the extension to the P.A. [Prince 

Albert] YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association], again 

these beds are really, really, critically important. 

 

And I always think of my friend Heather Pocock who’s worked 

in this area for probably close to 30 years now in women’s 

shelter issues. And she currently works with the sexual assault 

services of Saskatoon doing some really important work in 

children’s education, grade 5 program with a puppet show 

where they take it to the schools and it’s teaching children how 

to be aware of . . . how to deal with the situation when they find 

themselves in where they’re being abused, sexually abused. 

And the program is called Free to Be Me and it’s a really 

positive message for those children. And the work that’s being 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2905 

done by sexual assault services in that area is incredible, and 

this is becoming more and more popular in schools to the point 

where I think Heather’s basically run off her feet right now. I 

think she’s done over 80 schools since January on this program. 

And what happens is when these kids are empowered to realize 

they have a voice, they actually do report, and it has provided 

that kind of outlet and safety for children who are living 

through the horrors of sexual abuse at home.  

 

And she also worked at Interval House in Saskatoon for many, 

many years, and I just see the toll it takes on the people who 

work there when they see these women coming in in incredibly 

dire and dangerous circumstances, who have nowhere else to 

go. And as my colleague from Saskatoon Centre spoke about 

this earlier, the sad part of this is that we need more beds, that 

the need seems to be increasing. And if we could only see a 

situation where we needed less beds, then rather than having to 

expand these programs that we’d see a decrease, that would be 

the goal, I think, a real celebration for our province and for the 

women in this province and men and children who live with the 

horrors of abuse. 

 

So those kinds of programs are ones that we will always 

support and encourage and hope that this government continues 

to maintain and support. As I said earlier, you know, as our role 

as holding this government to account, we would like to see 

even more support for those types of things but are always 

encouraged by the positive moves that have been made in that 

area. So that’s something we do appreciate. 

 

There’s a number of particular areas I wanted to address tonight 

in my comments. There’s just a few things I want to touch on 

and different areas that are highlighted in the budget. Obviously 

there is a lot of detail in a budget like this, and as we go through 

the estimates we will have opportunities to ask a few more 

questions from the government as to the changes and the 

decisions that have been made with regards to this year’s 

budget. 

 

But first of all in terms of employment training, and particularly 

for First Nations, this is something we know that has been 

identified by people like Eric Howe who’s indicated the critical 

importance of ensuring that First Nations people have the 

proper education and are able to engage meaningfully in our 

society and in the workforce in Saskatchewan. And his report 

indicated that if we were to employ First Nations at the same 

rate as Alberta and Manitoba, we would increase provincial 

employment by almost 6,000 employees and grow that number 

as much as possible. So we’re lagging even behind Alberta and 

Manitoba, our neighbours. 

 

So what is it? Why is that happening? Why can’t we engage 

more First Nations people in the workforce? I think this is a 

very serious question that this government has skirted around 

but hasn’t been able to successfully deal with it, and we 

continue to challenge this government to take that very, very 

seriously. 

 

There doesn’t seem to be any new ideas or solutions in this 

budget to ensure that there is opportunities for everyone in 

Saskatchewan and that we need to see First Nations and Métis 

people given the opportunity to be trained and get into the 

workforce. We know that there was an announcement from the 

joint task force on improving education and employment 

outcomes for First Nations and Métis people. We saw the 

announcement last year. We’re still waiting for the initiatives 

on what’s going to happen with that task force. It’s been 

impending for some time now. So it’s hard to provide comment 

on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when there isn’t anything coming 

out of that task force. We are promised, keep being promised 

that the report is forthcoming. So again, we’re waiting to see 

how that’s going to turn out. 

 

The government is trumpeting their increase of 5 per cent for 

the First Nations and northern forest protection workers, but 

really what we’re seeing is an increase of $100,000. So it 

depends on how you characterize a lot of these increases, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And we see percentages being used when the 

amounts are small, or we would be seeing amounts being used 

when they look impressive. But really I think if we were . . . I’d 

like to be able to compare all of these increases against the 

increase on population. Because in my view, a 10 per cent 

increase is meaningless if the population’s growing 20 per cent. 

And so I think a lot of these numbers are . . . What we see 

happening is a lot of spin, and I think, you know, that certainly 

we’re going to be working hard in the committees to ensure 

that, under the estimates process, that these are real increases 

and not just shifting numbers so that the percentages look good. 

 

We see a cut of 50 per cent, for example, to the First Nation and 

Métis Consultation and Participation Fund — we’ll be asking 

questions about that in estimates — and even almost a $1 

million cut to the First Nations and Métis engagement. So it’s 

hard to understand how that is seen as progress. 

 

And we all know that until all of us are prospering in this 

province, we haven’t succeeded. And there are many, many 

people being left behind and falling through the cracks. And 

you’ve heard us say that before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’ll 

continue to say it because it’s true. And prosperity is not for . . . 

if it’s not for everyone, it’s really not for anyone. And we need 

to really take a serious look, and I don’t see that in this budget. 

I don’t see this government really taking a serious look at these 

issues. 

 

Even from the Saskatchewan School Board Association we see 

a comment on this budget saying that only 30 per cent of 

Aboriginal students are graduating from high school in 

Saskatchewan. And what this government announced in the 

budget, and this is from the Saskatchewan School Board 

Association president Jane Foord, is that the increases here 

amount to 0.001 per cent of the total education budget. So it’s 

one one-thousandth of the total education budget. And she said 

it’s “. . . simply unacceptable if the goal of eliminating the 

Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal student achievement gap is to 

be realized.” 

 

So yes, there’s increases in education, but they’re unacceptable. 

It’s not enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we need to find a 

way to make those changes real so that we can start seeing 

those numbers for First Nations more reflective of what our 

prosperous society should show. 

 

In terms of advanced education, we see this government forcing 

debt and tough decisions onto our post-secondary schools. 

They’re getting less funding than they need and much, much, 



2906 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

much less funding than they asked for. Today another 100 

employees are being cut from the University of Saskatchewan 

and this is in addition to other cuts. We see a broken promise 

from the Sask Party forcing U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] to max out its debt limits so that they can finish 

the construction and completion of the Health Sciences 

Building. We see tuition going up at a time when students are 

already dealing with, as I indicated earlier, very high costs of 

living including very high rent. So until there is some relief for 

students in terms of rent, it’s really impossible for many 

students to survive, given another tuition hike. 

 

So you know, there’s a certain element of stubbornness here. 

We see a government refusing to pay for the construction of the 

Health Sciences Building, starting along the path to pay for it 

and then just saying, oh we don’t feel like finishing this so 

we’re going to just ask you guys to take on that debt, forcing 

the U of S board of governors into a very awkward situation. 

And then now what we see as a result of that is cuts in 

programs, cuts in staff, deep cuts in administrative supports. 

And I think the sad thing is that learning is the ultimate loser 

here. 

 

I look at, you know . . . I’m a big fan of a liberal education I 

guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m very proud of my oldest 

son, Zachary, who’s taking a course right now in liberal arts at 

Concordia University in Montreal. And when he was home at 

Christmas, it was just fascinating to see how his little brain is 

absorbing all these things he’s learning and reading. Actually, 

it’s not a little brain; he’s got a fairly big brain. 

 

But what he’s doing is he’s learning literature. He’s learning 

philosophy. He’s learning art history. And these are synthesized 

classes where he’s being put to question guys like Plato and 

Socrates. He’s thinking about what they’re saying and what 

they said at the time and how that applies to issues of today. 

And certainly we get into all kinds of really difficult and tough 

conversations about women’s rights, about what is democracy. 

And he’s watching with interest the movements like Idle No 

More and the Occupy movement. And it’s just this beautiful 

young 19-, 20-year-old brain that’s trying to figure the world 

out. 

 

And I’m just so pleased that he has the opportunity to take a 

liberal arts education to sort of expand his ideas. And he’s not 

focused yet on the big job at the end of the degree or the big 

salary that’s going to come about. That’s not of interest to him 

at this point. I know that at some point I hope he will find 

gainful employment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But right now the 

learning that he’s encountering as a young man is going to last 

him his whole life. And he will continue to question, and I think 

that’s the most important thing that any education can do, is 

give an individual an ability to question and always seek better. 

 

And unfortunately when universities are being forced to focus 

strictly on the bottom line and have cuts in those kinds of 

programs where young minds are challenged to expand, I think 

it’s really a sad state, especially in what we hear so much about 

as a prosperous economy that we are living in right now. So it’s 

a shortfall that concerns me, and I would certainly encourage 

the government to take a better look at these kinds of things in 

the advanced education area for sure. 

 

We know that the increases that they are receiving — and the 

government has talked about that — they’re there, but it’s clear 

from the universities’ perspective it’s not enough. We see 

increases of 2 per cent where we know universities need 

increases of around 5 just to maintain the status quo. So the cuts 

are deep. I mean, the increases are cuts in a certain sense. And 

that’s really a difficult situation to put in, put the universities 

and the other advanced education institutions. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So some of the quotes that we’re hearing from in response to 

the budget that came out last week for . . . And these are careful 

statements by these people because they understand, you know, 

you don’t bite the hand that feeds you. But for example the 

president of the University of Regina said last week: 

 

This isn’t the increase we were looking for. We’ve been 

looking for efficiencies though for the last three years and 

we’ll continue to do so. It’s going to be a challenge, but I 

think we have the same challenge the province has.  

 

So universities understand that they have to look for 

efficiencies, but what we know is the efficiencies in this case 

mean cuts, staff layoffs, and tuition hikes. So those are things 

that in such a prosperous time is a bit puzzling to me, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, how it is that this government cannot keep 

pace with the growth in the province by supporting growth in 

our important institutions like advanced education. 

 

Another area I want to make a few comments on is in 

agriculture. We see a couple of interesting comments in the 

agriculture . . . separate pages in the Estimates: a large budget 

reduction for agriculture this year, 21 million. And we see that 

much of that comes from regional services. So that’s a question 

I’m going to follow up in estimates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $11 

million from regional services. So where are these government 

programs . . . What cuts are actually happening there? What 

kind of services are going to be lost as a result of this cut? 

 

Something, for example, that was very interesting to me: 31 

positions are being cut from the Livestock Services Revolving 

Fund, which means there’s only going to be 10 people left 

because 31 staff have been cut. This is an important program 

for producers, and they deal with all kinds of fees and they 

collect fees for livestock brand inspection, for pesticide 

applicator licences and other provincial services. All these fees 

are going up, and yet we know that the government is cutting 

services. There’s services for the Cattle Marketing Deductions 

Fund, and even the Horned Cattle Fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

So we have more questions, certainly at the estimates stage, to 

find out exactly what’s going on here. 

 

I think one thing that does make a lot of sense is an increase in 

spending for irrigation bridge rehabilitation, and that’s to 

support the long-term growth of irrigation in the province. And 

indeed as we see extreme weather becoming more and more of 

the norm here in Saskatchewan, the chance of drought as we 

see drought happening in the central United States in the last 

year and perhaps again this year — they’re forecasting that — 

so we know that irrigation is going to become more and more 

important. And certainly water security and all the issues that 

are related with climate change are going to have more and 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2907 

more of an impact. So we need to see irrigation supported and 

see long-term growth in irrigation. So that is something that we 

could support again. I’m not sure if 1 million is going to be 

enough, but at least it’s a move in the right direction for the 

support for irrigation. 

 

We also know that there’s a whole lot of changes in 

AgriStability and AgriInvest. And we’re looking to see what’s 

going to come out of the Growing Forward 2 program. 

Unfortunately there’s no detail on that right now. There’s some 

indication from the ministry that there will be an additional $25 

million in the federal-provincial framework from the previous 

framework.  

 

So we know that that’s coming, but we see a decrease in 

AgriStability of $52.4 million. So here we have the minister 

who came out last fall and indicated his disappointment with 

the federal government for the deep cuts that they are inflicting 

upon agriculture, and in particular the AgriStability program, 

and yet he himself had already agreed to the terms of that 

agreement a month before he came out and made that 

announcement. So it’s not really clear to me what it was he did 

to support Saskatchewan producers when the federal minister 

announced that they weren’t going to support. And certainly he 

didn’t . . . He said he was disappointed, but we don’t see 

exactly any large scale effort or, you know, even a vocal sort of 

outrage other than one comment he made to the media in the 

House here last fall. So we’re not sure where this government is 

with the federal government. 

 

We see the federal Agriculture minister really going after 

farmers in a big way, especially last year in the budget, in the 

2012 budget. And we see the cancellation of the excellent 

community pastures management program. We see the failure 

to continue support for the tree nursery in Indian Head, and this 

is another very successful program that has helped thousands of 

farmers over the years across the Prairies. We don’t see any 

initiative on the part of this government to take responsibilities 

for those programs to ensure that they continue to provide those 

services to the agricultural community that is using them. 

 

And I think the bottom line of this is something that will 

eventually show that this was a poor decision on the part of this 

government, that the community pasture program — and I’m 

talking about a bottom line that includes the social and 

environmental impacts on these lands if they are privatized, as 

this minister seems very intent on doing — time will reflect 

poorly on that decision because we know that the management 

of these pastures has been critical to the success of the 

biodiversity in those pastures, as well as the protection of 

endangered species, but also for the farmers themselves. 

 

And we find this minister often saying he’s going to listen to 

the patrons and that the patrons are the best stewards of the 

land. In the case of the community pastures, what the minister 

has failed to point out is that the patrons drop their cows off, 

and they’re actually managed by the managers. They drop the 

cows off in the spring; they pick them up in the fall. They call it 

cow daycare. And what happens is that they don’t actually 

manage the land. They drop the cows off, and then the 

management is taken care of by the pasture manager. So that’s 

something this minister hasn’t pointed out and hasn’t seemed to 

appreciate: the importance of the role of the manager for those 

particular pastures and the reasons why they were created in the 

first place. 

 

The other thing is we see at least this ministry has the ability to 

put some money aside for crop insurance. This minister 

understands that things can go wrong as far as crops go. We 

don’t see that when it comes to planning for flooding in the 

provincial budget. And indeed we don’t see any sort of 

planning at all in the budget for emergency flooding, despite the 

fact that we know that there are record snowfall in a number of 

areas here in Saskatchewan. So we see the crop insurance 

increase is, well a large increase, and that’s something I think 

that producers appreciate. 

 

What’s interesting in the crop insurance increases is that there’s 

now an opportunity for private reinsurance and for a crop 

insurance program to stabilize the premiums. And I would 

think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a program that’s probably 

available . . . it’s not available to all farmers because it’s only 

available to those who can best afford it. And so it’s good for 

them that they have the resources available to afford it, but it’s 

not a program that will be available for all producers. So it 

seems to be a special carrot for those who can actually afford to 

do that, but my concern is for those who can’t afford it and that 

their level of insurance won’t be quite the same. 

 

Moving on to education, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We see a number 

of issues on the education front. And certainly my colleagues 

have been raising concerns about that and we will be looking at 

more questions on the thinking behind the education portion in 

the budget. 

 

Again there’s way more students now enrolled in schools as a 

result of the growth in the province — 4,500 more students 

enrolled in 2012 and 2013. We get 40 portable classrooms. So 

if you want to do the math, we’re looking at one new classroom 

for every 115 new students. 

 

And we have a minister who is not able to tell us what he thinks 

the maximum class size should be. Certainly we see a ministry 

that is able to tell us they need more minutes in the day, they 

need to ensure that school doesn’t start until after the Labour 

Day weekend, and they also need standardized testing in order 

to measure performance. So those are three areas where this 

government and ministry’s been very active in its opinions on 

education. 

 

But when we asked the minister whether or not he has an 

opinion on classroom size, no, he walks away from that. He’s 

not interested at all in giving us an opinion on that, despite the 

fact that when we ask about standardized testing there seems to 

be no coherent response from that ministry and from the 

minister in terms of why we need to spend that money on 

standardized testing. Millions of dollars are going to pay for 

this testing instead of teaching, and we see $6 million being 

allocated in the budget for standardized testing. 

 

We’re also seeing a move on the part of the Sask Party to move 

out of funding and building schools out of the provincial and 

public funds. And they’re using . . . you’ve heard much from us 

in the last few days about the use of public-private partnerships 

for school constructions. This is not an area that we feel 

comfortable about because we know from the evidence that’s 



2908 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

out there that these are expensive in the long term. 

 

And when we talk about a credit card budget, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s exactly what we’re talking about, is using these types of 

programs to defer debt. And it’s clearly an effort on the part of 

this government to remove that debt from the now and put it 

into the future. And it’s like the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres’ new child that’s coming along. That child will be the 

one that’s responsible for this debt. It won’t be dealt with by 

this generation. It will be next generation’s. That’s 

short-sighted. It’s unfortunate. 

 

And there seems to be a stubborn streak in the Sask Party that 

insists that this is the way to go when there are other areas 

which needs a lot more attention, for example, school supports. 

There has been no restoration of the more than 300 educational 

assistants that the Sask Party has taken out of the classrooms. 

This has a direct impact on students and on families, and there’s 

just an insistence that this was necessary. And we don’t see any 

sort of revisiting that and recognizing that there was a mistake 

made, and the students continue to suffer. 

 

As I indicated earlier, only 30 per cent of Aboriginal students in 

Saskatchewan graduate from high school. There’s only a 

fraction of the amount, less than one thousandth of a per cent, is 

being put into solving that problem. And there’s no plan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So there’s concerns in the education front, and I know other of 

my colleagues will be commenting on this as well. But I think 

this is one of the areas where this government had an 

opportunity to shine, and they basically dropped the ball. 

 

And I know there’s comments that we’ve received from the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association and the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, which is not always two 

groups that you will hear on the same side of the page, Mr. 

Speaker. So I’m not going to go into their quotes because other 

of my colleagues have quoted those quotes already. But the 

concerns are there, and we want to make sure that we keep 

pushing the spotlight on these kinds of issues. 

 

Another area that I think has been critically overlooked, and 

that’s the environment. We see cuts again to the environment, 

Mr. Speaker, cut again, the whole budget; 2.6 million is gone. 

We see climate change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, cut by 20 per 

cent. So what was seen as a successful program, the go green 

program, has basically been decimated. There was some talk a 

couple years ago about creating a climate change institution. 

There’s no mention of that whatsoever now. We see 56 staff cut 

from the ministry. The message there is that the environment is 

not important. And if this minister is supporting those kinds of 

cuts, he’s obviously not interested in making progress in the 

environmental area. For example Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund staff has been cut by more than half, from 

15 down to 7. It’s a deep cut to that one particular program 

when we see cuts all over the place. 

 

We see $3.2 million that was allocated for municipal 

environmental protection eliminated. It’s gone. And we know 

that this municipal environmental protection was responsible 

for protecting people through the regulation of municipal and 

industrial development. It’s just simply gone. 

Wildfire management has been cut 4.5 million, and it was cut 

3.8 million last year. So those are some deep cuts that the 

Ministry of the Environment has sustained. And we live in a 

world where we know environmental issues are going to have 

more and more of an impact on us, both economically because 

of the things that we see like extreme fluctuations in weather 

. . . And we don’t see any initiative on the part of this ministry 

to make positive change in that area. 

 

We also see an increase in $15.5 million for the Water Security 

Agency, and it’s not exactly clear why this increase is there. So 

we will be asking questions in estimates about what that grant 

is for and what it’s meant to do. 

 

[20:45] 

 

But beyond that, the one area in funding where there is research 

that I think is a good move, but again not nearly enough, is in 

the boreal caribou research project. We have outstanding 

international commitments there. We have national 

commitments there that haven’t been met. And so this seems to 

be a start, but we’re starting with $250,000 in funding. So we 

need to go a lot further than that. $250,000 is a good start and 

it’s a good . . . It’s important for the government to get involved 

in this project because we have obligations to do so, and I know 

that the people involved in that project have been calling for 

support for a long time. So finally there’s some support there. I 

will be talking to people involved in that project to see whether 

they think that’s enough support or whether there’s still 

outstanding obligations that this ministry needs to pay attention 

to. 

 

In terms of health, we see a 2.3 per cent increase, and we know 

that that simply is not going to even hold the line, Mr. Speaker.  

 

One of the biggest concerns, and I mentioned this earlier, is in 

the lack of support for long-term care. We see the same 

announcement every year about long-term care projects. All 11 

of the long-term care projects that are listed in this budget were 

announced in 2009. So this is simply a recycling of 

announcements that were made in the past, and we don’t think 

that that’s supportive at all of the desperate need of long-term 

care that we have.  

 

In fact a lot of the calls I get in my constituency office are often 

from children of seniors, so adults who are looking after their 

elderly parents, and the only way they can get their parent into 

long-term care is through the hospitals, by taking them in to 

emergency. And they know there’s a way to work the system. 

People have figured out a way to work the system. But that 

simply is appalling actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people 

have to figure out how to work the system so that their loved 

ones can be looked after in a proper long-term care facility. 

This simply isn’t enough, and by recycling these 

announcements, it puts on an aura of this government that 

they’re actually looking after long-term care. But until we see 

those beds, Mr. Speaker, we know that this government has a 

long, long way to go. 

 

There’s all kinds of staff being cut in health. We do see an 

increase in Central Services spending of 550 million. And we 

don’t know for sure, but we’re suspicious that that might be 

because there’s now two ministers instead of one in the area. So 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2909 

we want to ask more questions about that. 

 

Also we see that a promised hospital from years ago in North 

Battleford is now going to be done through a public-private 

partnership. Last year there was a promise from this 

government to allocate $100 million in this year’s budget to 

build that hospital. That’s another broken promise of this 

government, Mr. Speaker. That money has not been allocated, 

and instead we see this government turning to the short-term P3 

[public-private partnership] funding model instead of dealing 

with the need and the public funds to support this facility and 

the people of North Battleford for their health care needs. 

 

The only other area in terms of health I want to mention, well 

there’s a couple more points. One is where is . . . What’s really 

missing in this budget is the support in the North. Now we 

know that there’s a report that indicates a desperate need for 

more long-term care in the North, and this government has 

simply ignored that report. The only planned northern 

long-term care facility from the 2009 announcements has been 

cancelled because the RM cannot afford its share of the 

funding. Now, Mr. Speaker, again this is a desperate need in an 

area that’s important for our province, and for whatever reason 

this government has ignored that need. 

 

We can go to Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. We see this government 

here refusing to listen to the people of Moose Jaw. They’re 

replacing the hospital, but it’s a third smaller than the existing 

one. And as we indicated a couple weeks ago, it will not 

include the hyperbaric chamber, the only one of its kind in 

Saskatchewan. We’re going to lose . . .The Moose Jaw people 

are not happy at all. They’ve been signing petitions by the 

thousands. And I think that those thousands of people are 

wanting to be heard, but we’re not sure that the members from 

Moose Jaw are paying attention at all. I think they’re probably 

out of touch completely with what the people of Moose Jaw 

really want. 

 

I turn to Highways and Infrastructure. Again we see the push to 

use public-private partnerships to build highways. This is 

definitely a deviation from the norm, and again I think it’s just 

another opportunity for this government to defer debt because 

we won’t have ownership of these, the things like the Regina 

southeast bypass, and we know that there’s already lawsuits 

associated with that particular project. And if they’re going to 

look to private partnerships to support and fund these things, 

we know that it’s a buy now, pay later scheme. This is the 

credit card budget of 2013, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re seeing a quote from the government about heavy 

preservation of highways of $86.3 million which will include at 

least 280 kilometres of highways, and we know that 280 

kilometres is less than point zero three per cent, so point zero 

three per cent of Saskatchewan’s asphalt roads. So given all the 

resources that this government has and seems intent on burning 

through, why can’t they do more for the highways, Mr. 

Speaker? We’re going to keep pushing on that and asking 

questions on that. 

 

Finally, the last area I want to speak to tonight is on the North. 

And this is probably the more glaring omission from this 

budget. It’s been completely ignored. We know that there is no 

long-term care for the people in the North. There’s no 

long-term care for the people of the North. There’s nothing 

specifically for housing in the North and nothing to improve 

damaged or inadequate highways. Simply nothing. 

 

There’s a report from 2010 that La Ronge alone needs 46 

long-term care beds. The community has 16. When this issue 

was raised in November last year, the minister said it will take 

time to add the number of long-term care beds needed in the 

province. Well the question is, Mr. Speaker, how much time? 

How much more time does this government need? There’s 

nothing in this budget for long-term care beds for people in the 

North. 

 

Wollaston Lake, we know there was a promise by this 

government to build an all-season road to that community. This 

government has done nothing to construct that road. Members 

from Hatchet Lake First Nation came to the legislature in 

October. The Sask Party government has still refused to build 

the road, and there is nothing in this budget to build it. And 

that’s why this First Nation has been forced to extraordinary 

measures to deal now with private companies to build the road 

which is going to cost close to $100 million. 

 

This government refused to restore the fish freight subsidy that 

was eliminated in last year’s budget. And this has really hurt 

the commercial fishing industry and put a number of First 

Nations jobs at risk. So when we hear this government talk 

about First Nations jobs and the creation of those, we know that 

there’s some empty promises there because we see there’s no 

support whatsoever for things like the fish freight subsidy 

which enables First Nations people to continue living the 

lifestyles of their traditional culture, Mr. Speaker. So there’s 

obviously a lot of work that’s needed. 

 

And when we look at First Nations employment, we know that 

there are a large percentage of First Nations live in the southern 

part of the province. And as FSIN Chief Perry Bellegarde 

indicated, the budget does not focus on trying to get more First 

Nations people working in the province in Treaty 6 area, Treaty 

4 area. Why take a plane to Ireland, Bellegarde asks. The fastest 

growing segment of Saskatchewan’s population are indigenous 

peoples, so invest in that segment. That’s the key thing. 

 

So we see just a complete lack of foresight in terms of how to 

approach the issue of engaging First Nations and finding 

meaningful employment, ensuring that the training is there and 

not just for mining jobs, Mr. Speaker. That’s important, but 

First Nations need to be engaged in all sectors of our economy 

— in agriculture, in health care, in education, in all sorts of 

areas — and not just mining. So I think this government talks 

about its achievement there. I think they’re short-sighted, and 

it’s a very narrow aspect of the labour force and of the 

professional development of professions in the province. And I 

think there’s just a whole lot more needed in that area. And I 

think it’s important to leave my comments on the note of First 

Nation engagement and bringing First Nations people in a 

meaningful way into the lifestyle that many non-First Nations 

peoples are enjoying, like ourselves for example. 

 

And so we need to see more of an effort from that from this 

government, and sadly it’s not there. So at this point, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to support the amendment that was introduced 

by my colleague last week. I think it’s a very well-written 



2910 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

amendment. I think one that bears considerable attention by the 

members opposite. I think they need to take time to carefully 

reflect on the intent of that amendment and take it seriously. 

They quickly ridiculed it without even having an opportunity to 

actually stop and think about it a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I’m hoping that as we go through this debate, they’ll 

start to see the wisdom in that amendment and they may 

actually consider supporting the amendment at some point. So I 

will speak in favour of the amendment and certainly will not 

support the budget as it now stands. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 

very much. Our crowd’s quite lively here this evening, Mr. 

Speaker, as we approach the 9 o’clock hour. It is my pleasure, 

Mr. Speaker, to rise in my place today and join in on the budget 

debate, the sixth consecutive balanced budget brought down by 

this government, Mr. Speaker. I want to congratulate the 

Minister of Finance, the member from Canora-Pelly, for 

delivering this balanced budget. 

 

But along with the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, I also 

want to take a couple of minutes and recognize those colleagues 

on this side of the aisle that serve on Treasury Board. Having 

served on Treasury Board myself, Mr. Speaker, through a 

budget process, through a budget cycle, I know the long hours 

that those members put in in working on a provincial budget. 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, having sat through those long 

hours as we prepared the provincial budget, it is a dedicated and 

worthy endeavour on behalf of the members on this side of the 

aisle, Mr. Speaker, that serve on Treasury Board, and I want to 

take my hat off to those members as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well I want to pay tribute to the officials, the 

members of our professional civil service that serve the public 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I want to point out that the 

officials in the Finance ministry who work alongside the 

Minister of Finance spend some long hours in developing the 

provincial budget and getting things in order for the delivery to 

the Assembly. As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out the 

officials that work with each of the individual ministers and 

their ministries as they go before Treasury Board to present 

their individual budgets and have to work alongside the treasury 

board analysts and the members of the Ministry of Finance in 

developing the provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, and take my hat 

off to how well served the people of Saskatchewan are by our 

professional civil service here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a couple of minutes as well and just 

point out the people of Regina Northeast, my constituents, the 

people that afforded me the great opportunity to come and serve 

in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan back in 

November of 2011 on that historic election. Mr. Speaker, I 

spent a lot of time, as I talked about this last year during the 

provincial budget debate, the amount of time I spent in Regina 

Northeast in door knocking and meeting the people of Regina 

Northeast at their doorsteps — whether it be in their business or 

at their home — and listening to their concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just this past Sunday I had the opportunity to attend an event in 

the Glencairn Community Centre called Community 

Connections, Mr. Speaker. I know my colleague from Regina 

Dewdney was there to bring greetings on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. It’s a cultural community centre 

that bisects the constituencies of Regina Dewdney and Regina 

Northeast, Mr. Speaker. I had the opportunity to attend this 

event that is put on by some volunteers. And the idea behind it 

is to bring together newcomers to our province, Mr. Speaker, 

not only newcomers to our province but indeed, in a lot of 

cases, newcomers to Canada from throughout the world. 

 

And it’s an opportunity for them to gather, Mr. Speaker, in a 

community hall and talk about their experiences in coming to 

Canada, to celebrate their own individual cultures, to learn from 

each other, to share some refreshments and some foods from 

their homelands, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you that these 

individuals have embraced living in this province despite the 

fact we’re now towards the end of March and we’ve still got 6 

feet of snow out here in the capital city. 

 

These people have moved to Saskatchewan. They’re taking up 

jobs in Saskatchewan. They’re contributing to our cultural 

mosaic not only in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, but indeed 

the province of Saskatchewan. And I take my hat off to 

Councillor John Findura who’s been active in that area in 

organizing that particular event, Mr. Speaker, and the 

volunteers that work with him. 

 

I had the opportunity to attend the event, as I indicated. I met a 

lot of individuals there, Mr. Speaker, who thanked me and 

wanted to thank the Premier and thank this government for the 

opportunities that have been afforded them as they move to this 

province and take up jobs and reside with their families and 

start building their lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also had a number of individuals come up to me during that 

event and congratulate me, Mr. Speaker. They wanted me to 

pass on the congratulations to the Minister of Finance and to the 

Premier for this balanced budget. They wanted to tell me about 

how they appreciate the fact that the province is being run in 

such a fiscally responsible manner, Mr. Speaker. And I said I 

would definitely pass on that information to the Premier and to 

the Minister of Finance and again take my hat off to the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things I experienced when I was door 

knocking a couple years ago, 18 months ago or so during the 

election of November of 2011 and the lead-up to that election, 

as I talked to the men and women and the residents of Regina 

Northeast, was they kept asking me questions as to why the 

official opposition, the NDP, were being so negative about 

everything here in the province of Saskatchewan, why they 

continued to just run down the province of Saskatchewan with 

their former leader, Mr. Lingenfelter, Mr. Speaker. They kept 

asking me, why can’t they ever say anything positive about the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, now what I hear from the people of 

Saskatchewan is they continue to ask me, when we look at a 

balanced budget like this, the sixth consecutive balanced 

budget, the only balanced budget presented last year in the 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2911 

Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker, now people say to me, all 

we ever hear from the NDP is it’s not enough. It’s not enough. 

 

I just heard the member from Saskatoon Nutana give her budget 

speech, Mr. Speaker, and on virtually every area of the budget, 

on virtually every area of the budget, Mr. Speaker, she talked 

about the fact we need more there. We need to have more 

resources put there. There is not enough being spent there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There is eleven and one-half billion dollars being spent this 

year on behalf of taxpayers of this province. Mr. Speaker, it is a 

balanced budget without raising any personal income taxes or 

any corporate income taxes. And the NDP on virtually every 

area of this budget have said it’s not enough. 

 

I say to the members, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, now 

is the time to stop with the platitudes to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Now is the time to start telling them how much. 

How much are you going to spend in health care? How much 

are you going to spend in education? How much are you going 

to spend in post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker? They 

refuse to say that. They refuse to say that, Mr. Speaker, and the 

people of Saskatchewan are telling us on this side that that is 

enough, Mr. Speaker. They’re tired of listening to the NDP 

criticize everything in this budget, Mr. Speaker, without talking 

about how much they would spend in those particular areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why don’t we talk a little bit about the 

investments being made through this budget into the province 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? And more particularly I picked 

out some of the highlights in the areas under quality of life, in 

the areas under infrastructure and labour force development, 

Mr. Speaker, that I think are not only applicable to the people 

of Saskatchewan, but I’m more concerned right now with the 

impact on the residents of Regina Northeast, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I looked at these different areas. This is new spending on 

top of what we’ve already been doing in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And again I heard from members opposite who, by the 

way, said last week when the new Leader of the Opposition was 

elected, that they were going to try and find good things to say 

about the government. They were going to give the government 

credit whenever there’s things come up, Mr. Speaker, that they 

thought the government was doing well. I’ve listened to a 

number of the speeches across the hall, Mr. Speaker, a number 

of speeches from across the aisle with respect to the budget so 

far, Mr. Speaker, I have yet to hear any member on the 

opposition side say anything good about this budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have seen under the quality of life area in 

this budget is a $131.8 million increase for regional health 

authorities, Mr. Speaker. We know two of the largest regional 

health authorities in the province are in Saskatoon and Regina 

and we know that an additional $131 million contributes, along 

with a $10 million increase, Mr. Speaker, for the Saskatchewan 

surgical initiative to reduce surgical wait times. Now here’s the 

interesting part about this, Mr. Speaker. This is new money in 

the health care system. This is new money going to help all the 

residents of the province of Saskatchewan, including the 

announcement, Mr. Speaker, last year of the Plains Health 

Centre coming back to the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. And I 

congratulate the Minister of Health for making that 

announcement. 

 

But the interesting thing about this, Mr. Speaker, on every 

single one of these initiatives, is the members opposite are 

going to vote against this. This is money that’s going to be 

spent in the province of Saskatchewan in health care. Health 

care, Mr. Speaker. They have said time and time again, so far in 

their budget speeches, it’s not enough. You need to spend more. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re spending $132 million extra, on top of the 

already very high budget with respect to regional health 

authorities, and we’re going to add an additional $10 million for 

a total of $70.5 million towards the Saskatchewan surgical 

initiative to reduce surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker — the 

number one issue I hear about in my constituency office — and 

those members are going to vote against it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have $2 million for an innovative home care services pilot 

program here in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, our capital 

city. I was chatting with the Minister of Health earlier today. 

We were chatting about this and I’m looking forward to see the 

results of this particular pilot program here in the capital city of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker. $2 million for a pilot program. Those 

members are going to vote against it. 

 

$350,000 increase to expand Alzheimer’s First Link, Mr. 

Speaker. I understand that’s a sevenfold increase for the 

Alzheimer’s First Link program. New money being spent. The 

members opposite will stand up and say, it’s not enough; you 

need to spend more. Mr. Speaker, they’re going to vote against 

it. 

 

$76.1 million, Mr. Speaker, for child and family services, 

community-based organizations, our CBOs involved in child 

and family services, $76.1 million in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And those members are going to vote against it. 

 

$800,000 for women’s shelters across the province. A new 

transition house in the city of Melfort, Mr. Speaker, that the 

MLA from Melfort did a great job in making . . . in bringing 

that issue to light for our government, Mr. Speaker. I 

understand it’s the first women’s shelter to be built in this 

province in 20 or 30 years. As well as additional funding for 

transition houses and existing facilities in the cities of Regina 

and Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. This is badly needed in our 

province. This is badly needed in our province, Mr. Speaker, 

and those members are going to vote against it. 

 

$9.2 million increase for the third year in federal-provincial 

affordable housing agreement, a housing agreement, Mr. 

Speaker, to bring affordable housing to our province. The NDP 

are going to vote against it. 

 

$264.4 million, Mr. Speaker, a $27 million increase. Increase. 

The members opposite say you’ve got to spend more. The 

members opposite say it’s not enough; you’ve got to spend 

more. An increase for municipal revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. 

This represents a 161 per cent increase for the city of Regina 

since this government took office in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was talking to some of the city councillors in the city of 

Regina. I was talking to the mayor here, Mr. Speaker, on budget 

day. The mayor, His Worship Michael Fougere, came up to me 



2912 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

and shook my hand and thanked me, Mr. Speaker. I know the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs, the Minister of Government 

Relations here was the one that brought that budget forward. He 

wanted me to pass on his thanks to the Minister of Government 

Relations for that increase in revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. 

And those members are going to vote against it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a $700,000 increase to enhance and expand the 

Building Partnerships to Reduce Crime initiative, to reduce 

crime initiative, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got a great program going 

on in the city of Prince Albert. We’ve got . . . The new deputy 

minister of Corrections is the former chief of police in Prince 

Albert. I happen to know the existing chief of police in Prince 

Albert, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great model to work from. We’re 

going to expand that across the province. And those members 

are going to vote against it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 27.4 million, a $3.2 million increase for the 

seniors’ income plan. Mr. Speaker, this is a bit of a sore point 

with the members opposite because, and they know it, they 

didn’t increase the seniors’ income plan by one dime in 16 

years in office. Not by a dime. Not by a dime. By the time this 

term is over, Mr. Speaker, our government will have tripled, 

tripled the seniors’ income plan. And those members are going 

to vote against that, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to vote against 

increasing funding for our seniors’ income plan in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ll go on in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. $63.6 million for 

economic corridor projects such as the Regina west bypass — 

absolutely needed here for the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker — 

the Estevan bypass, passing lanes on Highway 10, and 

completion of the Highway 11 twinning initiative. The member 

for Saskatoon Nutana just talked in her budget speech, there’s 

not enough money being spent in the highways budget, Mr. 

Speaker; we have to spend more. I simply ask the question, how 

much more? How much more should we be spending in the 

highways budget and where are you going to find the money for 

it? These increases, Mr. Speaker, and those members are going 

to vote against it. 

 

$6 million, Mr. Speaker, for SaskBuilds preparatory work for 

P3 opportunities, including the Saskatchewan Hospital at North 

Battleford, a P3 approach to new school construction, and the 

Regina southeast bypass infrastructure. Now the member for 

Regina Elphinstone who represents the city of Regina, you 

would think would want to support that, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

constituency on the east side of Regina. I hear over and over 

again about the congestion, the traffic congestion problems on 

the eastern side of the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. This 

government’s going to explore a new southeast bypass, and 

those members are going to vote against it, including the 

member for Regina Elphinstone. 

 

117.4 million in student supports, an increase of 19.6 million or 

20 per cent, Mr. Speaker, a 20 per cent increase — the members 

opposite say it’s not enough — which includes 63.9 million in 

refundable and non-refundable tax credits for the graduate 

retention program, the most generous program in the country of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. 34.5 million for the Student Aid Fund, 

this additional fund for our post-secondary students, Mr. 

Speaker. 7.5 million for the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship and 6.5 million to establish the Saskatchewan 

advantage grant for education savings, Mr. Speaker, a brand 

new program. A brand new program for our post-secondary 

education students, Mr. Speaker, and those members are going 

to vote against it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did some analysis as well. We’ve had tax 

changes done in this province by our Minister of Finance such 

that a single mom, Mr. Speaker, a single mom making $25,000 

a year in the province of Manitoba pays almost 400 per cent 

more in income tax, provincial income tax in the province of 

Manitoba governed by the NDP, the NDP in Manitoba, than 

that single mom would pay here in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We think that’s good public 

policy. They’re going to vote against a budget that has that kind 

of incentive and that kind of support for single moms making 

$25,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to touch a little bit about my own portfolio, Mr. Speaker, 

the Parks, Culture and Sport ministry, and just look at some of 

the investments we’ve been making into that particular 

ministry, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you that in our provincial 

parks, for example, we will be spending thirteen and a half 

million dollars a year, thirteen and a half million dollars a year 

in capital infrastructure in our provincial parks, the 34 

provincial parks throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. If you 

total up the amount of capital dollars that have been spent in the 

last six years of the previous NDP government versus the last 

six years of this government, Mr. Speaker, it is in excess of a 

200 per cent increase in capital dollars into our provincial parks 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We had record visits last year to our provincial parks, Mr. 

Speaker, over 3.5 million visitors in our provincial parks, both 

people from the province of Saskatchewan and our tourists 

from outside the province of Saskatchewan bringing their 

dollars into the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 

they’re going to vote against that kind of capital infrastructure 

for our parks. 

 

We have over $1 million to support our regional parks, Mr. 

Speaker, our regional parks system throughout the province. I 

spoke with the president of the Regional Parks Association at 

the budget speech last week, Mr. Speaker. He shook my hand 

and thanked me for the support this government is providing 

our regional parks. 

 

$100,000 for the RCMP Heritage Centre here in the city of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, $100,000 to support the RCMP Heritage 

Centre, matching $100,000 from the city of Regina. And those 

members are going to vote against that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And our culture sector, our culture sector, Mr. Speaker, one of 

the areas I am very proud of what we’ve accomplished in this 

budget. Mr. Speaker, the overall budget increase is 3.1 per cent 

on our expenditure side, and those members say we need to 

spend more. Those members say we need to spend more. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind all of the members on 

both sides of the House that there is no use of telephones in this 

Assembly. If the member wishes to use the telephone, he may 

leave the Chamber to do so. 

 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2913 

I recognize the Minister of Parks and other fun stuff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 

described my ministry as the ministry of fun, as have many of 

my colleagues, so I appreciate the recognition on that side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to talk a bit more about the monies that 

this government, this Minister of Finance, this Premier have 

delivered in our cultural sector, in my ministry, Mr. Speaker. 

Year-over-year estimates will allow an 18 per cent lift, an 18 

per cent lift on cultural spending in my ministry this year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have $5 million for the film employment tax credit in this 

coming fiscal year, $5 million still available for the film 

industry in this province, Mr. Speaker. We have a $1 million 

transition fund, a $1 million transition fund provided by the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board that all of our creative industries, Mr. 

Speaker, are accessing as we speak to help them develop and 

commercialize their product. We have over $1 million in 

support for the sound stage, Mr. Speaker, over 73,000 square 

feet. This government’s been providing over $1 million on an 

annual basis to support that sound stage and keep it available. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also have the creative industry growth 

and sustainability fund, $1.5 million that continues into this 

next fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. It’s being moved over from the 

Arts Board through agreement with them into Creative 

Saskatchewan, and Creative Saskatchewan is up and going. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to say that we have $5 

million — new dollars, Mr. Speaker — in an investment fund 

in Creative Saskatchewan for all of our creative industries to 

access, to provide support for them financially, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had the opportunity over the last seven, eight months to be 

involved in this consultation process with our creative 

industries in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I can 

tell you that on budget day, on budget day to a person, they 

thanked us. They thanked this government for that $5 million 

investment fund, the likes of which they’ve never had access to 

in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell you 

they were delighted. 

 

But I can tell you they weren’t very happy with, Mr. Speaker 

. . . is the comments from the Culture critic that’s been pointed 

out by various members over on this side, Mr. Speaker, during 

their address to the budget speech. And what I can tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, it is disappointing. It’s disappointing that the members 

opposite, the members opposite continue to focus in on just the 

film industry in this province as comprising our creative sector, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that our creative industries are made up of music — I 

think the member from Nutana talked about that — the film 

industry, digital media, visual arts, crafts, publishing, and the 

performing arts, Mr. Speaker. And when asked, the NDP 

Culture critic, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, Mr. 

Speaker, said there are lots of details that remain to be seen. But 

in general, in general, Mr. Speaker, the new fund shows that the 

province hasn’t listened to filmmakers, hasn’t listened to 

filmmakers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve been working with all the representatives from the 

creative sector for the last seven, eight months, Mr. Speaker, 

and she continues to point out just filmmakers. She goes on to 

say her concern with the new money, the new fund, is that it 

divides money with other arts and is not going to stimulate film 

production here in Saskatchewan. It does nothing for the 

economy, and that’s the bottom line. That’s the bottom line, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s 5 million new dollars in this budget this 

year, Mr. Speaker, as well as $5 million in the film employment 

tax credit as well as a $1 million transitional fund over from the 

Arts Board, Mr. Speaker, an 18 per cent lift, an 18 per cent lift 

in our cultural sector in this budget, Mr. Speaker. And the 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale, the Culture critic, says it’s 

not enough. That’s the bottom line. It’s going to do nothing for 

our economy. 

 

[21:15] 

 

So I can’t imagine what a music producer, Mr. Speaker, or a 

publisher or someone in digital media . . . woke up the morning 

after the budget, having their morning coffee and opened up 

their newspaper and read that, that their contribution to our 

province, Mr. Speaker, their contribution and their particular 

artistic genre does nothing for our economy, Mr. Speaker. It 

does nothing unless they’re a filmmaker. And I think that’s 

divisive politics on the part of the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’m proud, proud, Mr. Speaker, of what we’ve been able to 

accomplish in this budget in my Ministry of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. I’m looking forward to getting into the estimates of this 

particular area, Mr. Speaker, with members opposite. I am 

going to be supporting this budget and not the ridiculous 

amendment put forward by the members opposite. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

always a pleasure to rise in the House and represent the people 

of Regina Dewdney and talk specifically about the balanced 

growth budget. 

 

A few thank yous before I get into the substantive part of my 

comments, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the Treasury Board 

and the Minister of Finance. Before I got into government I 

didn’t realize how much time is spent in Treasury Board. And 

basically for the folks at home, they look at a line-by-line item 

of every budgetary expenditure of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, some $11.6 billion. And from October to when 

the budget’s dropped, Mr. Speaker, they put in a lot of time, so 

I’d like to thank those folks. 

 

Of course I’d like to thank my constituents, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

really enjoying my time in my role as an MLA, and I enjoy 

representing them every time I can. And it’s a good experience 

for myself, and I again thank those folks for putting their trust 

in me and electing me on November the 7th, 2011. 

 

I’d like to thank Brittany. She’s relatively new to our office, 

Mr. Speaker, but she’s doing great work on behalf of the people 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Certainly last but not least, Mr. Speaker, I have to thank my 



2914 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

family. Of course all of us know how important families are in 

this business. They share us with our constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

So we’re very thankful for the sacrifices our family make, and 

specifically my family, my wife, Tami. She’s the best one 

around. I got very lucky, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been through a 

lot of ups and downs, but she’s always kept us together and 

kept us going. And my three sons, Nicholas, Ryan, and Blake. I 

think they’re watching right now. Certainly very proud of them 

and, you know, they’re enjoying their time growing up here in 

Saskatchewan, and it’s a good time to be here in Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, a few days or a day after the 

budget, my son Ryan mentioned to my wife, he was kind of 

concerned and he said, he said to my wife — I wasn’t home — 

how come there’s no red ink in Saskatchewan? He was really 

concerned that, you know, how is his teacher going to mark his 

tests? How is he going to write with a red pen? He was a little 

concerned by that. And I wish I was home. I would have 

mentioned to him, well son, the market’s really down on red ink 

in Saskatchewan. We haven’t needed it in the last six years. Or 

I could have said, I suppose I could have said, well just about 

every place else in the world has totally used it all. It’s all gone. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, just quickly here an update on Regina 

Dewdney for my colleagues and the folks that might be 

watching around there, excuse me, around the province tonight. 

There’s a lot of new buildings, new construction happening all 

the time, just like every place in the province, every 

constituency: a new commercial office building on McAra 

Avenue north of Victoria Avenue; a new Royal Bank going on, 

going to be starting soon on Quance and Prince of Wales; a new 

private care home. I mentioned this I think in my last speech, 

Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately there was a small fire that set them 

back a little ways, Mr. Speaker, but it looks like they’re back on 

track. It’s going to be a new private care home, and it’s going to 

be specifically for folks with dementia or related diseases. So 

it’s not good to see it, but certainly with a Canadian every five 

minutes being diagnosed with some form of dementia, those 

types of care homes will be needed. It’s on Heseltine Road in 

my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think a lot of times when you go on Victoria Avenue East, Mr. 

Speaker, you think of the big box stores, the Wal-Marts, the 

Costcos, etc., but all along Quance there’s a lot of small sort of 

local businesses thriving along Quance, and more and more you 

see extending west along Victoria Avenue, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s a lot of, I think, business optimism in my constituency 

and right across the province. 

 

And when I think about it, Mr. Speaker, there’s not a whole lot 

of land. I think when I moved to the area in 2003, there was 

obviously a lot more available land. There’s just a little bit 

south of the Victoria Square Mall now and, outside of rezoning, 

that’ll be it. So that speaks to the growth of the area. 

 

Again I spoke about Parkview Village before on Fines Drive, 

71 units of social housing. It’s coming on the market. It’s being 

rolled in. I drove by there a few days ago. There’s people living 

there now. There’s cars. There’s families there. There’s a $9.6 

million investment from our government that was not from this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, but that has already been allotted. And it 

comes in at half the cost of replacing those buildings. If we 

would have just left them, we would have lost those buildings. 

There was basement problems. So this government, this 

minister, stepped up with $9.6 million, 71 units, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Specifically for Dewdney in the budget, Mr. Speaker, two 

portable classrooms for Glen Elm School. The renovations to 

Campus Regina Public continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And $6 million to SaskBuilds to prep for the southeast bypass, 

Mr. Speaker. I know that’s certainly a big issue in my 

constituency. Victoria Avenue East runs right through the heart 

of Regina Dewdney. I know this is a big issue as well in . . . my 

colleague from Wascana Plains, Mr. Speaker. It’s one of the 

busiest areas in the province for traffic, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 

No. 1 Highway, No. 1, a highway that goes right through the 

city, Mr. Speaker. There’s lots of truck traffic and there’ll be 

certainly more and more as more businesses come online to the 

Global Transportation Hub. 

 

Satellite communities — White City, Pilot Butte, Balgonie — 

there’s a lot of people moving there and that come into the city, 

so it’s a very congested area, Mr. Speaker. So when you come 

into the city, there’s seven lights that all those cars have to go 

through on Victoria East, seven traffic lights. And that leads to 

congestion when you have those big semi-trailers with two 

trailers and a lot of people coming in from outside the city, Mr. 

Speaker, and a lot of people through the city. That’s certainly a 

needed project, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know we’re looking at a P3 project for that, Mr. Speaker. I 

know earlier in question period today there was a lot of 

fearmongering by the members opposite about looking at P3s. 

I’m not sure, based on how question period went for the 

member from Rosemont, I’m not sure . . . We might not get a 

few more. We probably won’t get any more questions in the 

next little while about those. 

 

You know, I hear from certainly the members opposite that the 

growth plan or the idea of growth, it only benefits a select few 

people, Mr. Speaker. Some say it’s growth just for growth’s 

sake, but certainly nothing can be further from the truth, Mr. 

Speaker. This budget shows that. On page 1 of the budget it 

says it’s not just for growth’s sake but it’s what growth pays 

for, Mr. Speaker. And every Premier’s speech I’ve listened to in 

the last years, he’s made the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think this budget particularly shows the importance of 

what growth does for our province. When resource revenues are 

slumping a little bit, Mr. Speaker, years past it would’ve been a 

big problem for the government. There would’ve been slashing 

across the board, or if the members opposite were in power, big 

taxes increases, I imagine, and massive deficits. But you know, 

we look at what’s happening in Alberta, $6 billion in the hole. 

We haven’t seen that in a long time, whereas we tabled another 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So here’s some of the things that growth does pay for, Mr. 

Speaker. People with disabilities, the funding has gone up by 

$126.8 million since 2007 when we took government, a 62.4 

per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. New transition houses, many of 

my colleagues have talked extensively about this. I might just 

point out a few though for families of victims of domestic 

abuse, Mr. Speaker. Seniors’ income plan again, a near tripling 

since it was brought in in 2007. New paratransit services, 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2915 

particularly for smaller centres in our province, Mr. Speaker, a 

doubling of the capital grants for those paratransit services. 

 

Services and supports for people with Alzheimer’s, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that’s a very important initiative by the 

Minister of Health. You know, it just helps give services and 

supports for families that are newly diagnosed. And there’s 

good programming in Regina and Saskatoon. This helps it 

move into some of the smaller communities in our province, 

Mr. Speaker, to have that support when a family member is 

diagnosed with that disease. So that’s a good thing. 

 

It was kind of interesting what one of the members opposite 

said about that new funding and that new program, Mr. 

Speaker. The member from Rosemont in his reply to the budget 

speech, he mentioned, “We’re pleased to see that the NDP’s 

specific request for funding for the First Link program for 

Alzheimer’s patients . . . will see some funding.” Well, Mr. 

Speaker, leave it to the NDP to self congratulate themselves, 

give themselves the old pat on the back. I think they 

overestimated a little bit their influence on that decision, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know, the new Leader of the Opposition said he would 

give credit where credit’s due. I didn’t think . . . He gave credit 

when it’s not due, Mr. Speaker. You know, if it was me I might 

have thanked the minister. Well maybe, you know, you don’t 

expect the members of the opposition to congratulate the 

Minister of Finance or the Minister of Health, but you might 

want to congratulate Joanne Bracken let’s say from the 

Alzheimer Society who’s put in hundreds of hours probably 

advocating for Alzheimer’s patients around the province. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I would have thought after the last 

election there might be a sense of humility from the members 

opposite, and they might have changed their ways just a little 

bit. But I think statements like that, it really proves that, you 

know, it’s just the same old NDP. I think Dwain Lingenfelter 

would have just fit in just fine with that same group of people, 

Mr. Speaker. So that’s too bad to hear things like that. 

 

One more quick thing, Mr. Speaker, is that quick response 

home care pilot project in Regina helps keep seniors in their 

own home longer. That’s happening here in the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region, Mr. Speaker, and it helps defer 

placement in long-term care which helps the system not have so 

much congestion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Quickly, Habitat for Humanity, they’ve doubled the funding. 

The Ministry of Social Services, they’ve doubled the funding, 

40 new homes. Since ’09, 90 homes built, Mr. Speaker. I know 

it’s just a great program — $50,000 towards each home from 

the Government of Saskatchewan. It combines with high school 

students who help build those homes. The new owners get a 

chance to work on those homes. I believe they put 500 hours in 

of sweat equity, Mr. Speaker. And that’s great to see. 

 

And I know when you look at a budget, you think about a 

million here, a billion there. You start to, you know, not really 

think about the people that are impacted by those 

announcements of those homes. And I know the minister was at 

a key ceremony this morning when a family, a new family to 

Saskatchewan got a chance to have their new home, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s, you know, that’s the story behind the 

money, Mr. Speaker. And you see the look on those kids’ face. 

I know several of my colleagues from Regina have been at 

those ceremonies, and it’s just a special moment when families 

from here in Saskatchewan but also around the world, that have 

been through things you probably wouldn’t believe if you heard 

it, and they come here to Canada and Saskatchewan and they 

get a new home. 

 

And what’s really sad about that though is the members 

opposite are voting against that. They’re voting against that, 

those folks getting that new home. It’d be interesting if one of 

those members had a conversation with those people that were 

in those situations and came here and got a new house, what 

their rationale for not supporting this budget would be, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Let’s see what Dennis Coutts, the CEO [chief executive officer] 

of Habitat for Humanity, what he said. He had a lot of good 

things to say and that’s great, Mr. Speaker. “The Hon. Minister 

June Draude’s hard work and unrelenting passion to solve 

housing issues in Saskatchewan serves as a model for the entire 

country.” 

 

He also went on to say, “We are the envy of the country. I 

applaud the Government of Saskatchewan for keeping their 

commitment for more housing to help low-income, 

hard-working Saskatchewan people.” 

 

And again I think he’s right. We’re the envy of the country. I 

don’t think a lot of other jurisdictions are rolling out programs 

like this. They’re slashing. They’re cutting because they have 

to. They’re in deficit. We’re not, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s too 

bad we don’t have support from the members opposite. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Just real quick a few other third party quotes I’d like to share 

with the members of the House and people watching at home. 

Our mayor here in Regina, he said: 

 

Overall this is a positive budget for the city of Regina. We 

continue to grow and prosper and it’s very important to 

. . . that. The province is our partner in sustaining that 

growth and meeting the needs of municipalities across the 

province. 

 

Someone else said . . . Hold on here. “Yes, we’re overall very, 

very pleased [Mr. Speaker], quite frankly. We’re still one of the 

only provinces in the country to have a balanced budget, and 

we can’t forget the significance of that.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a few things I didn’t say . . . Sorry, 

Steve McLellan said. I am sorry, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure a lot of 

people had said something similar to that as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s a few things I heard that I didn’t like as much though, 

Mr. Speaker. I heard from the members opposite, a few of them 

have already labelled this a credit card budget, particularly the 

member from Rosemont. Well that’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s more revenue than expenditures in this budget. You 

don’t need a credit card for that. I think he’s not quite 

understanding that situation. 



2916 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

I saw as I was watching TV — I believe it was Thursday 

morning — and the member from Rosemont live on TV, he was 

fearmongering again about P3s. And he talked about the great 

credit rating of the province; we’re in a strong financial 

position. So I think he was advocating the province taking on 

more debt, and that is certainly a situation where you’d need a 

credit card. And I wonder what credit card or how many credit 

cards the province would need after those members’ last 

election platform, Mr. Speaker. It would be quite a few — a 5 

billion-plus-dollar budget deficit that would be needed, Mr. 

Speaker, and obviously the people of Saskatchewan didn’t want 

to go down that road again. 

 

The plan advocated by Dwain Lingenfelter and the member 

from Massey Place, the new Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, this was their budget, Mr. Speaker, the tree booklet. It 

would have risked all the hard work the province, the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan had done for many, many, many 

years, Mr. Speaker, and got us to the position where we are 

today. That would have been gone in one fell swoop. 

Thankfully the people of Saskatchewan soundly rejected that 

government or that former government that got us, you know, 

in a tough situation, Mr. Speaker. So I’m so glad that we 

rejected, the people of Saskatchewan rejected that to the tune of 

49 to 9, Mr. Speaker. And the way I count, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

seven converted touchdowns to three field goals over there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on. There’s a few other things I 

wouldn’t mind talking about. But, Mr. Speaker, I think what 

I’m going to do is let my colleagues continue on. It’s been my 

pleasure to represent the people of Regina Dewdney and my 

family as well, Mr. Speaker, and on behalf of those people I just 

mentioned, I am going to be supporting this budget. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to start out by congratulating the people on this 

side of the House. Throughout the summer, they talked to their 

constituents, they visited with them, they found out their 

concerns, they brought it to caucus, discussed it over . . . what 

budget items that needed to be discussed, and together they put 

it together into the hands of the Finance minister. Him and his 

ministry spent a lot of time, a lot of effort in putting in the 

details of this budget, this $11.6 billion budget. And I 

congratulate him and his ministry for what they have done in 

putting this together. 

 

I also thank him for the presentation he did to the Moose Jaw 

Chamber of Commerce luncheon on Friday. There was some 

concern obviously when the highway was blocked for some 30 

hours leading up to Friday’s luncheon and, you know, a little 

concerned if he couldn’t have made it. I was kind of looking at 

possibly being able to do the presentation, although as difficult 

as that would have been it would have been kind of cool to be 

the Finance minister for a day. Fortunately he, with the 

knowledge he had and the Ministry of Highways opening the 

roads, the minister got there, did a great job for the people of 

Saskatchewan or for the people of Moose Jaw rather at the 

chamber of commerce luncheon in Moose Jaw. So thank him 

for that. Thank him for the amount of work that he’s done with 

his ministry on this budget, this budget of growth and keeping 

Saskatchewan moving forward. 

 

And keeping Saskatchewan growing is . . . We’ve done this in 

the budget. It’s the sixth balanced budget that this government 

has produced. It’s a responsible budget with prudent 

management and controlled spending. The excellent 

presentation by the minister was much longer than I’m allotted 

time here today. But I’d like to take a few minutes and just go 

over some of the key issues that I look at when I see the budget 

— key issues in health and education, agriculture, the economy 

at large, and the better quality of life for all of Saskatchewan 

citizens. It is a plan for improving housing for the service of 

vulnerable adults and children, increasing levels of care rates 

for residents of approved private service homes, assisting 

seniors through income in the seniors’ income plan, further 

enhancement to the Saskatchewan assured income for 

disabilities program as well as infrastructure and agriculture. 

This budget contains investment in infrastructure 

improvements, all with a vision that looks far into the future, 

Mr. Speaker, all within controlled spending, all within a 

balanced budget. 

 

This budget provides for the good of the people of 

Saskatchewan and it does it in a sustainable, responsible way, 

and it is balanced. This budget provides the needs for citizens 

planning for the future, and it’s balanced. Yes it is. Balanced in 

meeting the needs of today. Balanced in looking for the future, 

for our children’s future and far beyond. Balanced in providing 

growth, strengthening our economy. Balanced in the quality of 

life and balanced both on the general revenue and the summary 

statement. It is rightfully labelled balanced growth for 

2013-2014. It is within this document which the future plans of 

the province are based upon. That is why such effort has gone 

into the details, making sure it prepares for the future and yet it 

does control spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest challenges of growth is making 

sure that we have the infrastructure we need for our growing 

economy. The infrastructure was left in a deteriorated state for 

decades by the former NDP government that was out of touch 

with the people and the needs of Saskatchewan. You’ll recall 

that schools were run down, highways appalling to a point of 

not being passable. At the end of their term, 52 rural hospitals 

were closed, plus the newest provincial hospital at that time, the 

Plains hospital closed. There were 1,600 fewer long-term beds 

during the NDP term in government. People were leaving the 

province. There was no growth. There was no plan, only their 

mindset of managing decline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the lost investments like SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company] and Navigata and 

Channel Lake, yes even Guyana and Coachman Insurance, they 

lost millions of our taxpayers’ dollars in a declining economy. 

 

During that NDP tenure, year after year the population 

declined. Our kids grew up here. They graduated from high 

schools and technicals and universities, and then they moved on 

to other provinces. 

 

In fact roughly 10 years ago . . . And the Premier alluded to this 

last Wednesday about the NDP government’s press release 

about 10 years ago — the out-migration is now at a slower rate 

in the province of Saskatchewan. Isn’t that a disgusting way to 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2917 

promote the province, the out-migration is slowing down? 

That’s like saying, we’re not as lousy as we were, but we’re 

there. Or we’re not expecting growth, just slowing the poverty 

slide of this province. In fact the statement was made by one of 

those members: the more people that leave, the more there is 

for the rest of us. What a terrible, what a terrible mindset to be 

in by people who are supposed to be, Mr. Speaker, in a 

leadership position. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the case with the Saskatchewan 

that we know now. That’s not the case with the Saskatchewan 

Party government. The Saskatchewan Party government is 

caring for people. They’re managing wisely. We’re growing the 

economy while balancing the budget. And this is the sixth 

balanced budget of our government. 

 

We believe Saskatchewan has great potential for growth. This 

budget plans for growth, plans for sustainable growth, a 

balanced plan providing quality of life for all of our citizens and 

rightfully entitled a balanced growth budget. 

 

New record population figures show that Saskatchewan 

continues to grow. Over the last six years, Saskatchewan has 

been the place to be or the place to return to, which is a stark 

contrast from the depopulation that used to be the pattern of the 

NDP government. Saskatchewan today is setting records. 

Firstly, they are setting records in population, 1,089,807 people. 

That’s over 82,000 people increase since January of 2008. And 

it’s on target to reach the goal of increasing population to 1.2 

million by 2020. A larger population, more investment. More 

investment, more jobs. More jobs, a broader tax base. Growth 

benefits all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last week I, along with the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, participated in the official ribbon cutting of a new 

business in Moose Jaw, Blue Whale Financial Solutions. I want 

to congratulate Joe Moffatt and his wife, Krista, who opened 

this brand new office in Moose Jaw. You know, during that 

opening celebration, I happened to talk to a gentleman from 

Sun Life out of Regina. His name was Brian Kilback. I was 

fascinated by his recollection of his years as the centre 

manager. And he said just a few years ago he used to get one or 

two calls every six or eight weeks about somebody that was 

moving back to Saskatchewan. But he says, Warren, I get six to 

eight calls now daily, just from people that are moving back. A 

big increase from the people that are moving back, an 

opportunity for them to increase their business and build new 

places, new buildings . . . business. 

 

Agrocorp Processing is a new agricultural processing company 

that will be opening this summer in Moose Jaw. It’s a large 

processing company, a high-speed loading and cleaning facility 

to handle peas and lentils, oilseeds and grains, with a capacity 

to handle 250 000 metric tons of diverse products. It’s a new 

job, a new company creating jobs, hiring people, helping to 

build our economy. There’s other growth opportunities that are 

in Moose Jaw, as they are in every corner of this province. 

They see the potential, they see the opportunities, they see the 

opportunities for growth, and growth is good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Increased population, increased investment, creating new jobs, 

higher weekly wages, lowest unemployment, and a balanced 

growth budget to take us into 2014 and beyond. This budget is 

balanced in the General Revenue Fund and on the summary 

financial fund, and Saskatchewan is the only province that had 

a balanced budget this fiscal year. And with all other provinces 

and other jurisdictions throughout North America struggling 

with economic downturns and high unemployment, 

Saskatchewan leads and will continue to lead in growth again in 

this fiscal year. This budget focuses on balanced growth. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t have time to go into a lot of details of the 

budget document; however, I do want to centre on a few of the 

items. 

 

Our government is committed to improving health care for the 

people of Saskatchewan. A record $4.84 billion will be invested 

to continue to reduce surgical wait times, thereby improving the 

quality of the life of the people of Saskatchewan. This is an 

increase of 41 per cent over the past six years, demonstrating 

our commitment to improve health care for Saskatchewan 

people and our goal to ensure that no one waits more than three 

years for surgery. You’ll recall that the NDP, when they were in 

power, had the longest surgical wait-list in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $3 billion of funding is going to regional health 

authorities to provide health care through hospitals, health 

centres, and long-term health facilities. Again when the NDP 

were in power, 1,600 long-term beds were closed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, cancer has touched the lives of everyone in this 

room, I’m sure. Last year our family was saddened by two 

deaths in our family — Connie Anne Walchuk, my niece, and 

my sister, Marie Meckling, both died from cancer. I was 

pleased that this government understood the need for care, and 

this year the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency will receive $150.7 

million to provide enhanced cancer care service. Mr. Speaker, 

this is an 8.6 increase over last year, and it’s a 90 per cent 

increase to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency over the past five 

years. Funding allows the agency to operate prevention and 

early detection programs, conduct innovative research, and 

provide safe patient- and family-centred care. 

 

[21:45] 

 

There will also be $3.7 billion toward operation of a new 

PET/CT [positron emission tomography/computerized 

tomography] scanner at the Royal University Hospital. Two 

hundred and forty additional physicians are practising in 

Saskatchewan today compared to 2007. And an increase of $2 

billion will support the doubling of post-secondary training 

seats to 120 to further boost physician numbers in 

Saskatchewan. And to the people of Moose Jaw and the Five 

Hills Health Region, there’s $50 million to continue the plans 

and start construction for the replacement of the Moose Jaw 

hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t be more excited about the opportunities 

that are presented through the Moose Jaw hospital. This is a 

state of the art hospital. The planning has gone on for a year 

now. They’ve actually had people — they were the finest 

contractors in the business, architects — working with the 

medical staff from the Moose Jaw Health Foundation, the Five 

Hills health foundation, along with some of the citizens and 

former patients from the area. 

 

They’ve rented a warehouse where they’ve actually set up 



2918 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

models of how this hospital will work and how the flow of 

patients will come because it’s centred on patient care, Mr. 

Speaker. If something doesn’t work, they reconstruct it and 

look at it again. Mr. Speaker, this is a state of the art facility, 

and it’s ready to start construction early in the spring and go 

forward. And I’m so pleased that there’s $50 million in the 

budget to forward that construction. 

 

There’s further investment for rural health and rural family 

physician recruitment and continuing investment in the STARS 

helicopter ambulance. Health care is the largest expenditure, 

and I’ve presented some of the items included in this balanced 

growth budget. This balanced growth budget is there to benefit 

all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my time is running quickly, but there’s a lot of 

things that are covered in this budget in support of the students 

and post-secondary education. The government keeps a 

commitment to provide more housing. Housing is a huge issue, 

and in the program that was brought out last year from the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth by the Premier, it was 

announced that there would be 114 new housing rental units 

through the Minister of Social Services. 

 

This is a great opportunity for our city, for 140 new units being 

added to the market. And what happens, the people that are 

living in these rental units, these public units, they have the 

opportunity, the first opportunity to buy the units they’re in or 

they can move into the new ones when they’re ready. By 

moving into the new ones, it doesn’t cost them any more 

because the formula is on the amount of income they have. But 

they will increase because they’ve got safer, new 

accommodations that are economically more efficient than the 

ones that are probably 50 to 60 years old. And it’s a win-win 

for the people of Moose Jaw, adding 114 residences to a tight 

marketplace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be amiss if I didn’t mention this in 

conclusion, that in response to the opposition critic, the member 

from Regina Rosemont, when he talked about a credit card 

budget. Mr. Speaker, the reckless spending that was offered in 

their campaign platform with Dwain Lingenfelter, it outlined a 

$5 billion proposal for expenditure to try and buy the election 

— $5 billion, Mr. Speaker. They talk about a credit card, credit 

card budget and they were willing to risk and willing to force 

the people of this province $5 billion in debt just so they could 

win the election. It’s totally ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. It was 

smart of the people of Saskatchewan to see the real, the real 

value of that behind Mr. Lingenfelter and the NDP. And yet 

they endorsed that, and they called this balanced budget a credit 

card budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it could be nothing further from the truth. This is 

an honest budget. It’s a balanced budget. It’s the sixth balanced 

budget, Mr. Speaker. I will not be supporting the amendment 

made by the NDP opposition. But I will be supporting the 

government, the budget that was presented by our Minister of 

Finance. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise to respond to the budget speech, Mr. 

Speaker. I am mindful of the time, and I believe I am all that 

stands between my colleagues and adjournment of this House, 

so I’ll try to keep my remarks fairly brief. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the next 40 minutes or so I will hope to talk 

about the budget, obviously, and my constituency. But first, Mr. 

Speaker, I do want to thank my constituency assistant, Marcie 

Swedburg, who has served just absolutely in a dedicated way 

the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy even before I became the 

MLA in 2006. Marcie has served capably and dedicated in a 

dedicated fashion and faithfully to the people of Weyburn-Big 

Muddy for going on 13 years, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank 

her. 

 

I also want to thank, Mr. Speaker, the staff in the building that 

work in my ministerial office — Brenda, Trent, Michael, 

Crystal, Andrew, and Jessica — who do a tremendous job each 

and every day, not only serving me but also interacting with 

constituents from all across this province who from time to time 

will contact the minister’s office. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I do want to thank all of my family and 

my friends back home who do such a great job in supporting 

me and providing me with the opportunity to do this. 

 

Most especially though I want to thank Amanda, the love of my 

life, Mr. Speaker, and who this summer we will be celebrating 

14 years of being married, 14 years. And, Mr. Speaker, there is 

not enough time in this session or in this legislative sitting to 

tell the people of this province how much I appreciate her and 

just how much joy that she brings to my life. So I want to thank 

her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to, I want to talk a little bit about the 

Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is an incredible time of growth in the constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, regardless of what part of Weyburn-Big Muddy that 

you happen to be in, Mr. Speaker. We are seeing, particularly in 

Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, record development, record growth, 

record numbers when it comes to construction starts, building 

permits, new housing starts, Mr. Speaker. We are certainly 

seeing significant population growth. And I think we’re seeing 

as well, a government, the provincial government working well 

with the city and with the municipalities that surround the city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to, while I am on my feet and talking 

about the city of Weyburn, I do want to congratulate the mayor 

of Weyburn, Debra Button, my friend Debra who was recently 

elected the president of SUMA, the first female president of 

SUMA in the over 100-year history of that organization. And 

she certainly is doing a terrific job as our mayor and will, I 

know, at this new responsibility that she has been given. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look back at the five, six years I guess that 

this government has been in office, revenue sharing alone, 

which is an important piece to all of our municipal partners to 

help them deliver services to the citizens that they serve, Mr. 

Speaker, the city of Weyburn has seen 169 per cent increase in 

revenue sharing. And it certainly has been a significant jump 

when you look at, in a sheer dollar amount, from about 

$800,000 back in 2007 to well over $2.2 million in revenue 

sharing, Mr. Speaker. And they are certainly putting those 

dollars to good use. 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2919 

We’re also seeing, I think, as much of the province is seeing, 

significant increases in property value. And we wanted to make 

sure as a government that we were doing what we could to help 

offset our portion, the education portion of those increases 

because of assessment and reassessment this year. We are 

seeing for, Mr. Speaker, I believe for residential alone the value 

of property in Weyburn jumped from $253 million to $575 

million between assessments, Mr. Speaker. When you look at 

the provincial average, I believe which is around the 75, 

possibly 70 per cent increase in residential value, in the city of 

Weyburn it has increased by 130 per cent, Mr. Speaker. So 

certainly it is good news that this budget commits significant 

dollars to try as much as possible to get to a revenue-neutral 

position across the province when it comes to education 

property taxes. 

 

Speaking of education, we are, Mr. Speaker, seeing a 

significant renovation to our high school, Mr. Speaker. Up until 

really this time, Weyburn’s high school has been a grades 10 to 

12 with the regional college as a part of the high school. We’re 

seeing a transition to a new grade formulation configuration 

where grades 7 to 12 will now be a part of the high school, and 

that’s a part of approximately $60 million renewal of the high 

school which will then include the regional college as well as a 

community performing arts centre, which is very exciting for 

the city and for the people of the area. The city has put up, I 

believe, $6 million towards the performing arts portion and the 

community is raising $4 million, and they are very close to 

achieving that goal. And so I want to recognize the board 

members of the Triple C Centre which now will be known as 

the Cugnet Centre after a significant donation by Ken and 

Joanne Cugnet and their family of, I believe, it was a $1 million 

donation, Mr. Speaker, to that very worthwhile endeavour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to, while I’m on my feet and speaking 

to the budget, I haven’t had the opportunity since last fall to 

recognize the high school and the high school students who last 

fall hosted the Canadian student leadership conference. Over 

1,000 students and chaperones attended over about a week-long 

period, and it was certainly fantastic as well. 

 

I don’t think I can not mention I think our favourite son of 

Weyburn, Graham DeLaet who, Mr. Speaker, with the Bay Hill 

invitational finishing today, he tied for 50th, which actually for 

him wasn’t actually that great of a finish because he’s been top 

10; he’s been top 15, Mr. Speaker. But with today’s finish, he’s 

now the 110th best golfer according to the world golf rankings. 

He’s very close to breaking the top 100 in the world and, Mr. 

Speaker, he comes from Weyburn, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pretty close to ending the speech but not 

quite. Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk about the health budget. 

Certainly it represents 42 per cent of the budget, $4.84 billion 

this year projected expenditure. Mr. Speaker, this is about a 40 

per cent increase over the six-year term of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have done in this budget I think is done a 

number of things. First we’ve recognized the significant growth 

that we’re seeing in this province — over 80,000 people that 

are now living in Saskatchewan over the last number of years. 

We know that that’s putting pressure on regional health 

authorities, so we’ve increased regional health authority 

budgets by an average of four and a half per cent. $29 million 

of that, Mr. Speaker, is to deal directly with population growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well we are, as came up today in the House, we 

are working with our regional health authorities to bend the cost 

curve on health care. We know that 10 years ago, the health 

budget in this province was $2.3 billion, and as this budget is 

closing within five days, it’ll be roughly $4.68 billion. Mr. 

Speaker, in 10 years the budget of Saskatchewan Health has 

doubled. And we know across Canada, we know in 

Saskatchewan that those rates of increase of 5 and 7 and 10 per 

cent are just not sustainable. 

 

We need to bend the cost curve, so we’re working with our 

health authorities to put a target on efficiencies, not just talk 

about efficiencies but actually put a target on efficiencies, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have every confidence with a budget for 

regional health authorities that has grown by $1 billion in six 

years that we believe that the budget is in place that can allow 

regions to manage the growth, manage the pressures, manage 

demographics and still provide, Mr. Speaker, better health, 

better care at a better value. We believe that we can achieve all 

three at the same time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I think that we will show in Saskatchewan 

that we are as well positioned, if not better positioned, in 

Canada compared to all of our provincial jurisdictions. In fact 

when you look at our budget this year, Mr. Speaker, three and a 

half per cent increase for the health budget, that compares to 

British Columbia at just 2.3 per cent and even in Alberta, even 

though they are running a $6 billion deficit, at a 3 per cent 

increase, Mr. Speaker. So even with the Western Canadian 

provinces that have already reported and tabled a budget, Mr. 

Speaker, a three and a half per cent to date is the highest 

percentage increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about just a few initiatives. As 

well with about $130 million increase to regional health 

authorities, Mr. Speaker, for their operations, we’ve also 

increased the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency by $12 million. It’s 

about an 8 per cent increase. More significant than that though, 

Mr. Speaker, is that over the six-year life of this government 

and the six budgets that this government has introduced, a 90 

per cent increase in the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency budget, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well on top of the money that we 

are providing in base funding, 130 million additional dollars, 

bringing us up to about $3 billion — over $3 billion. I believe 

it’s $3.03 billion in regional health authority budgets. 

 

We’re also continuing with our surgical initiative. The Treasury 

Board and the cabinet saw fit to increase that. And we certainly 

appreciate it because it will help us to get to our goal of being 

able to provide surgery within three months by the end of 2014. 

We know Regina’s going to take a little bit longer, Mr. 

Speaker. But it really shows the power of setting goals and 

setting your mind to those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an additional $10 million in this year’s budget 

will bring the surgical initiative in year 4 to $70 million, Mr. 

Speaker, which will go directly to regions to be able to bring 

down their wait-lists for surgery, Mr. Speaker. The four-year 

initiative, when 2014 comes to a close, March 2014, we will 

have spent an additional $180 million on the surgical initiative 

over and above what regions were already spending to deliver 



2920 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

surgeries, Mr. Speaker. And it has meant that we are leaders in 

this country when it comes to addressing surgical wait times 

which have plagued governments of all stripes across this 

country for far too long, Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan is 

once again reasserting its leadership in health care policy in this 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to mention — and I know members 

are conscious of the time, Mr. Speaker — I also want to 

mention just a few other initiatives in the budget which 

members have already spoken about. Mr. Speaker, this summer 

I had the opportunity, I think it was late summer, to sit down 

and meet the Alzheimer Society, Mr. Speaker, where they made 

I think a very compelling case to expand the First Link 

program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I am very pleased that Treasury Board and that my 

colleagues were in agreement that we increase their budget by 

$350,000 so they can expand a very important program, a very 

important link for families who have family members who are 

diagnosed with Alzheimer’s and other related dementias. Mr. 

Speaker, this will allow this very important program to be 

expanded beyond Regina and Saskatoon into the communities 

of Swift Current, Prince Albert, North Battleford, and into the 

Sun Country Health Region. It’ll be based I believe out of the 

city of Estevan. Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased about that. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I think when we talk about long-term 

care and the treatment of our seniors, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

important to talk about the dollars — $163 million in this 

budget for health capital, setting aside the $50 million to the 

Moose Jaw hospital, which I hope to briefly talk about in a few 

minutes, Mr. Speaker. But this will mean that of our 13 

long-term care facilities that were announced a couple of years 

ago, one is finished in Watrous, Mr. Speaker, and that’s up and 

running and serving the people of that community and area very 

well. Five more we believe will be complete by 2013 with an 

additional six in 2014, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well we know that it’s not just about institutionalizing 

seniors. It’s about offering a continuum of care whether they 

need support in their own home, whether they need support 

perhaps through the personal care home supplement that is 

available through the government or whether it be through 

long-term care, through government-run long-term care or 

perhaps privately run long-term care. We want to make sure 

that that service and that help is available for our seniors, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so we’re pleased to look at a program, be able to pilot a 

program here in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, Mr. 

Speaker, that has been showing promise in other areas like 

Ontario, the Home First/Quick Response, Mr. Speaker. This 

will allow seniors that are living in their home some . . . What it 

will be, Mr. Speaker, is more intensive but for a shorter time 

additional help for seniors perhaps after hours, outside of the 

normal hours of home care, so that perhaps we can keep that 

senior in their home even longer, Mr. Speaker, so that we can 

defer that placement into long-term care for maybe a few more 

months or so that we can defer a visit perhaps to an emergency 

room or to an acute care bed in the middle of the night perhaps, 

more . . . some intensive support after hours, Mr. Speaker. So 

we’re very . . . hold a lot of promise for this program, hope to 

pilot. We will pilot here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, but hope to see 

it be delivered in other regions across this province in short 

order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk briefly, Mr. Speaker, about 

some rural initiatives. And I have to begin my comments by 

thanking the Minister for Rural and Remote Health, the 

member for Biggar, who has been just a real pleasure to work 

with in our new roles, the new role that was created by the 

Premier last summer, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the member 

for Biggar has provided a tremendous amount of support to me 

and to the ministry in looking at different types of policies. In 

fact it was the member from Biggar early on in his time heard 

about a program in Nova Scotia, called collaborative 

emergency centres in Nova Scotia, last summer. He went to 

Nova Scotia, looked at those. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased 

that there is money in the budget to launch a number of those 

sites across the province to give additional support to people in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the time is drawing near. Mr. Speaker, I 

know members are . . . I know they’d like me to go on further. 

But, Mr. Speaker, with that I would say that I will not be 

supporting the amendment. I will be supporting the budget. I’m 

very pleased to do so on behalf of the people of Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, Mr. Speaker. And at this time, I would move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:09.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2893 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2897 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2899 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2901 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2903 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2910 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2913 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2916 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2918 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2895 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2902 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


