




















































Hansard: April 30, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 55A  TUESDAY, APRIL 30, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3399 

 April 30, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it’s my pleasure to welcome to the Assembly, 

seated in your gallery, my mom and dad, Craik and Faye 

Wotherspoon. Nice to have them here today. Maybe mom’s 

going to be making sure I’m on extra good behaviour here 

today in the discourse across this Assembly. It’s a pleasure to 

have her here. 

 

Mom’s recently retired and I certainly wish her well on that 

front. She took many years off to raise us and then put in a full 

career after that, Mr. Speaker, and something that’s certainly 

incredibly admirable. And as a wise woman keeping a healthy 

marriage, as soon as she retired, she sent dad back to work. So 

you might see his bent nose on a real estate sign near you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Of course these two, my parents, are incredibly important in my 

own life. They’ve been very involved in the last year in the 

political affairs as well. Spent a lot of time with dad, in fact, on 

the road all across the province. It sort of reminded me at times 

of growing up, doing the fishing and hunting and hockey trips 

all across the province, and certainly we added to many of those 

memories as well. So I’d like to thank both of them for all their 

support in the political life, but of course most importantly 

simply for being such tremendous parents. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to table the 2013 special report, 

The Need to Change: Modernizing Government Budgeting and 

Financial Reporting in Saskatchewan in accordance to the 

provisions of section 14.1 of The Provincial Auditor Act. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased to rise today to present a petition, a petition on 

cellphone coverage for northwest Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

we have been presenting these petitions for a number of months 

and a number of years, but this particular petition in relation to 

Dore Lake, which is part of my constituency and, Mr. Speaker, 

like anybody else, the community and residents of Dore Lake 

and Sled Lake would like to have similar coverage as to those 

enjoyed by southern Saskatchewan and many other areas of our 

province. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present 

the petition. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake as soon as possible to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the northern hamlet of Dore Lake, 

located in northwestern Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, like anything else, this petition has been 

signed by people from all throughout this great province. And 

on this particular page, Mr. Speaker, it is a number of folks that 

have signed from the community of Dore Lake, and I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling for better seniors’ care here in 

Saskatchewan: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 

improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 

including creating more spaces and more choices for 

seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 

facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 

appropriate staffing levels in senior care facilities; and 

providing more support to help seniors remain 

independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for the reconsideration of passing Bill 85, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we know since the bill 

was introduced in December, literally hundreds of hours of 

study and comparison have been carried out in the interest of 

due diligence. And there is no labour relations crisis to fix and 

no necessity to rush this omnibus bill through that will likely 

govern workplace relations for decades to come. I’d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition to the Legislative Assembly regarding nuclear 

waste. Northern Saskatchewan is being targeted by the Nuclear 

Waste Management Organization to become a storage site for 

millions of used irradiated nuclear fuel bundles. These 

radioactive nuclear bundles would be shipped on provincial 

highways. Some provinces have already banned the storage or 



3400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2013 

transport of used nuclear bundles. So I will read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly pass legislation to 

permanently ban nuclear waste storage and transportation 

of nuclear waste into, out of, and through Saskatchewan. 

 

And I present this petition. It has around 300 names on it, 

communities from Southend, Saskatchewan all the way down to 

Ituna. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Fundraising Events in Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, many northern communities 

sponsor annual snowmobile poker rallies and fish derbies, and 

this year I was able to attend and volunteer for many of the 

events that took place at Grandmother’s Bay, Stanley Mission, 

Montreal Lake. There were also derbies in La Ronge, Sucker 

River, and Pelican Narrows. 

 

These annual events raise thousands of dollars, money that is 

used by the organizations to fund recreation and many other 

events throughout the year. The money is also used to provide 

travel for youth to travel to sports and cultural activities outside 

of their communities, to provide maintenance and upgrades to 

community rinks, and to support other worthwhile community 

activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these events are successful because of the 

community leaders and community members that work as a 

team on these fundraising committees. These are family events 

that sometimes have a few hundred attendees and some are as 

large as 1,600 people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 

of the communities, organizations, and the many volunteers for 

their hard work and commitment to our youth and to our 

communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Detailed Design for Children’s Hospital Approved 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning the 

Minister of Health announced the approval of the detailed 

design for the children’s hospital of Saskatchewan. This is an 

important milestone in our journey towards a state of the art 

maternal and children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. The hospital 

design, as presented by the Saskatoon Health Region, reveals a 

vibrant, child-friendly, and home-like facility. The detailed 

design phase was the most intensive part of the design process 

and today’s announcement is the culmination of literally 

thousands of hours of work across a team of over 200 people. In 

conjunction with the lean processes, population and service 

level projection analyses were also incorporated into the 

planning phase to ensure the new facility will meet the needs of 

the growing province for the years to come. 

 

As a result of these exercises, overall space requirements were 

reduced by 15.6 per cent and an estimated construction cost was 

significantly cut at this time, ensuring a proper service level 

was maintained to meet patients’ needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize and thank the project team, 

design development participants, and the project partners on 

this huge step forward. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join 

me in celebrating the milestone in moving forward the 

children’s hospital of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Ten Years of Health Research 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the 

Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation on the release of 

their report titled Measuring the Value of Saskatchewan’s 

Health Research. The Saskatchewan Health Research 

Foundation is celebrating its 10th year as the provincial agency 

that funds and facilitates health research in Saskatchewan. 

 

It is clear that health research adds value to our communities 

through advancing our knowledge and understanding of the 

many health issues we are facing as a society. However, one of 

the challenges that the Saskatchewan Health Research 

Foundation faces is how to quantify the impacts of health 

research that is taking place. Never ones to shy away from a 

challenge, the research foundation has tackled this issue and 

identified five areas that impacts could be felt, including 

research capacity, advancing knowledge, informing decision 

making, health impacts, and broad economic and social 

impacts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, projects that are currently being funded range 

from using the synchrotron to image tissues in order to study 

metastatic cancer cells, to a community-based research project 

combining arts, theatre, and storytelling to develop culturally 

appropriate and cost-effective methods for improving the health 

of Aboriginal youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of the House to 

congratulate the Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation on 

10 years of incredible work on behalf of the people of this 

province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Parkland Victims Services 20th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday I was pleased to 

attend the Parkland Victims Services 20th anniversary in 

Yorkton. When it began operating in 1993, Parkland was only 

the third police-based victim services program established in 

Saskatchewan. And it was the first RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police]-based victim services program. 

 

Last Thursday’s event had great meaning when one considers 

what this organization does for our area residents and the 20 

years of support for the victims of crime. It’s humbling to think 

about the thousands of people whose lives were changed 

forever for the better because of Parkland Victims Services. 

 



April 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3401 

On behalf of the Minister of Justice, I was honoured to 

announce at the event that our government is increasing annual 

funding to Parkland Victims Services to expand to six nearby 

RCMP detachments. This additional funding of over $128,000 

per year will allow the program to expand to Canora, Esterhazy, 

Melville, Moosomin, Wadena, and Wynyard RCMP 

detachments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is especially important for me to thank all of the past and 

present volunteers — some recognized at the event for 10, 15, 

and even 20 years of service. They have helped people through 

traumas of crime and helped their entire community. I’m very 

proud of the work Parkland Victims Services does and the 

additional funding allows them to expand on the good work 

they already do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Parkland Victims Services on their 20-year anniversary and to 

everyone to has taken the time to be involved in this 

organization. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

2013 Saskatchewan Book Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 

Saturday evening was Saskatchewan Book Awards 2013. This 

was the 20th anniversary of this literary event and the MC 

[master of ceremonies] for the evening was CBC’s [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] Sheila Coles who’s been the MC for 

all of the 20 years of this event. Mr. Speaker, this event is very 

important in that it recognizes and pays tribute to the 

wonderful, talented writers of our province. Saskatchewan may 

be smaller in population than some other provinces, but we 

contribute surprisingly percentage highly in acclaimed 

Canadian authors. 

 

The First Book Award was won by Melanie Schnell for her 

book While the Sun is Above Us. She was also awarded the 

Regina Book Award for that title. Some of the other award 

winners were: Alice Kuipers for 40 Things I Want To Tell You 

in the young adult readers category; Blair Stonechild for Buffy 

Sainte-Marie: It’s My Way for the Aboriginal Peoples’ Writing 

Award; and Barbara Langhorst for Restless White Fields in the 

poetry category. 

 

And the big winner for 2013 was Candace Savage who won in 

three categories: the Saskatoon Book Award, the Non-Fiction 

Award, and the Book of the Year for her book entitled A 

Geography of Blood: Unearthing Memory from a Prairie 

Landscape. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 

congratulating all of the talented nominees and the recipients of 

the Saskatchewan Book Awards 2013. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

Saskatchewan Country Music Awards 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m excited to rise in 

this Assembly today and talk about the Saskatchewan Country 

Music Awards Gala which was held in Saskatoon on Saturday. 

These awards are a great opportunity to support and promote 

our homegrown talent in this thriving industry, and give 

Saskatchewan country music artists recognition for what they 

have accomplished throughout the year. 

 

A total of 17 awards were presented at the event which was 

hosted at the Dakota Dunes Casino by country music star Aaron 

Pritchett. Guests were also treated to live performances by 

Pritchett as well as popular bands such as Wyatt, and Codie 

Prevost. 

 

Major award winners included Samara Yung who was 

presented with both the Song of the Year and Video of the Year 

awards. And Will Ardell was chosen as the Rising Star of the 

Year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the biggest ovations was given to Donny Parenteau and 

his band with Marty Grambo who did a thrilling version of “He 

Stopped Loving Her Today” in honour of the late George Jones. 

Parenteau also won four awards at the gala. 

 

Other award winners include Codie Prevost, Jess Moskaluke, 

Wyatt, Al Leblanc, Hal Schrenk, Bart McKay, and Steve 

Gibson. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating all of the 

Saskatchewan Country Music Awards winners and nominees 

and recognize their hard work. Happy trails, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Capacity in the Health System 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 

the Leader of the Opposition stood in this House and said twice 

that there were 47 patients left in the hallways at St. Paul’s 

Hospital last Thursday. The Minister of Health was very 

concerned to hear this and looked into it immediately. 

 

Here’s what he found out. It is not accurate. According to the 

Saskatoon Health Region, there was a Norwalk outbreak in one 

of the units at St. Paul’s, so they could not move patients in or 

out of that unit. That led to an overcapacity issue and five 

patients being treated in the hallway before they could be 

moved to a room, not 47 as the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

leader claimed twice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the NDP brings forward legitimate concerns 

about our health system, the Minister of Health has a 

responsibility to look into these concerns. But the NDP leader 

also has a responsibility. He has a responsibility to bring 

forward accurate information and not be making false claims 

and giving this information on the floor of this Assembly. His 

statements yesterday about 47 patients stuck in the hallways 

were not only wrong, they were irresponsible, and they were 

fearmongering. 



3402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, we will always look into the concerns that are 

being raised about our health system. We know there’s more 

work to do. But the NDP leader needs to get his facts straight 

and not be making false claims about our health system. Will he 

stand in his place, apologize for these false claims, and correct 

the record? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Reporting of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in a special report issued this 

morning, the Provincial Auditor, an independent officer of the 

Legislative Assembly, said that total government debt is 

projected to reach 19.1 billion by the end of this fiscal year. 

That means, Mr. Speaker, under the Sask Party government, 

total debt will have increased by $2.1 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that comes as a surprise to Saskatchewan people 

because of the endless and the expensive spin from the Sask 

Party government that repeatedly tries to convince 

Saskatchewan people that government debt has dropped. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: will he admit that the 

Provincial Auditor is correct and that total government debt will 

have increased by $2.1 billion under his watch? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we were pleased to receive the auditor’s report 

today making a number of recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve had the opportunity, we’ve had the opportunity to 

discuss that draft report with the auditor last week. Mr. Speaker, 

we had an opportunity to share with her a number of our 

concerns, Mr. Speaker.  

 

We also indicated, as I have in this House, Mr. Speaker, that 

Saskatchewan is envied by most provinces, Mr. Speaker, in that 

we have a balanced budget. We have a balanced budget on the 

summary basis and we have a balanced basis on the General 

Revenue Fund basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to talk about the errors of 

governments in the past not funding the pension liability, 

making sure now that government in fact is there for those who 

retire, especially in the public service, and the teacher’s pension 

plan, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, the liabilities will continue 

to accumulate, and as we move forward, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going to be there for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for some reason the Sask Party 

government seems to only think that a small part of the 

government’s debt should actually count as government debt. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the front bench only wants to talk about that 

debt. So while the Provincial Auditor talks about $19.1 billion 

in debt, the Sask Party government, the Premier, the Deputy 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, cuts that down by 80 per cent and only 

talks about $3.8 billion in debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not the transparency, that’s not the 

accountability that Saskatchewan people expect and that 

Saskatchewan people deserve. When a family is looking at their 

debt situation, Mr. Speaker, yes, they take their mortgage into 

account. They also look at their credit card debt, loan payments 

for student loans, for car payments, Mr. Speaker, as well as debt 

related to their business or their farm operation. That’s a 

common sense approach that Saskatchewan people understand. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: why is the Sask Party 

government so keen to focus on only part of the total debt 

instead of being accountable and transparent and giving 

Saskatchewan people an accurate and clear picture of the 

finances? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

since 2004 the governments of the time that have been in 

power, the NDP and us, have followed the plan that was put in 

place in 2004. It is the summary financials, Mr. Speaker. It 

includes all of the debt of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are two components that are there that 

are referred to as debt, and there are certain components that are 

referred to as liabilities, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve talked about 

some of the judicial liabilities, some of the pension liability. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in our documents that we presented on March 

20th, it clearly shows that there is going to be a $3.8 billion 

government debt, down from 6.8 billion. And there’s going to 

be a Crown debt that is going to continue to grow, Mr. Speaker. 

It is going to continue to grow to meet the challenges of a 

growing province, Mr. Speaker. The debt will be there, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that we can replace the infrastructure deficit 

that was left behind by that sorry bunch over there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier, the Finance 

Minister, the Premier, and the Sask Party government has a 

responsibility to present a clear and accurate and transparent 

picture of the provincial finances to Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker. And as the auditor points out, that is not occurring. 

 

From a backgrounder that the auditor provided with the report, 

it says the GRF [General Revenue Fund] does not include more 

than 270 Crown corporations and other agencies controlled by 

the government and can be altered to portray whatever financial 

picture the government would like. This can be done in two 

ways: by controlling the amount and timing of money transfers 

to and from Crown corporations and other agencies, and by 

transferring money to or from the rainy day fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s somewhat like a family who has a chequing 

account. In order, Mr. Speaker, to make that chequing account 

look good, they pull resources from their line of credit, put 

them into the chequing account so that it looks better than it 

actually is. Yes, it may look good in the one picture, but when 

you look at the total picture, it is not accurate and it is not 

sound. Will the Deputy Premier admit they’re maintaining two 

sets of books not for transparency, Mr. Speaker, but as the 



April 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3403 

Provincial Auditor suggests to “portray whatever financial 

picture the government would like.” 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the Saskatchewan Party government, the New Democratic Party 

government has never claimed that the GRF was a replacement 

for the summaries. And it doesn’t change, Mr. Speaker. The 

GRF, as I’ve indicated in this House and I’ve indicated to 

people all across the province, is a subset. It is a subset of the 

entire financial affairs of government. We’ve never said that we 

want the GRF to be the equivalent. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting, and the Public Accounts 

Committee, Mr. Speaker, in the Public Accounts Committee on 

May 11th, this was said, “The NDP held the very same position 

as the Sask Party government does now, [that there is a place 

for GRF and summary financial statements] and we held that 

position for five years.” Mr. Speaker, the person who made this 

comment is Pat Atkinson. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the projected debt, the projected 

debt of $19.1 billion doesn’t even include the debt, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Sask Party government has off-loaded onto 

school divisions, health regions, and the universities including 

recently, Mr. Speaker, the nearly $100 million of debt the Sask 

Party government off-loaded onto the University of 

Saskatchewan for the Health Sciences Building. That’s not 

transparent. That’s not accountable, Mr. Speaker, and 

Saskatchewan people deserve better. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: will he admit that the Sask 

Party government off-loaded nearly $100 million onto the 

university books simply to make the provincial books look 

better? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the financial statements 

that are prepared by this government and former governments, 

that have account for all the affairs of the province of 

Saskatchewan, are accurate, Mr. Speaker. The auditor has 

indicated that the financial statements that are presented in the 

Public Accounts document are accurate. Mr. Speaker, they 

contain all the debt of the province of Saskatchewan except for 

one exception and that is the universities. The universities are 

not included. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when I looked across all of Western Canada 

especially, and I looked at the summaries of British Columbia, 

Alberta, and Manitoba; they’re all different, Mr. Speaker. Some 

provinces include this, some other provinces don’t include that. 

So, Mr. Speaker, for the member to stand up there and say that 

there is somehow something that’s not transparent is absolutely 

false, Mr. Speaker. It is in the summary document. It will be in 

the Public Accounts document that will be produced with the 

year end of March 31. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through session, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve heard and seen many examples through 

question period of where the Sask Party government is failing 

to deliver proper services to Saskatchewan people. 

 

We can think of failures in home care, Mr. Speaker. We can 

think of seniors’ care or individuals, seniors aren’t getting 

bathed as often as they should, where individuals are left 

unattended on toilets for long hours, Mr. Speaker. We know 

there are many concerns. We hear of crumbling schools, 

problems with school gyms, Mr. Speaker, as well as layoffs on 

post-secondary institutions here in the province. 

 

At a time when our province is doing well financially, 

economically, Mr. Speaker, it’s puzzling to Saskatchewan 

people why the Sask Party government is having trouble 

delivering good services to Saskatchewan people. And when 

they hear that debt under the Sask Party’s watch is increasing to 

$19.1 billion — an increase of $2.1 billion under the Sask 

Party’s watch — they can’t understand, when the economy is 

doing well, how debt is going up. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: can he explain why 

services are being cut, debt is going up at a time when the 

economy is doing so well? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for that comment, Mr. Speaker. But first I’m going to 

ensure that I provide the accurate information to this Assembly, 

unlike the comments made by that member yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear. In the summary financials, we provide 

all of the material. On the General Revenue Fund side, Mr. 

Speaker, as I’ve indicated, it’s more of a revenue and 

expenditure on the chequing side. We had $11.6 billion worth 

of revenue, Mr. Speaker, and we wanted to ensure that we 

maintained a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, unlike the 

members opposite who campaigned not too long ago on a $5 

billion spending spree, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So our expenditures this year total $11.5 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

That will mean that there will be a surplus; there will be a 

surplus on both the General Revenue Fund and the summary 

financial basis as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as highlighted by the 

Leader of the Opposition here today, and as made clear in the 

Provincial Auditor’s report, the books of that government, the 

Sask Party, are confusing and wrong. The auditor said it before 

and she says it again, I quote, “The government focuses on the 

wrong information when communicating its budget and 

results.” The auditor says, such practice is confusing and very 

misleading. The report says, “Two sets of books creates 

confusion within Saskatchewan.” It’s manipulation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Why does that government insist on using misleading books 



3404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2013 

that create confusion for the people of Saskatchewan instead of 

providing the straight goods and the whole picture that they 

deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I indicated in one of my previous answers, we’ll continue to 

follow the practice that was established by the NDP. That was 

acknowledged by former NDP MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] Pat Atkinson who says that that’s a 

practice that Saskatchewan follows. 

 

We are transparent, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated, each province 

creates a financial reporting system, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It creates a reporting 

system for what the needs are of the province’s people. In 

Saskatchewan we produce both the General Revenue Fund and 

the summary financial basis. People understand it, Mr. Speaker. 

They understand it to the point where the bond rating agencies 

who come to the province of Saskatchewan review both the 

summaries, the General Revenue Fund, the reports of the 

Crowns. And, Mr. Speaker, they have now come up with a 

position that says Saskatchewan has a AAA rating — the first 

time ever. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can bluster on 

all he wants, but the report of the Provincial Auditor is pretty 

clear that the books are misleading and confusing, not just in 

Saskatchewan but across our borders as well, misleading the 

rest of Canada, Mr. Speaker. The auditor’s report states that the 

Sask Party government has run three consecutive deficit 

budgets, racking up more than millions of dollars over the last 

three years. The auditor says that the reporting of the 

government forces people to compare apples to oranges. And 

because of the misleading books, national stories from 

respected organizations have become inaccurate and confusing. 

 

The auditor says, “The government also contributes to this 

confusion through its own communications.” Just think of the 

billboards and spin of that government, Mr. Speaker. Why does 

that government promote misleading books to the rest of 

Canada and respected organizations? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

I’ll try to make sure that the member opposite doesn’t consider 

my voice too blustery. So I’ll speak in a very low tone so the 

member understands that I won’t be raising my voice at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Alberta this year in fact, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 

had the meeting with the Provincial Auditor, the Alberta 

government has now moved to three separate funds: three 

subsets which are the operating, as we do, their capital, and 

their debt fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In Manitoba, in Manitoba when you take a look at the Manitoba 

budget, there is a core, there is a core that when you look at it, it 

resembles the General Revenue Fund budget of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. So we’re going to continue to follow the practice 

that was implemented by the NDP in 2004. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite wasn’t even in this House when 

in 1992 the government of the day implemented summary 

financials. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister, that Premier, 

the Sask Party have been in overdrive trying to spin and defend 

their misleading books. We see it here again today. They’ve 

actually tried to suggest that, when it comes to reporting our 

finances, that they’re going above and beyond by providing a 

bonus set of books with more information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The auditor says that’s absolute nonsense. She says that two 

sets of books are confusing and misleading and says, I quote, 

“Using only the summaries would alleviate this confusion and 

would make the Saskatchewan government more transparent by 

providing the people of Saskatchewan with a full, fair, clear 

financial picture.” Mr. Speaker, honestly how can this 

government defend providing anything less? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to informing the people of 

Saskatchewan in a transparent and full accounting of all of the 

affairs of the province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated, the summaries which we prepare at budget, the 

summaries are prepared at midyear and are reported in the 

Public Accounts documents, Mr. Speaker, include all of the 

affairs of the province of Saskatchewan except for the 

post-secondary universities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are different scenarios across all of Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of usage of something called the GRF. Newfoundland 

still does use the General Revenue Fund. Manitoba, as I 

indicated, in their core uses the General Revenue Fund. Alberta 

has just created a situation where in fact now they’re using 

three separate entities or funds within their budget. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to ensure that we move forward with our 

summaries. The auditor has made some recommendations on 

how we might improve communication on the summaries, and 

we’re prepared to look at that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, despite the minister’s spin 

and defence, the Provincial Auditor minces no words and 

makes very clear recommendations that need to be adopted — 

adopted, Mr. Speaker, not dismissed stubbornly as we see once 

again here today. Times change and it’s clear that the practice 

of using two sets of books is one of those things that’s old and 

outdated. It’s inappropriate, it’s misleading, and it needs to 

change. It’s only common sense. It’s only fair to Saskatchewan 

people, and it’s the right thing to do. 

 

Will the Sask Party government finally do the right thing, 



April 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3405 

follow the advice of the Provincial Auditor, and present a set of 

transparent and accurate books, one set for the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to ensuring that 

we report to the people of Saskatchewan. Currently the method 

that we report through is the General Revenue Fund and the 

summary financial basis.  

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to do that, but we’re also 

committed, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the auditor during the 

week, that we’re committed to looking at the summaries, 

ensuring that we can communicate better about what the 

summaries actually mean. She’s made recommendations about 

an expense and revenue basis, Mr. Speaker, that we’re prepared 

to look at.  

 

We’re going to look at all of those things to ensure that, if we 

can improve the transparency, if we can improve the 

communication to the people of Saskatchewan because, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s who we are reporting to. We are reporting to the 

people of Saskatchewan. I’m sure, I’m sure that those people 

outside of the province of Saskatchewan, like the bond-rating 

agency, are going to take the time to study all of the affairs of 

the province of Saskatchewan, and they’ll come up with the 

right explanation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Purchase of Hunting, Fishing, and Trapping Licences 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, since April 1st, Saskatchewan 

residents now have the long-awaited option to purchase their 

fishing, hunting, and trapping licences online or by phone. 

However, instead of a new, modern system, the Sask Party’s 

new licence program is riddled with issues. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, in order to purchase two licences for 

a family online, perhaps a parent and child, one needs two 

email addresses and has to do two transactions. In order to 

purchase two licences for a couple online, one needs two email 

addresses and two transactions. Mr. Speaker, why would the 

Sask Party unveil such a bureaucratic system for hunting, 

fishing, and trapping licences? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, 

to the member for the question. It is true that the Ministry of 

Environment has moved to a system of electronically allowing 

people to purchase licences across the province. It’s something 

that SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] and others 

have done. It’s part of our commitment to make things as easy 

as possible for people to do and as accessible as possible. We’re 

moving through it. We’ve engaged the services of Active 

Network, a company that does a lot of this work in North 

America. They have a Canadian subsidiary. They’re working 

through the Saskatchewan process. There are a few bumps 

along the way, but they are providing that service, and they’re 

doing so in an efficient manner. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the minister 

indicated, the Sask Party’s new online hunting, fishing, and 

trapping licence system is being run by an American company. 

So people in Saskatchewan are clear, that means a summer 

fishing and camping trip means registering a campsite online 

with an Ontario company and a fishing licence with an 

American company. So much for Saskatchewan first, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The licensing company currently runs their call centre out of 

Tennessee. If someone wants to purchase a licence over the 

phone, they must call the Nashville-based number and pay a fee 

some are calling the Tennessee convenience fee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why would the Sask Party government use a US 

[United States]-based system to sell licences, and why would 

they charge a fee for someone to order the licence over the 

phone? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. Again Active Network is operating across North 

America. They have offices in Canada. They have offices in 

Burnaby. They have offices in Ontario. When I was speaking to 

the individual, I suggested to him that it would be a good idea 

to have an office in Saskatchewan. And they are looking at that. 

 

But more importantly, they are doing this work across North 

America. Many states, the province of Ontario has engaged 

them as well. They are doing that. They understand what’s 

needed here in Saskatchewan, and they’re providing us with an 

efficient, cost-effective way of providing this additional service 

to Saskatchewan residents. That’s what people want; that’s 

what they’re getting, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, in order to purchase the licence 

online or by phone, a person must give their driver’s licence 

and other information to the American company. But even 

more alarming, is for people without a driver’s licence, they 

must give their health number for verification. Mr. Speaker, this 

is unacceptable. It’s completely inappropriate for people’s 

private information to be handed over to a third party for a 

fishing licence, in this case an American-based company. To be 

truly modern, the government should comply with modern-day 

privacy protection and stop using health card information to get 

a fishing licence. 

 

To the minister: did the Ministry of Environment consult with 

the province’s Privacy Commissioner about using a health card 

in order to get a fishing licence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 



3406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2013 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, and thank 

you for the question. And the answer is, absolutely 

consultations were undertaken. Suggestions were made by the 

Privacy Commissioner, and those suggestions were enacted. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I would like the minister to 

provide information now about what the response of the 

Privacy Commissioner was. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you very much for the 

question. Certainly there was concern based on the use of the 

number, the health services number. It’s been used in 

Saskatchewan. It’s used in different purposes. But his 

suggestion was not to use that number, to certainly not have the 

person put that forward. And that’s indeed the recommendation 

that was put forward, and that’s the change that was made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

somewhat concerning when our Privacy Commissioner, an 

independent body, makes recommendations that this 

government ignores, just like our Provincial Auditor. It’s a sad 

track when they don’t take the recommendations of our 

independent officers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, local retailers have always been more than happy 

and willing to issue licences for people on behalf of the 

government, especially in remote areas. It’s convenient for 

people to show up at the fishing hole, grab their licence, and 

away they go. The move to an online system will make it 

difficult for some vendors to continue to provide that service. 

 

Modernizing the system makes sense, but limiting access and 

choices doesn’t. I’ve heard from some vendors, they’ll simply 

drop the service rather than put up with the hassle. That’s no 

longer convenient for people, and it doesn’t help vendors who 

have provided this service. Why can’t the Sask Party 

government put in place a common sense alternative for 

vendors that allows them to continue to help people enjoy 

Saskatchewan’s fishing and hunting into the future? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much. Once 

again, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of inaccuracies in the 

question that the member opposite is putting forward. We’ve 

seen that earlier today. We’ve seen that from the Leader of the 

Opposition. There seems to be a trend happening here. There is 

no fee that is involved, first of all, Mr. Speaker. There’s no fee. 

And there’s also a situation where recommendations were made 

by the Privacy Commissioner, and they were certainly listened 

to. 

 

What is at stake here, what is the bottom line is that we’re 

moving forward. We’re allowing people to do something, using 

the technology that is available. This is something that 

Saskatchewan residents have asked for. They want to be in line 

with what other jurisdictions are doing. 

 

We’ve opened it up to a contract that was bid on by a company 

that does work, I am told up to 70 per cent of the work in North 

America is done by this particular company. They’re doing so 

in an efficient manner. Are there a couple of hiccups along the 

way? Yes, there probably are, but we’re working those through. 

At the end of the day, we will have an efficient system that will 

be of benefit to Saskatchewan residents. And that’s what they 

want. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman for the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 59, The Animal 

Identification Amendment Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The chairman has moved concurrence report 

on the Economy. Okay. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture 

even though he’s not standing yet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 59, The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to grant leave? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 59 — The Animal Identification 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I move this bill now be read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 59, The Animal Identification 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



April 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3407 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

[14:15] 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 60, The Animal 

Products Amendment Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I request leave, Mr. Speaker, to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 

No. 60, The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 and the bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 60, The Animal Products Amendment 

Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 48, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment 

Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

bill and that the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Environment has 

requested leave for consideration of Committee of the Whole 

on Bill No. 48, The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases Amendment Act, 2012. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

this bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Environment that Bill No. 48, The Management and Reduction 

of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 47, The 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 



3408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2013 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

bill and that the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Environment has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 47, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012 and that the bill be now read a third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I move this bill be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Environment has moved 

that Bill No. 47, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 65, The Securities Amendment Act, 

2012 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested to 

waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 65, 

The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) and the bill be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 65 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 65, The Securities 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012 — 

this is a bilingual bill — without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole and that the bill be now read a third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 51, 

The Public Inquiries Act, 2012 and that the bill now be read a 

third time. 

 

Is leave granted? Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 



April 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3409 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 

sur les enquêtes publiques 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move the bill be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 

2012 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 52, 

The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 and 

that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move this bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 67, The Community Planning 

Profession Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on this bill 

and that the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 67, The Community Planning Profession Act, 

2012 and that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 67 — The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Government Relations that Bill No. 67, The Community 

Planning Profession Act, 2012 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 



3410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2013 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 73, The Municipalities Amendment 

Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill now be 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 73, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Government Relations that Bill No. 73, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed 

again by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice to report Bill No. 74, The Cities Amendment Act 

2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 74, The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 and the 

bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Government Relations that Bill No. 74, The Cities Amendment 

Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 



April 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3411 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed 

again by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice to report Bill No. 75, The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 75, The Northern Municipalities Amendment 

Act, 2012 and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Government Relations that Bill No. 75, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed 

again by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice to report Bill No. 76, The Municipal Board 

Amendment Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 76, The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 

2012 and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 76, The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Latin.] 

 

I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:27.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3399 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3399 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3399 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3399 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3399 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3399 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Fundraising Events in Northern Saskatchewan 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3400 

 Detailed Design for Children’s Hospital Approved 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3400 

 Ten Years of Health Research 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3400 

 Parkland Victims Services 20th Anniversary 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3400 

 2013 Saskatchewan Book Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3401 

 Saskatchewan Country Music Awards 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3401 

 Capacity in the Health System 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3401 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Reporting of Provincial Finances 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3402 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3402 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3403 

 Purchase of Hunting, Fishing, and Trapping Licences 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3405 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3405 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3406 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3408 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 59 — The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3406 

 Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3407 

 Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3407 

 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3408 

 Bill No. 65 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3408 

 Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3409 

 Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3409 

 Bill No. 67 — The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3409 

 Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3410 

 Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3410 

 Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3411 

 Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3411 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


