




















































Hansard: October 24, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 2A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 24, 2013, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3611 

 October 24, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to, to 

you and through you, introduce a couple of constituents in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce my constituency 

assistant, Janet Hanson, and her daughter, Jade. Please welcome 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all the members of the Assembly, I 

feel very privileged and honoured to introduce two guests that 

are in the west gallery. One is a friend of mine that I’ve known 

now for well over 40 years, even though I’m only 41 years of 

age, and he lives in Saskatoon. It’s Thomas Wilderman. And 

the second is my constituency assistant, Susan Dunne, who is 

also a very good friend of mine and a great asset to the 

Humboldt constituency. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d like 

to introduce a group of students that are here from Rhoda 

Hardlotte Memorial Keethanow High School in Stanley 

Mission. The grade 7 students are here. And I just want to 

welcome their teacher, Isabelle Hardlotte. Welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. Kiefer as a chaperone, Preston is here, as 

well as Cheyenne is here as chaperone with a number of 

students in grade 7 from the community. 

 

I just want to make sure that they understand this Assembly is 

yours. Be proud when you come here. This is your Assembly. 

We are here working on your behalf so that you have a good 

future, a fair future. And we honour you that you are here to 

come and visit us and learn what the proceedings happen here, 

how we’re supposed to all work together to honour every 

student, every child in our province. So I welcome you to your 

Legislative Assembly and say thank you, tēniki for coming. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today presenting a petition calling for reasonable funding so 

that all Saskatchewan students can do well. And we know 

classes in Saskatchewan schools are growing so fast that many 

classes have well over 30 students in them, and many classes 

are now being taught in hallways and boot rooms. And we 

know in a time of economic boom, it’s only common sense that 

schools receive appropriate funding so that all students, 

including First Nations and Métis students, can achieve their 

full potential. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the government to immediately 

increase the financial support for all Saskatchewan 

students, including resources to limit class sizes, provide 

resources for students with special needs, support English 

as an additional language, and to provide more support for 

Aboriginal education. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to rise today to present a petition in support of 

fixing up Highway 123, which is the highway that serves the 

people of Cumberland House along with the Cumberland 

House Cree Nation. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to recognize that upgrades, repairs, and total 

maintenance on Highway 123 is important to northern 

residents and must be undertaken immediately. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 

all from throughout Saskatchewan, not just Cumberland House 

and the Cumberland House Cree Nation. The people that have 

the petition here today are from Cupar, Strasbourg, and 

Saskatoon. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be presenting petitions on cellphone 

coverage and highways from northern Saskatchewan over the 

course of this fall sitting. And, Mr. Speaker, I so present the 

petition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gymnasium at 

Sacred Heart Community School. Yesterday we had a group of 

students here from their school. They were wearing their 

brilliant yellow shirts, Mr. Speaker. It’s because Sacred Heart is 

the school that takes literacy very seriously, and all those 

students get those shirts as part of the commitment they have to 

the accelerated reading program there. 

 

Last year the gymnasium at the Sacred Heart Community 

School quite literally started falling apart, has been closed 

indefinitely, and is no longer safe for students. Sacred Heart’s a 

school where it’s the largest school in North Central with 450 

students, 75 per cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. 

Enrolment at that school has increased by 100 students over the 

past four years, and attendance and learning outcomes are 

steadily improving. It’s a matter of basic fairness and common 

sense, Mr. Speaker, that Sacred Heart Community School 

should have a gym just like any other school. In the prayer that 



3612 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

reads as follows: 

 

Respectfully requesting that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan takes the following action: to cause the Sask 

Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 

replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 

Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the city of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Combined Lab and X-ray Technicians’ Day 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to rise today and recognize the work of the combined 

lab and X-ray technicians because tomorrow, October 25th, is 

Combined Lab and X-ray Technicians Day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these highly skilled, dedicated professionals are a 

vital part of our health care system. You’ll find them in clinics, 

laboratories, hospitals both big and small. Combined lab and 

X-ray technicians work alongside other health care providers 

and perform a variety of essential tests for the benefits of our 

patients. They collect and analyze patient samples. They 

operate sophisticated diagnostic imaging equipment and they 

make sure the equipment is properly maintained and functions 

properly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, combined lab and X-ray technicians also need to 

be sensitive to the needs of people who may be sick or hurt or 

may be just a little bit nervous. Mr. Speaker, at some point in 

our lives, nearly everyone has had to give a blood sample. We 

know the caring nature of our lab techs make these experiences 

all that much easier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members of this Assembly and all 

the Saskatchewan residents, I would like to thank the members 

of this important medical profession for the work they do today 

and every day. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Travels in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure all of us, 

those over on the government side and those of us on the 

opposition side, are pleased to kick off the third session of the 

twenty-seventh legislature. And I’m sure we all feel a deep 

sense of responsibility. And I know, Mr. Speaker, I sure do. 

 

I travelled the province extensively over the last few months, 

and I met a whole lot of Saskatchewan families. And I’m 

grateful that they welcomed me into their homes, workplaces, 

businesses, and communities. I’m grateful that they shared their 

hopes and dreams with me. And I’m grateful they opened up 

and shared their struggles, challenges, and fears because, 

though there is a lot going well in Saskatchewan thanks to our 

hard-working people, innovative businesses, and abundance of 

natural resources, there’s a whole lot that needs to be so much 

better. 

 

So throughout this session, I’ll be thinking of everyone I’ve met 

over the last few months. I’ll be thinking of their stories and I’ll 

be focusing on what matters to them and to all Saskatchewan 

families today because politics should never just be about the 

province doing well but it should be about people doing well. 

And for that to happen, in this Assembly, we must focus on 

what really matters to Saskatchewan families today. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Foster Families Week 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise in the House today to recognize the dedicated foster 

families across this province during Foster Families Week, 

which runs from October 20 to 27. This year’s theme is creating 

memories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, foster families make a big difference in the lives 

of children and the families they serve. In addition to meeting 

the everyday needs of children in their care, they also provide 

the most important thing of all, a place to call home. As a foster 

parent myself, I can say being a foster parent isn’t easy, Mr. 

Speaker. It is challenging to care for children whose lives have 

been disrupted by abuse, neglect, or abandonment. This is why 

it is so important to recognize the great work that foster parents 

do each and every day. 

 

As we celebrate Foster Families Week this year, we want to 

express our most sincere appreciation to foster families for 

taking on this crucial role. Through your hard work and 

dedication, you’re creating lifelong memories for this 

province’s most vulnerable citizens. 

 

In closing, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

recognizing and thanking all foster parents across the province 

for the hard work and compassion that they show to the 

Saskatchewan children, youth, and their families. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Amachewispimawin River Gathering in Stanley Mission 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Amachewispimawin River Gathering in 

Stanley Mission. I rise today to acknowledge the community of 

Stanley Mission who hosted a great cultural event from July 

23rd to the 25th. 

 

During this event I was privileged to take part in many of the 

cultural activities, including basket weaving and traditional 

moosehide preparation. I was pleased to enjoy many of the 

traditional foods offered. 

 

I also took part in a voyageur canoe race. Our team consisted of 

PAGC [Prince Albert Grand Council] Vice-chief Brian 

Hardlotte, FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] 

Vice-chief Simon Bird, Lac La Ronge Indian Band Chief 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3613 

Tammy Cook-Searson, and two other community members. 

Our team did very well, as we finished second overall. 

 

Afterwards we listened to great local musicians and watched 

many of our great jiggers and square dancers. 

 

I would like to thank the organizers, the many volunteers, and 

the council of Stanley Mission for hosting this event on the 

shores of the mighty Churchill River, home of the oldest 

building in Saskatchewan, the Holy Trinity Anglican Church. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 

the community of Stanley Mission. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Ranchers Win Environmental Stewardship Awards  

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I proudly rise in the 

House today to talk about the remarkable achievements of two 

of my constituents, Allen and Lillian Patkau of Hanley. Allen 

and Lillian were recently awarded the Environmental 

Stewardship Award at a ceremony on June 10th in Moose Jaw 

at the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association’s 100th annual 

general meeting. 

 

The Environmental Stewardship Award is presented each year 

by SSGA [Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association] in 

partnership with Ducks Unlimited and Meyers Norris Penny. It 

is presented annually to a Saskatchewan rancher who 

demonstrates excellence in innovation and environmental 

stewardship in the ranching industry. 

 

The recognition did not stop there, Mr. Speaker. After taking 

the provincial title, the Patkaus were awarded the Canadian 

Cattlemen’s Association top environmental honour at a 

ceremony held in London, Ontario this past August. They were 

chosen out of other environmental stewardship award winners 

from British Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario. 

 

The Patkaus own and operate the Sandy Arrow Ranch located 

west of Hanley. When they first acquired the land, there was an 

abundance of saline areas. When the Patkaus started working 

the land back in the late 1970s, the priority was to find out why 

the salinity was there and then figure out a solution as to how 

they could deal with it. The land had been seeded to annual 

grain crops and was not well-suited for that purpose. They 

seeded the farm land to grasses and improved the saline and 

wind erosion. With proper management, Al and Lillian 

developed a productive, sustainable, award-winning operation. 

 

Allen and Lillian are celebrated for focusing on protecting and 

nurturing the land on their ranch as they went about making 

their living. They state they wanted to make sure their land 

survives and thrives for years to come. I also know Mr. Patkau 

very well, and I know that he was actually speechless, which 

was very rare for him. 

 

So on behalf of the constituents of Arm River-Watrous, I would 

like to personally congratulate Allen and Lillian Patkau on their 

earning of the environmental stewardship awards. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Nine New Schools for Province 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to commend the government on the nine new joint-use 

schools in our province . . .  

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Docherty: — There’s more . . . that were announced by 

the Premier and the Minister of Education on Tuesday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last several years we’ve seen remarkable 

growth across this province, and our government has acted to 

support families by building these schools in our highest 

growth communities . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. 

 

Since 2007 we’ve seen elementary school enrolment in Regina 

increase by 18 per cent, in Saskatoon by 20 per cent, in 

Martensville by 52 per cent, and in Warman by 90 per cent. 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, our government announced these 

nine new joint-use schools to be built within these 

communities. These schools will also be constructed through a 

P3 [public-private partnership] model which will allow our 

government to build more schools in less time than the typical 

funding and procurement approach would allow. 

 

Our government’s announcement has already received positive 

reviews from stakeholders such as Saskatoon Public School 

Board Chair Ray Morrison, who said, “To say that I’m pleased 

to be here today for this announcement would be a serious, 

serious understatement.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, these nine schools are just another example of 

how our government is working hard to support growth in 

communities across the province so we can keep Saskatchewan 

moving forward. Thank you. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Opposition Ideology 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve been down this road before with the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. When we said we could reduce surgical 

wait times by starting to do private surgeries, the NDP were 

against it. They wanted ideology. Saskatchewan people wanted 

more surgeries. Our government delivered more surgeries. Now 

the NDP want ideology. Saskatchewan people want more 

schools. Our government will build more schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they may have a different leader, but it’s the same 

old NDP. Mr. Speaker, the NDP can remain chained to their 

outdated ideology as long as they want. They want ideology. 

Saskatchewan people want to keep Saskatchewan moving 

forward. Our government will keep Saskatchewan moving 

forward. 

 



3614 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, on 51 occasions the Leader of the Opposition 

stood in this House and called for new schools, a new school in 

Hampton Village — 51 times, Mr. Speaker. Two days ago our 

Premier, two days ago our Premier went to the NDP leader’s 

constituency. And what did he announce? Nine new joint-use 

schools. You’d think the NDP leader would be happy about this 

great news in his constituency, but he’s not. In fact, the NDP 

leader opposes a new school in Hampton Village. Why? 

Because it’s a P3, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Special Care Standards and Staffing 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Premier. Why did this government choose to scrap the 

minimum care standard in the special care home regulations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome all 

members back to the legislative session. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

important forum we’ll have today and in the days ahead to 

debate not just the contents of the Speech from the Throne but 

the specific legislative initiatives we’re going to bring forward. 

 

A big priority for the government, as signalled in the Speech 

from the Throne, is long-term care, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure we’ll 

be hearing more about that here throughout the rest of the 

morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has taken unprecedented 

investments in opening new long-term care homes after a 

decade of NDP bed closures, Mr. Speaker. We were just in 

Shellbrook where we opened up a new integrated facility there, 

brand new long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker. Eleven others 

currently under construction, and significant response in the 

Speech from the Throne with respect to long-term care issues, 

both short-term, mid-term, and long-term. 

 

We want to continue to work on this. We know there is work to 

do, Mr. Speaker, and we welcome the input of members 

opposite to make further achievements in this particular area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure all 

members appreciate the welcome back to the Assembly by the 

Premier. But what members of the Assembly would appreciate, 

as well as the public watching, Mr. Speaker, are some answers 

to the questions that are asked. And the question was very 

simple, Mr. Speaker. The special care home regulations used to 

require a minimum of two hours per day of nursing and 

personal care for residents. For some reason, Mr. Speaker, this 

government chose to quietly get rid of that minimum care 

standard. My question to the Premier: why? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, what we need to recognize is that for seniors living 

within care, this is in fact their home, Mr. Speaker. What we 

have chosen to do, Mr. Speaker, is change the regulations to 

ensure that each resident is provided with adequate care at all 

times to meet the individual’s total care needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new guidelines refer to the fact that 

encompassed in the provision of adequate care is the promotion 

of health, safety, and comfort for each resident. This will 

include evidence of good personal hygiene such as clean, 

healthy-appearing skin, Mr. Speaker, clean, trimmed 

fingernails, toenails, and other hygiene, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to treat these individuals as individuals 

within their own home, Mr. Speaker, as if this was their own 

home, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why these changes were made 

— to put in place guidelines that were more personalized to 

every individual. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what the changes did was remove 

a minimum care standard for residents. Let’s be clear. Other 

provinces have minimum care standards of 3.6 or 3.8 hours per 

resident per day. But instead of increasing Saskatchewan’s 

minimum care standard and ensuring we have appropriate staff 

in place to actually fulfill that standard, this government chose 

to completely remove the minimum care standard. 

 

My question to the Premier: why do seniors in other provinces 

deserve a guarantee of 3.6 hours per day, yet Saskatchewan 

seniors don’t even have a guarantee of two hours any more? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, at a provincial 

level we are not specifying the number of times, the number of 

hours that would be mandated by the provincial government. 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that it is more proper to tailor the 

individual care around the individual’s need, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can speak of an example from this summer, Mr. Speaker. I 

toured a long-term care facility, as I know other members have 

done. Mr. Speaker, one resident that I met who is afflicted with 

a severe form of dementia, Mr. Speaker, the workers in that 

facility told me that should there be a standard, a minimum 

standard in terms of baths, Mr. Speaker, that they are not able to 

get that individual, because of her condition, in a bathtub 

maybe once every three months, Mr. Speaker. They’ve made 

other arrangements such as showers which they have much 

more easy ability to provide that type of hygiene, Mr. Speaker. 

We think that that’s a better way to provide care which is more 

individualized to the person’s individual need. This is not about 

forcing care on people, Mr. Speaker. It’s about the proper care 

for an individual. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these questions are to the Premier 

about changes that his government has made that has reduced 

the level of care for seniors here in the province. This 

government not only removed the two-hour-per-day minimum 

care standard from the special care home regulations; it also 

very quietly removed any reference to sufficient staffing. My 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3615 

question to the Premier is simple. Why did his government 

remove the reference to sufficient staffing? To the Premier, 

please. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as the member will know, 

we undertook a comprehensive review of our long-term care 

facilities in this province, Mr. Speaker — the first time to our 

knowledge that has ever been done in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, there were a few people I think in this province, led by 

the Leader of the Opposition, who thought this was a bit of a 

fool’s errand. Mr. Speaker, at the end of the process, what we 

came up with, what the CEOs [chief executive officer] in the 

health regions came up with, was over 300 pages of detailed 

reports of every facility within our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that in some cases that staffing issues are a challenge 

in terms of the level of staffing, Mr. Speaker, and we’re putting 

together plans to have health regions submit plans to address 

some of those issues, whether it be staffing, whether it be on 

equipment, whether it be on some small maintenance repairs, 

Mr. Speaker. We look forward to seeing those proposals in 

providing $10 million in an Urgent Issues Action Fund, Mr. 

Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing is, while we are 

increasing the number of staff in long-term care, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re doing it in a way that is within the needs of the residents 

of each individual facility. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it was this government that 

quietly amended the special care home regulations to remove 

the minimum care standard of at least two hours per day of 

nursing and personal care for residents. And it was this 

government, Mr. Speaker, that removed any reference to 

sufficient staffing within special care homes from the 

regulations. So it’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that seniors’ care 

under this government’s watch has been getting worse in the 

province. By watering down, Mr. Speaker, the standards for 

seniors’ care, seniors have been paying the price, seniors who 

are in care. 

 

But the watering down doesn’t simply stop there, Mr. Speaker. 

Health regions have now thrown up their hands and are actually 

listing several important functions as discretionary. My 

question to the Premier: is he aware now what front-line health 

workers are told are discretionary duties for caring for seniors 

in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of the care that’s 

provided to seniors, the changes that we made earlier this year 

actually, the Leader of the Opposition apparently missed that, 

Mr. Speaker, but it’s in line with what other provinces are 

doing. 

 

BC [British Columbia] has no requirement that stipulates the 

number of baths per week. What they’ve done is the Residential 

Care Regulation, section 81, includes skilled care with 

professional supervision consistent with the needs of the client, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s the same in Manitoba. It’s important to note 

the practice across Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, that does not have a 

policy that states the number of . . . in terms of personal 

hygiene, Mr. Speaker. I could go on about other provinces that 

have moved towards tailoring the care around the needs of the 

individual, Mr. Speaker, and moving away from a mandate 

across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are increasing the number of workers within 

long-term care. That has been the record of this government 

over the first six years of this government, Mr. Speaker, unlike 

the members opposite who cut 1,200 long-term care beds, Mr. 

Speaker, in 16 years of government. Sixteen long-term care 

facilities were closed — one a year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s concerning that the Premier 

does not know what front-line health workers are now being 

told is discretionary in terms of caring for seniors in this 

province. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the Premier what is 

considered discretionary now. 

 

Here’s what memos to staff in several care facilities say: “The 

following table has been developed to identify priority and 

discretionary work functions by department as guidelines for 

staff in the event that they are working short-staffed due to an 

inability to replace.” Right at the top of the list of the 

discretionary duties, Mr. Speaker, of the discretionary 

functions, is bathing. 

 

My question to the Premier: when did he learn that bathing is 

now considered a discretionary duty? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll continue to explain to 

the member opposite the model of care that is changing, and it’s 

not just changing within Saskatchewan but other provinces. 

Manitoba’s Personal Care Homes Standards Regulation now 

say that individual bathing schedules to be determined as part 

of a resident’s individual care plan, which is developed with the 

resident’s interdisciplinary care team along with the resident 

and the family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that we have work to do when it comes 

to long-term care. We know that the CEOs and the senior 

administration, when they did their tours, Mr. Speaker, pointed 

out what’s working well and what needs to be changed, Mr. 

Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, in terms of staffing, we know that 

we have work to do in particular facilities. 

 

Considering that the number of long-term care beds have really 

not changed in the six years that this government has been in 

power, Mr. Speaker — so we have the same number of 

long-term care beds, roughly, Mr. Speaker — and we have the 

same resident mix today that we did six years ago, yet today we 

have 10 per cent more LTC [long-term care] staff working in 

the system, Mr. Speaker, and broken down further, 14 per cent 

more nurses and LPNs [licensed practical nurse] working in 

long-term care. Mr. Speaker, I can’t imagine what care and 

long-term care was like when the members opposite were 

totally understaffing long-term care. 

 



3616 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these questions have been 

directed to the Premier. This is about guidelines now given, Mr. 

Speaker, to workers in health regions who are told that bathing 

is now discretionary. This is not about what the minister would 

suggest about customizing a bathing schedule for someone who 

can’t get into a tub. This is about the daily work that should be 

occurring in care facilities, and it’s about health care workers 

now being told that they don’t have to give baths if they’re 

short-staffed, Mr. Speaker. And residents will be suffering, are 

suffering the consequences of that. 

 

Here’s what else is listed as discretionary — washing and 

ironing of residents’ laundry, changing bed linen, routine 

cleaning duties, sweeping or mopping dining room and kitchen 

floors, and the list goes on. How routine cleaning is considered 

discretionary, Mr. Speaker, when we have things like Norwalk, 

when we have things like bedbugs that are a threat to facilities, 

I don’t quite understand. I don’t think Saskatchewan people 

understand either. 

 

They’ve reduced references to sufficient staffing. They’ve 

eliminated, Mr. Speaker, the standards put in place in order to 

ensure a minimum standard of care, and now they’re forcing 

health region managers to list important things like bathing as 

discretionary. 

 

My question to the Premier: how does this make any sense? 

Why aren’t there simply enough staff to care for seniors in our 

care facilities? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well as I said before, Mr. Speaker, well 

we do know that in some facilities that we do have to address 

some of the staffing issues that were identified. And we’ve put 

together $10 million as an Urgent Issues Action Fund, Mr. 

Speaker, to try to address some of those issues, knowing that 

it’s not going to solve all of the issues that have been identified 

within long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I can tell members opposite, for special care aids within 

long-term care facilities, knowing that we’re dealing with 

roughly the same number of beds, Mr. Speaker, there are nearly 

600 more special care aids than there were under the NDP. Mr. 

Speaker, there are nearly 150 more LPNs working in special 

care homes, Mr. Speaker, than there were under the NDP, and 

there are nearly 150 more RNs [registered nurse] working in 

long-term care, with the same number of residents, roughly 

speaking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have moved, as other provinces have, to 

tailoring the needs of care around the individual, Mr. Speaker, 

whether that be on hygiene, whether that be on bathing, Mr. 

Speaker, and other hygiene issues, Mr. Speaker. We think that’s 

a more appropriate care because for these seniors, this is in fact 

their home and we’re going to treat them in an appropriate 

manner in their own home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

Combatting Bullying 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve been calling for a long time for this government 

to release an action plan on bullying, and we’ve heard a lot of 

words and references to it, but no action. Will the government 

today release its report on anti-bullying? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

raises an important issue of concern for all citizens of the 

province not just MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], 

and I thank him for raising the issue. 

 

We have had one of our members travelling across the 

province, particularly into the North, having had discussions 

with students, with educators, with parents. And I can advise 

the House, Mr. Speaker, that there will be a report and a 

specific action plan that will be introduced in the next number 

of days. And we look forward to having some more discussion 

at that point in time, Mr. Speaker. It’s an important issue, not 

just for government but I think for educators, for parents. I can 

imagine no worse tragedy for a parent than the suicide of a 

child. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Provision of New Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House 

we’ve been calling for new schools to be built for many years. 

We want those new schools to be built cost-effectively and 

quickly. But the evidence shows that P3s are not the best way to 

achieve that. P3s hike the overall cost to taxpayers through 

higher private borrowing rates, massive fees to develop 

contracts, and higher costs to maintain those contracts. 

 

New Brunswick’s auditor found that P3s, instead of saving the 

millions that were promised, actually cost millions more. And 

Nova Scotia scrapped its bundled P3 contracts because of cost 

overruns and, by reverting back to the traditional method, they 

saved about $2 million per school. 

 

My question to the minister: why is this government pretending 

it found a shiny, new approach to building the schools we need, 

when auditors and even conservative governments recognize it 

costs way more? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, I contacted the Leader 

of the Opposition a few days ago and asked him whether he 

wished to attend the announcement in Hampton Village 

regarding the announcement of this school. On 51 separate 

occasions, the Leader of the Opposition mentioned the need for 

a new school in Hampton Village. Now he’s against the school 

because he is against the process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can imagine nothing better for the community of  

 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3617 

Hampton Village and the area surrounding than to have an 

announcement of a significant number of new schools. Mr. 

Speaker, one of the members earlier quoted the Saskatoon 

Public School Board Chair, “To say that I am pleased to be here 

today for this announcement would be a serious, serious 

understatement.” Mr. Speaker, that’s Ray Morrison, Chair of 

the Saskatoon Public School Board. Janet Foord, president of 

the Saskatchewan School Boards Association: “We are really 

quite excited about this announcement because it is going to 

relieve some pressure and it is going to create schools within 

the community.” Mr. Speaker, we are moving forward with 

schools. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, despite the government’s 

rhetoric, the truth about P3s is that they often take longer to 

complete. Saskatchewan needed new schools yesterday. We 

need shovels in the ground, not delays. But P3 schools involve 

extremely complex processes that are notoriously slow to get 

off the ground. According to the Columbia Institute, P3s “. . . 

often suffer from both cost and time overruns.” This sure 

doesn’t sound like the smartest way to build the schools that 

our students and that our teachers need. 

 

My question to the minister: is that why the government was 

unwilling to provide clearer timelines as to when these schools 

will actually be opened? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the member 

opposite that we want these schools in place and operating for 

our students as soon as we possibly can. We believe that using a 

P3 model will be the most effective and cost-effective way of 

doing this and should be able to deliver them in a very timely 

manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are looking closely at what took place in 

Alberta. They used a bundling process to procure schools. They 

have in fact over the last number of years delivered 40 schools 

with savings of some $245 million. Phase 1 of that process 

delivered 18 schools in a bundle — savings of $97 million, or 

13 per cent. Phase 2, the second round, was 10 schools in a 

bundle with savings of $105 million, or 29 per cent less. Phase 

3 of the bundle: 12 schools, savings of $43 million, or 13 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s an enormous amount of money, 

money that could be spent in classrooms, hiring teachers, and 

giving service to our students. And that’s what we intend to do. 

 

The Speaker: — While question period is winding down, there 

is time for members on both sides to stand and ask questions if 

they want. Otherwise, please listen to the questions and the 

answers. 

 

I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, conveniently the minister 

forgot to mention the Alberta experience of limited access and 

control issues where they wouldn’t allow portables to be added 

on to the private sector schools. 

 

But we have a recent example. This government recently took 

over buying portable classrooms, and bought them in bulk, 

claiming they’d be cheaper. The result wasn’t good, Mr. 

Speaker. When the classrooms finally arrived, late, they were 

the wrong product and, I’m told, more expensive than what 

could have been built had school boards still had control. 

Today’s StarPhoenix editorial, titled “Detailed speech offers no 

vision,” pointed this out, saying that the government “got 

burned this year by using a bulk procurement process to obtain 

all of its portable classrooms, but a similar setback with the new 

P3 schools could cause long-term and more serious pain.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this government’s bungling of portable 

classroom bulk buying, how the heck can Saskatchewan people 

trust them to bulk buy and bundle the schools we need for our 

children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this year’s budget included $120 million for the most 

relocatables ever purchased in the history of the province. Mr. 

Speaker, a number of those portables were diverted to go to 

assist with the flood damage in Alberta and, Mr. Speaker, we 

are always ready to stand and support somebody that has had a 

crisis. We know it’s been an inconvenience for our schools, and 

we want to remedy that as quickly as we possibly can. We’re 

working to have more of the portables brought in. We intend to 

do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I certainly take strong exception to the member opposite raising 

the idea that the portables should have been procured on a 

one-by-one basis. There is a great deal of savings to be done by 

having economies of scale, and that’s how we intend to acquire 

portables. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite also raises the fact of P3s 

and the issue of access to schools out of school hours. I have 

done a large amount of media in the last days, and I’ve 

indicated that is something that must and will be addressed as 

we go forward here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, we’ve, on this 

side of the House, we’ve been calling for new schools for many 

years. But we want those new schools to be built in the most 

cost-effective and quick way. And the evidence shows that P3 

schools aren’t the best approach to do just that. 

 

It’s pretty plain why this government is choosing this route. It’s 

all about not showing the people of Saskatchewan the true state 

of our province’s finances and debt. When the Conservative 

government in Nova Scotia scrapped the costly P3 plan, the 

Finance minister had this to say: 

 

The former government tried to use accounting to push the 

costs of new schools off-book, but they didn’t fool our 

lenders or taxpayers. Debt is debt is debt, and we must 

account for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how is this any different? 



3618 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be glad to tell you 

what’s different. Under the 16 years when the people opposite 

were in government, they closed 176 schools. That was how 

they handled schools in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand in the House and talk about 

P3s and how we intend to deliver schools to our students. 

Ontario, Quebec, Alberta, British Columbia, and New 

Brunswick all have P3 programs. There are over 204 projects 

built or under way in Canada since the early 1990s. From 2009 

to 2011, deals worth $21.7 billion were finalized in Canada. 

There are municipal P3 projects in Calgary, Winnipeg, 

Saskatoon, and Regina that are either planned or under way. 

The new federal P3 Canada project will oversee $1.25 billion 

just as it did before. Details are being worked out. 

 

The Conference Board of Canada analyzed 19 P3 projects and 

found that Canadian P3s have so far delivered savings ranging 

from a few million dollars to $750 million compared to 

traditional procurement. I can also advise, Mr. Speaker, that 

nearly all of those projects were done ahead of schedule. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Traffic Safety 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This summer the 

Traffic Safety Committee studied why Saskatchewan continues 

to hold the dubious distinction of the highest number of 

impaired driving fatalities per capita of all the provinces. 

 

Today after question period, the government will table the 

committee’s report which contains many good 

recommendations to make our roads safer. It doesn’t contain, 

however, one particular recommendation that has been proven 

to save lives, which was the goal of the committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in BC and Alberta almost immediately after those 

governments implemented short-term vehicle impoundments, 

impaired driving fatalities declined sharply. Implementing 

tougher penalties should include short-term vehicle 

impoundments on first offence, the policy that’s worked in 

other provinces. 

 

Will the minister commit today to implement this effective 

first-time offence policy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

our government takes our traffic safety record very, very 

seriously. That’s why the Premier assigned an all-party 

committee to do consultations with stakeholders and with the 

public on what can be done to address the very serious issue 

within our province. 

 

I want to thank the member opposite as well as our members 

that did a lot of work on that committee. I think it was very, 

very good work. We’re looking forward to the report and we 

will have a response to it very soon. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Special Committee on Traffic Safety 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The final report of the 

Special Committee on Traffic Safety was tabled with the Clerk 

on August 30th, 2013. Pursuant to rule 135(6), I now table the 

final report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a pleasure to be the Chair of the all-party 

Traffic Safety Committee this past summer. I want to take this 

time to thank all the members who took part, on both sides of 

the House. We all recognized over the last few years that, as 

Saskatchewan was growing, we saw the statistics, alarming in 

nature to be sure, were still climbing, Mr. Speaker. The 

committee took this to heart. 

 

In preparing for these meetings, we opened up the entire 

province for consultation. We asked every major centre if they 

wished the committee to come to their communities to talk, 

listen to stakeholders. A vast majority chose not to. However 

they presented through written submissions, Mr. Speaker, and 

those were given to the committee members to look at and use 

as we got towards the end of our consultation process to come 

to these 26 recommendations in the end. 

 

It seemed on a daily basis we were hearing from many 

stakeholders, individuals and professionals as well as 

academics, that the traffic fatality statistics in this province 

needed to be addressed through various means. 

 

[10:45] 

 

From the personal stories — after listening and hearing about 

the tragic death of the conservation officer, Justin Knackstedt, 

out of Watson on June 8th — the committee was very much 

directed in purpose, Mr. Speaker. The stakeholders that showed 

up after that, and even before that, all said that this province has 

the potential to make change — whether it be through large 

measures or interim measures, Mr. Speaker, which could 

immediately be addressed through maybe more efficient traffic 

and law enforcement activities which we saw take place 

through this fall with additional STEP [selective traffic 

enforcement program] programs with members of RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and city police officers 

jointly working. 

 

I can say in Prince Albert, I had an RCMP officer in front of my 

house stopping vehicles through the school zone. And I talked 

to this young member who said that this was a great initiative. 

He had just come from the northern part of the province down. 

He said this was one of those things where they couldn’t do 

much of up north because of the fact that it was difficult to get 

members out. 

 

So it’s good to see SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 

and I commend the minister of SGI for allocating more funds 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3619 

towards these measures. And I’m sure she’ll continue doing 

that to ensure we in fact see these kinds of programs, deal with 

issues of speeding and intersection safety. And again driver 

awareness is all part of this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The common goal of the committee truly was, although partisan 

in some nature, to be non-partisan in how we came to our 

recommendations. We took in data from various means; we 

never agreed on one particular section of a recommendation. 

The majority decided to go with a different measure and on 

that, the committee members that voted that way felt that the 

documentation presented clearly indicated to take a different 

path. 

 

But having said that, I thank the members of the opposition for 

their dissenting opinion, and we will now see what the minister 

and the cabinet decide moving forward. I do know and I’ve said 

before, this is a suite of recommendations, as the Chair, Mr. 

Speaker. These recommendations can be taken at face value as 

provided or they can be augmented by cabinet. They can be 

considered interim measures and then for further study as well, 

Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure that the minister and the cabinet 

members and government-elect will do that. 

 

One thing we do have in this province are committed officials 

in various ministries who want to see these statistics change. 

There are many people from the Ministry of Corrections and 

Policing and Justice, and officials from SGI who presented, 

they have ideas. We took those ideas to heart and even today, 

Mr. Speaker, after the recommendations are tabled and the 

report’s tabled officially, those officials and others will still 

have input moving forward. 

 

As I said, the recommendations were formed from various 

means, from academics, and from personal stories. Whether or 

not those take place today or in the next number of months, I 

feel as the Chair, I believe that the recommendations will be 

actioned by cabinet and by officials. This is a living, breathing 

document, Mr. Speaker, not to be actioned and dealt with one 

day. It’s my hope that cabinet ministers and officials will have 

this at their desktop at all times to review to make this province 

safer. 

 

Now having said that, we have dedicated law enforcement 

officials as we have SGI officials, officials who work in the 

justice system, who do everything possible, at their means 

today, to ensure that the messages are out about drinking and 

driving, use of cellphones while driving, speeding, and the 

effects of intersection safety. People need to be more aware of 

their surroundings, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that with this 

report tabled today and the recommendations, we’ll see a lot 

more of public awareness, more public awareness campaigns 

arising from our recommendations. 

 

We know that that’s one interim measure that can be taken. We 

know the police officers in this province are definitely 

committed to working towards solving this issue. I know that 

there’s lots of opportunity for additional resources to be 

implemented at some point, doesn’t have to be today, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

But we do know that we have seen evidence in other provinces 

where when they augmented police officers with additional 

resources for traffic safety divisions and changed legislation to 

cover speeding, road racing, impaired driving, intersection 

safety, cellphone use, and they’ve put a lot of dollars into public 

awareness — that’s probably the most important part — we 

believe that the statistics showed a decline in two specific 

provinces because the public was more aware of the punitive 

measures and punishment that could be taken against them if 

they in fact broke the law.  

 

So in that case, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to hearing from 

SGI, SaskTel as well, because they are a stakeholder in this as 

well, to see their input and their future plans on public 

awareness in relation to texting and driving, cellphone use, 

distracted driving, speeding, and the like. 

 

One thing that we heard from a few individuals, and we were 

surprised possibly that we didn’t have more personal stories 

come out, but there was a lot of individuals who felt that the 

system, the system let them down. But having said that, the 

system can only deal with what the system is provided in 

relation to punitive measures, laws, and enforcement initiatives, 

Mr. Speaker. So again with the recommendations put forth, I 

feel very confident that the minister and the cabinet and our 

government and the officials will take all those to heart and 

move forward in a timely manner. And I believe we’ll see some 

immediate changes very soon, especially when we look at . . . 

The focus of the committee was to look at changing overall 

behaviour of drivers. 

 

The most important future in this province are our young 

people. And if we can change the behaviour at that particular 

level — whether it be under the graduated driver’s licence 

program up to the age of 19 or even possibly up to 21, which 

could be a factor considered as well by the cabinet and the 

government — the most important thing is that the young 

people in this province realize that they have a future. And we 

don’t want to see their future chances stopped, hindered, 

hampered by a run-in with the law because of impaired driving. 

 

And there may be some measures that seem to be harsh to some 

people for first-time offenders, Mr. Speaker. But I believe, I 

know I believe all members of the committee believe that once 

the message is out and there are personal stories about how the 

system actually saves lives because of these punitive measures, 

that will see behaviour changing. And we’ll see the young 

people today, under the graduated driver’s licensing program, 

change their overall perception of drinking and driving and 

their actions toward it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the end the goal of the committee and the goal of all people 

in this province is to be able to drive to work every day, go on 

vacation, drive to a friend’s house, go shopping, and feel safe 

that when you start your vehicle you will arrive at your 

destination safely and return, Mr. Speaker. Those are the kind 

of factors that the committee took into consideration when 

looking at the recommendations as well. 

 

I would be remiss if I didn’t thank the members of the 

Legislative Assembly Service who took time out of their busy 

schedules to help us as well. 

 

I also want to thank the families of other members who took 

part in this work because we were in Regina and Saskatoon and 



3620 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

La Ronge and Pelican Narrows and Prince Albert and other 

communities in this province, like Weyburn. We had to stay 

away from our families to get this work done. None of us 

complained. We all looked forward to this work, and our family 

members supported us. I want to thank them as well. 

 

I want to thank colleagues on both sides of the House who have 

opinions on this matter who provided to the committee 

members. I’m sure, I know on our side we talked to some 

individuals who believed there needed to be change happening. 

And on that, Mr. Speaker, we took their advice as well. This 

was a team effort. Both political parties took part in this. But 

more importantly the public took part in this, and stakeholders. 

That was the most critical piece to us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So moving forward, we may have some people complain, 

we’ve done too much. Some will say, we haven’t done enough. 

This is the starting point, Mr. Speaker. This is a jump-off point 

for our province to change, for people’s behaviours, of all ages, 

to change. When you put your key in the ignition of your 

vehicle, you are responsible for every action that comes of your 

driving behaviour, whether you drink before you drive, which is 

a mistake, whether you use your cellphone during your driving 

is a mistake. If you . . . Speed’s a mistake. Not paying attention 

at intersections, Mr. Speaker, is also a mistake. The bottom line 

here or the goal is to affect behaviour and change behaviour so 

that, in a perfect world, we see not one more fatality on our 

highways attributed to those factors. It’s wishful thinking, but 

maybe it’s a start now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the final report on the Special Committee on Traffic 

Safety be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Prince 

Albert Carlton: 

 

That the final report of the Special Committee on Traffic 

Safety now be concurred in. 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter the discussion on the traffic safety report. I want to start 

by saying, I am a mom. I think everybody here in this 

legislature has heard me talk about my two daughters. They are 

the reason I’m here. Saskatchewan is a great place to call home, 

but when I chose to seek this position, it was because through 

my experience as a mom I was seeing things that this 

government could do better. I knew things could be better for 

Ophelia and for Hennessey and for all children and families. 

Almost everything I do, I see it through the lens of a mother, a 

mother who is in the throes of parenting young children. I can’t 

help it; that is my perspective. I think that that’s a big part of 

what I bring to this legislature. 

 

And there is no doubt there is no shortage of interesting and 

important areas on which we can put our focus as MLAs. And 

last year for me as the critic for SGI, it became apparent that we 

needed to put our focus on impaired driving. If this government 

wasn’t going to, the opposition would because it was very clear 

this government was falling short on having the necessary tools 

in place to help keep our roads safe. On our highways last year, 

almost 200 people lost their lives, many of these deaths caused 

by impaired driving. According to SGI, between 2000 and 2012 

impaired driving was responsible for 41 per cent of the traffic 

fatalities in Saskatchewan — 41 per cent — and 12 per cent of 

the injuries. This is just not acceptable and is totally 

preventable. 

 

We talk about the high number of fatalities, but the reality is 

these are people. These are children. These are mothers. 

They’re fathers. They’re sisters. They’re brothers. They are 

people who are loved and whose deaths undoubtedly have left 

gaping wounds in the hearts of those they have left behind. 

Having lost a dear family member this summer tragically and 

unexpectedly, I would not wish this pain on anybody. For me, 

hearing about the loss of life on roads and highways makes me 

think about those families. But it also makes me think about my 

own family, particularly my oldest daughter Hennessey, who is 

almost 16, God help me. She is learning how to drive and, as 

she grows up, she is spending less time with me and more time 

with her friends. 

 

Impaired driving is top of mind for me, especially now knowing 

what I do know about our abysmal impaired driving death rate. 

For more than a decade, our province has had a lousy track 

record with the highest impairment-related crash death rate per 

capita among all the provinces. In fact death rates have been 

going down in Canada over the past decade by almost 17 per 

cent but have gone up in this province by almost 23 per cent. 

That is not acceptable. 

 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, my daughter Hennessey is a great 

kid, and I do trust her judgment. However as she does get older 

and goes out in the world on her own more and more, I do 

worry, as all parents do, about everyone else she might 

encounter. I can tell you I don’t look forward to those days of 

her driving home at night and worrying about her meeting 

someone coming the other direction who may have had a few 

drinks. I don’t think any of us like that idea. And there are 

things we can do as members of this legislature, things people 

are counting on us to do to keep them and their families safe. 

To that end, last fall the opposition started pushing the 

government to do something about this. We said we needed to 

start talking about impaired driving and that we’d be glad to 

work together on this important issue. 

 

Following the fall session, the opposition embarked upon a 

consultation process of our own. If the government wasn’t 

going to do it, we would. We wanted to connect with those who 

understood this issue well — people like the police, traffic 

safety experts, those whose lives have been impacted by 

impaired driving, organizations like MADD [Mothers Against 

Drunk Driving] Canada who make it their business to 

understand this issue well. In fact, it was shortly after the CEO 

of MADD Canada was in Regina to meet with the opposition, 

and after we said we’d be offering solutions in the spring 

session, that the Premier announced the all-party Traffic Safety 

Committee. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The mandate of this committee was broader than impaired 

driving, which is good, and was struck to consult and come up 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3621 

with solutions to reduce fatalities on our roads. I was pleased to 

be one of the two opposition members on this committee and 

thoroughly enjoyed our work. It was a great opportunity to put 

partisanship aside, to hear from people who had lived 

experience, and who are policy experts, academics — all kinds 

of people. It was a good opportunity to read literature and 

tabled submissions and come up with the best possible 

solutions to meet our mandate to save lives. 

 

We heard testimony on many issues, but one theme emerged 

from almost all those who talked about impaired driving. 

Short-term vehicle impoundments for those caught for the first 

time drinking and driving in the .04 to .08 blood alcohol 

concentration range is a must. These are people who are not 

criminally impaired but whose driving is impacted by alcohol. 

This recommendation came from those who have worked in 

traffic safety for decades, those who work with directly 

impaired drivers here in Saskatchewan, those who know this 

issue well. Three-day vehicle impoundments have been 

implemented in BC and Alberta, and in a short time they have 

totally changed the landscape. This deterrent has the ability to 

be a culture changer. 

 

There were good in camera discussions — sometimes heated, 

as the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton could attest to 

— but in the end we had genuine consensus on most of these 

recommendations. But when it comes to impaired driving, 

government members stubbornly refuse to ignore the evidence 

before us. They fail to use common sense on this 

recommendation. That is why the member from Cumberland 

and I felt compelled to write a minority opinion. 

 

It is our hope for the people of Saskatchewan that the minister 

gets serious about impaired driving. We are so far behind other 

provinces on dealing with this issue. And undoubtedly the 

measures recommended by this committee will have some 

impact if implemented, but we have so far to go and we are so 

far behind. We need to be a leader on this issue. 

 

With all due respect, I would respectfully disagree with the 

member from P.A. Carlton when he says this is a starting point. 

This should not be a starting point. We have had, for more than 

a decade, the most notorious rate. This is not time for 

incrementalism. This is time to look at what other jurisdictions 

have done that have worked, and follow suit — do the same or 

do things stronger. 

 

What happened in BC? So in BC in 2010, they had both low 

blood alcohol concentration recommendations for those in the 

warning range, it’s called, and high blood alcohol concentration 

recommendations for those over .08. It was a combination of 

factors that they contribute to their success. So in 2010 when 

they implemented the three-day impoundments, their fatality 

rates involving alcohol dropped by 50 per cent in two years. 

 

When I was doing my consultations back in February, I spoke 

with someone who has worked in traffic safety for 30 years. He 

says he has never in his time in traffic safety seen such a sharp 

decline in such a short period of time, and he mostly attributes 

it . . . The experts believe that it is the three-day, short-term 

vehicle impoundment on first offence that has changed the 

culture there. 

 

The early results in Alberta under a Conservative government, 

in 2012 they implemented a three-day vehicle impoundment on 

first offence in that warning range as well, and fatal crashes 

where alcohol was involved dropped by 46 per cent between 

July and December 2012, compared to the five-year average for 

the same months. 

 

So again it is . . . The member talked about a suite of measures 

but the one thing that the stakeholders who presented to us — 

we had traffic safety experts, we had an individual who worked 

directly with impaired drivers, we had MADD Canada, we had 

someone from MADD Saskatchewan — they all agreed that 

this three-day vehicle or short-term vehicle impoundments on 

first offence is a great deterrent. 

 

One of the recommendations that this committee made was on 

licence suspensions, which we currently have. And the 

committee agreed, with the member from Cumberland and I’s 

dissenting opinion, that the three-day vehicle licence 

suspension — pardon me, the three-day licence suspension — 

was effective. But there’s two problems with this. We heard 

that as many as 70 per cent of suspended drivers violate 

suspensions. They’re easy things to get around. So you lose 

your car on a Friday night and you have . . . Or you lose your 

licence on Friday nights and a lot of people get away with 

driving while suspended. But the reason a vehicle impoundment 

is effective, it’s pretty hard to hide the fact that you don’t have 

your vehicle when you go home and tell your spouse or your 

parents why you haven’t brought the vehicle home. It does have 

a real impact, and that’s why vehicle impoundments have been 

a deterrent. 

 

We also had evidence presented to us that those who get 

short-term licence suspensions . . . So this is the 

recommendation of the committee that licence suspension 

should be the way to go on first-time offences. But we had 

evidence that those who get a short-term licence suspension are 

eight times more likely than the average person to end up with a 

.08 within two years. So you don’t start out as a .08 driver. You 

don’t get there usually your first time out. You have practice as 

an impaired driver. You drink a few drinks. You don’t get 

caught. Things are okay. Eventually you tend to increase your 

drinking and driving. These drivers who get licence suspensions 

are high-risk drivers. 

 

And I need to point out too that there’s a one-drink difference 

between a recommendation that we made. So at five drinks, 

you’re in the warning range if you’re a 200-pound male. You’re 

at .06 and in the warning range, and we are not willing to give 

that person a three-day impoundment. But if you have six 

drinks as a 200-pound male, you’re at .08. You know what 

we’ve decided to do there, which I support, we’re willing to 

take your car away for 30 days with one more drink. I would 

argue that it’s probably more effective to give the person who’s 

had five drinks and blows .06 a three-day vehicle impoundment 

so hopefully they learn their lesson and they don’t get to .08 

where they will have much more severe consequences and may 

end up injuring or killing someone. 

 

So the opposition does not believe this is time for 

incrementalism. We supported the work of the committee. We 

were pleased to be part of it and thought it was a great process, 

but we respectfully disagree with the fact that this government 



3622 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

was not willing to agree to three-day vehicle impoundments, 

evidence-based policy that has worked in other jurisdictions. I 

have to point out that when John Gormley and the NDP agree, 

that perhaps we found a middle ground somehow. 

 

So I think in this case the government, as it goes forward and 

has received this report and makes its decisions on what they’re 

going to implement, that they seriously consider the minority 

opinion. It will save lives and as a mom, I am imploring the 

government to do this for my family and for all families. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Prince 

Albert Carlton: 

 

That the final report of the Special Committee on Traffic 

Safety be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 

The Speaker: — At this time, I would like to present a note 

from the Lieutenant Governor, and it reads: 

 

October 15, 2013 

 

Dear Mr. Speaker: 

 

Pursuant to section 67 of The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, 2007, I hereby inform the 

Assembly of the membership of the Board of Internal 

Economy effective October 10, 2013: 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont, Chair 

Hon. Nancy Heppner (executive committee nominee) 

Hon. June Draude (executive committee nominee) 

Jeremy Harrison, MLA (government caucus nominee) 

Doreen Eagles, MLA (government caucus nominee) 

David Forbes, MLA (opposition caucus nominee) 

Warren McCall, MLA (opposition caucus nominee) 

 

Yours sincerely, 

 

Vaughn Solomon Schofield 

Lieutenant Governor 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I would also like to table the caucus 

disclosure statements from the government party, the 

Saskatchewan Party; and from the opposition party, the New 

Democratic Party. I lay them on the table now. 

 

And I also wish to table the members’ disclosure statements 

that were provided for the past year. 

 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 

pleasure to rise in the House to kick off, being the lead batter 

here for the Speech from the Throne debate, 2013, the third 

session of the twenty-seventh legislature here in the province of 

Saskatchewan of course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So a few thanks. I know that with such a large caucus, Mr. 

Speaker, we sometimes don’t get a chance to speak as often as 

we’d like sometimes maybe. But just again a chance to say a 

few thank yous to all the people that allow us to be here. First 

of all, of course my family. My wife, Tami, has always been 

very supportive. My kids, they miss dad once in a while, but 

that might be okay in their opinion. So I thank my family. I 

thank the people that work closest to me, the Government 

Whip, all the House leaders, and certainly members of the 

caucus, but also our CAs [constituency assistant] in our office, 

Mr. Speaker. I share an office with the member from Northeast 

and Douglas Park to use the taxpayers’ dollars as judiciously as 

possible. And so Brittany is my constituency assistant. We have 

Becky and Ron as well that do a great job for the people here in 

Regina. 

 

And I’d certainly like to thank the constituents of Regina 

Dewdney, the people that put me here in the first place, and I’ll 

always consider it a privilege to represent them. And every time 

I get a chance to rise in the House, I’ll remember to say my 

thank yous to them. I’m really enjoying what I’m doing and 

being able to represent them. 

 

So just a quick update as well on Regina Dewdney, Mr. 

Speaker. Just like everywhere else in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, we continue to see great growth here in Regina and 

specifically in Dewdney, Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot of condo 

development in our area in the area along Heseltine Road. It’s 

called the Riverbend Development, and there’s beautiful 

condos being put up. There’s still more coming and we see road 

graders there. We see forklifts and people working all the time. 

The streets are kind of muddy at this time of year because of 

that, but it’s great to see so many housing units being built in 

our community. 

 

There’s a new retirement home just recently opened, 

Brightwater, in the same area, and I was able to be at the 

opening along with the member from Wascana Plains. And so 

that’s great to see movement from the private sector in care 

homes in that area. 

 

I know in Regina with the tough winter that of course we had 

here in Saskatchewan, the Ring Road was in pretty bad shape, 

Mr. Speaker. I heard that a fair amount from my constituents 

that we needed some work done on Ring Road, and certainly a 

major thoroughfare in our city and our province. And so the 

government stepped forward with that, with funding for that in 

partnering with the city of Regina, and that work is almost 

done. I think there’s still portions in north Regina that are done, 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3623 

but the part of it that goes in the east part of town is done. And 

that’s a great improvement that we’ve seen there, so the 

minister and this government responding in year to pressures 

and concerns that we see from our constituents once again. 

 

There’s a project going on. It’s not necessarily a government 

project; it’s more municipal. But a lot of my constituents when 

I was out door knocking this summer were wondering, and so 

for the folks watching on TV that might be watching from our 

constituency or from Regina, there’s a project on the southeast 

corner of Victoria and Ring Road. And so a lot of people are 

actually a little bit excited that it’s going to be, oh, a new big 

box store or a new restaurant or something. But actually it’s a 

storm detention centre, Mr. Speaker. So that’s what that’s going 

in there. A lot of earth was moved for that. 

 

So we see a lot of exciting things happening in our province. 

Earlier in the year, the Throne Speech referenced the Juno 

Awards that occurred here in Regina. That was a great event for 

southern Saskatchewan, all of Saskatchewan really. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, an event that’s very close to my 

heart personally is the Grey Cup is coming one month from 

today, Mr. Speaker. One month from today, the Grey Cup 

championship, the CFL [Canadian Football League] 

championship is going to be held here, right in the heart of 

Rider nation. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s great to see. 

 

It’s certainly a unique event in Canada, I believe. I’ve been very 

fortunate as a player playing in a game, and that’s certainly a 

great experience. But nothing quite brings our country together, 

coast to coast to coast, like the Grey Cup. It’s our national 

event. It’s Canadian rules football, the only place in the world 

that it’s played. And the championship again is happening right 

here in Regina. 

 

And boy, again I was able to go to a few Grey Cups not playing 

in it, and it was just a great, great atmosphere. You know, 

there’s some ribbing going on certainly between opposing 

teams but everywhere wears their gear. And certainly there’ll 

be tons of green and white in the streets of Regina in the fall. 

And boy, Mr. Speaker, certainly personally looking forward to 

it. And I’m sure I can speak on behalf of Rider nation: 

everybody’s looking forward to that great event, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And I encourage all people . . . I don’t have tell the members of 

. . . Rider fans what a great event it’ll be. But particularly to 

new members, we have a lot of new people here in 

Saskatchewan and that’s great to see, and we hope that they sort 

of get involved. There’s a lot of free events that’ll be happening 

downtown Regina all Grey Cup week. And we encourage folks 

that are new to Saskatchewan and haven’t been here before. 

Boy it’s a lot of fun and it’s a great event. And it’s really a part 

of what Saskatchewan is all about. And we certainly love our 

football here. So I’m looking forward to that. 

 

I mentioned earlier about housing here in our province, 

specifically Regina Dewdney and about the vacancy rates 

we’ve heard about. Now I know there’s been a lot of programs 

brought forward by the government, referenced in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, about the dollars we have flowing 

towards partnering with the private sector, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’ve seen great progress in this from 2011, 2012 — more 

than, there was more starts, more housing starts in this province 

than its 16 years combined. That’s right from the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as a result, our provincial vacancy rate is around 3 per cent. 

Here in Regina though, we’re at 1.9 per cent. We’re at 1.9 per 

cent. Three is considered a balanced market, so we’ve still got 

some work to do there, Mr. Speaker, but we’re well on our way. 

It was at one point at point six, 0.6 vacancy rate, so it was very 

difficult to find a place to stay and live here in Regina. Again, 

this government’s responded to get it up to 1.9 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, $344 million in the next few years up to 2016, for 

12,600 units province-wide. And so that’s great. And those are 

the numbers, those are the things you see on the spreadsheets 

and in the Throne Speech. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues have been to many 

events here in the province. We’ve been to many events where 

we’ve had a chance to introduce new people to have a new 

house right here in our province, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

certainly a great event. And I do get to do those as much as you 

can because it’s great to see families doing well, having a safe 

place to live. And that happens very often here in our city, and 

that’s great to see. 

 

So I’ve been to quite a few Habitat for Humanity builds, Mr. 

Speaker. Actually in the spring and the summer I was able to 

swing a few hammers myself at a few of the builds. One day 

they actually even gave me an air nailer, so that — nobody got 

hurt, I’m proud to report — but it’s a lot of fun. It’s great to see 

how the community comes together. They do a great job. 

They’re passionate about what they do, the people at Habitat. 

But the people that come on site, they work hard. They really 

do work hard. They have an end in mind, and that’s wonderful 

to see. 

 

And I know other programs are working very well. The 

Headstart on a Home, the Summit Action Fund, those have 

been great to increase and improve the housing stock here in the 

Queen City. I was able to go on a tour of Chip and Dale Homes; 

it’s a CBO [community-based organization] in my area, Mr. 

Speaker. They do great work for truly the most vulnerable 

people in our province, Mr. Speaker, and it was great to see the 

nice facilities they have and the great work, the dedicated, 

passionate people that do the hard work on the ground. And 

they take their job seriously, and they’re really involved in the 

people’s lives that they help look after. So it’s wonderful to see 

they’re growing. 

 

And they were very, very complimentary — I don’t want to get 

too political on this point, Mr. Speaker — but they are very, 

very happy with the increase of wages we were able to give to 

all of the great people that work in that area because in a 

competitive job market, they were moving on to other jobs 

quite frequently. This allows them more stability in their 

organizations. And there’s many organizations I should 

mention, but this was seen as a great thing by those people. And 

it was great to see; it was a great learning experience for 

myself. 

 

And so I think in general, the few things I’ve mentioned, I 



3624 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

know we’ve done a lot of work on the home care areas, 

retirement communities, the Urgent Issues Action Fund, Mr. 

Speaker. Certainly there’s pressures to growth. That’s what this 

Throne Speech is all about — how to deal with the pressures of 

growth, Mr. Speaker. And certainly I think we have responded. 

More to do, no doubt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think these ministers, the ministers I’ve mentioned, when 

we talk about the Ring Road, when we talk about home care, 

when we talk about nursing care, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 

about social housing, when we talk about affordable housing, 

Mr. Speaker — and I want to mention the city of Regina has 

really come on board and done a good job in increasing the 

housing stock, Mr. Speaker, so we’re on our way — but 

important to note that these ministers and this government has 

really responded in a timely fashion to what they’re hearing 

from their MLAs, from their community. And they’re doing a 

good job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was wondering, as I mentioned earlier, I’d talk about the Grey 

Cup that’s coming here this year, Mr. Speaker. It was, the last 

time Regina, Saskatchewan has held the Grey Cup, the first 

time in 1995 and again in 2003, Mr. Speaker, so it’s been 10 

years, probably a little overdue that the Grey Cup would come 

back here to the heart of the CFL, Mr. Speaker. So I was 

wondering what . . . There’s a group of dedicated people 

throughout the CFL that they come to every Grey Cup. There’s 

still people from Baltimore, Maryland, from when the US 

[United States] team was, US teams were still involved in the 

CFL, there’s still a group that comes up to all the Grey Cups. 

There’s people from all over the nation, as I mentioned, 

congregate in the Grey Cup city. And it’s been 10 long years 

that Regina’s hosted it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I often wondered what those people, that they haven’t been 

back in Saskatchewan, they haven’t been in Regina, would 

think about what they see here now, Mr. Speaker. What would 

they think how much it’s grown? I’m sure if they’re arriving by 

air, they’ll see basically a brand new airport. They’ll see, if 

they’re flying over Regina, they’ll see all new subdivisions, 

hundreds of houses everywhere, particularly Harbour Landing 

out by our constituency in the southeast, Mr. Speaker — all 

kinds of houses, Mr. Speaker, brand new houses, very beautiful 

houses, apartment buildings, new businesses, strip malls. 

They’ll see new areas that have sprung up. If they’re coming 

into the northwest, on that flight plan, Mr. Speaker, they’ll just 

look out their left window, they’ll see again hundreds of 

houses. They’ll see growth. Mr. Speaker, they’ll see new hotels. 

There’s several hotels on the east part of Victoria, new ones 

happening in downtown Regina, Mr. Speaker. There’s lots of 

things happening. 

 

If you’re driving in, Mr. Speaker, there’s probably a lot of 

people from, in 2003 a lot of people from Edmonton that came 

down because unfortunately we lost the West final in 2003 and 

missed an opportunity to play here at home. Hopefully that’s 

not the case this year, we have a home team in the Grey Cup for 

sure. That would be great. 

 

But also I think those people that do drive in — it won’t be 

Edmonton this year, by the way — but I’m sure they’ll see all 

the new overpasses we have, Mr. Speaker. How this 

government’s responded to growth. So I’m sure they’d be very 

surprised and say, wow things are really happening in Regina. 

They’ll probably notice a little bit of traffic, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ll notice quite a bit of new traffic. And again that’s one of 

the pressures that come with growth. 

 

But they’ll also, they might notice that there, since that — 

around that area, I didn’t do the exact numbers — but there’s 

130,000 new people that live in Saskatchewan the last time the 

Grey Cup was played here on Saskatchewan soil. Mr. Speaker 

— 130,000 people, Mr. Speaker, from that last Grey Cup. You 

know that’s pretty impressive numbers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people said that couldn’t be done. 

You know, it was a fantasy. It just wouldn’t be able to happen. 

I’ll get to that in a second. But I thought I’d look back, just 

briefly from my own sort of education. I certainly listened to 

politics in those days, not intently, mostly around the, mostly 

centred around the budget, Mr. Speaker, mostly around the 

budget. I’d pay attention and look into it, but sort of the broad 

trends I’d pay attention to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I decided I’d look back at Hansard to see what was 

happening in this very House the last time the Grey Cup 

happened here in Saskatchewan. And it was . . . I read quite a 

bit through Hansard from about 10 years ago to get some 

context, get perspective of how things were then and how 

they’re different now and why they’re different, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly it was interesting that the Throne Speech 

happened in March, for instance. It’s just a difference from now 

to then, Mr. Speaker. And certainly there was some great debate 

back and forth. They didn’t pull any punches in ’02-03 in that 

area. There were many members on this side of the House that 

were part of the opposition at that time, sat over where the 

members opposite sit now. And certainly there was very heated 

debate, although it looks like they had a good time. 

 

So I was combing through that, and by the way, Mr. Speaker, 

my wife, she mentioned that I might be a bit of a nerd for 

looking at, for looking through Hansard from 10 years ago, 

spending my weekends combing over that stuff, Mr. Speaker. 

So I guess I’d have to agree; I would call myself guilty as 

charged in that respect, Mr. Speaker. But what was the debate 

about? What was going on? 

 

Well unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the province economically 

wasn’t doing that great. It wasn’t doing that great back in 2003, 

in that last Grey Cup, Mr. Speaker. There was talk in Hansard 

about how the province had recently lost another 12,000 jobs. 

Mr. Speaker, 12,000 jobs. There was more young people 

leaving our province all the time. We remember those days, Mr. 

Speaker. Again, it’s a good reminder. 

 

I remember the member from Cypress Hills, he mentioned to 

me, certainly when they were talking about four-laning, finally 

four-laning the TransCanada Highway west of Swift Current, 

and that’s his constituency, and there was talk in his community 

about whether there would be three lanes west and one lane 

coming back east because there was so many people flocking to 

Alberta at that time, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately. So we were 

down to 978,000 Saskatchewanians at that time, around that 

time, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately. We’re down 1,000 nurses, 

longest wait times in Canada unfortunately, and we were a 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3625 

have-not province at that time. We were a have-not. 

 

And certainly I read the then government, the NDP 

government’s Throne Speech at the time, Mr. Speaker. And it 

was an interesting topic, mostly platitudes — nothing specific 

that you’ll see like in our Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. There 

was no targets, Mr. Speaker. Of course there was no targets. We 

know the NDP don’t set targets because they know they won’t 

meet them anyway when they were in government, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s unfortunate. 

 

I know some of the rural members will be interested or not 

really want to remember, they had a thing called ACRE, the 

action committee on the rural economy. So that’s an interesting 

. . . I don’t really have to look back and see how that worked 

out, based on what we see here in the Legislative Assembly, the 

numbers here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was debate about NDP investments through SaskTel and 

dot-coms in Australia, Atlanta. They were still defending 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company], Mr. Speaker, they were still . . . That was the debate 

in our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The most telling and most interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, was 

the attitude of the members opposite at the time, the attitude of 

the members opposite in 2002-2003. 

 

And certainly there was a member who, during the Throne 

Speech debate in 2002, Mr. Speaker, his thesis or what he was 

talking about in sort of a wide-ranging account, but he 

mentioned that in agrarian economies there were other . . . And 

of course the members on the government side or opposition 

side were railing on that government about why we’re losing 

our young people all the time. Why are we losing population 

when we have such great potential in our province, Mr. 

Speaker, when we have the, you know, great natural resources, 

the envy of Canada? We have great, hard-working people, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well his reason: well every other agrarian region in the 

Midwest was also losing population as well. They were losing 

population as well. And he also had this to say — a member of 

the then government on the NDP side — here is what was said 

by a member and one of the excuses as to how, why things 

were happening in terms of population loss, Mr. Speaker. And I 

quote: 

 

. . . it’s very important that we all understand what it is that 

is affecting the economy in Saskatchewan and what it is 

we can do something about, but also what it is that we 

cannot do anything about, because if you try . . . or you 

make the decision to take substantial government resources 

. . . to try and counteract trends that are irreversible, you’d 

be spending your money . . . very foolishly. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, those are very disappointing things that 

you’d want to say about your home province, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly it sounds like they just threw up their hands at that 

point. They had no answer. And I saw two things wrong, at 

least two things wrong with that. And so the thoughts then 

were, we’ll just settle. We’ll just be fine the way we are. 

There’s not much we can do about it. 

 

Now I often wonder in my previous business if a general 

manager of the Roughriders for example in his postings and 

press conference, if he came up in front of the media and he 

said to the reporters present, well you know, we had a tough 

year. It was a four-win year. It was tough but you know what? 

Ottawa had a four-win season as well, so we’re okay. It’s okay. 

That’s not going to be a problem. No problem. And on top of 

that though, guys, on top of that we got a little bad news for our 

team, for our team, the team I’m the GM [general manager] of. 

There’s no chance we’re going to win next year either. It’s 

irreversible. It’s irreversible. The four-win season, somebody 

else did it so we’re okay. But you know what? We can’t 

counteract it. We have no way of counteracting it. 

 

So what do you think would happen with the season ticket base 

once they heard that? I would think that GM would be, he 

would probably be punted before he even got back to his office, 

I would hope. I would hope anyway, Mr. Speaker. But that’s a 

sentiment we saw from the members opposite while they were 

in government. 

 

And the interesting part also, Mr. Speaker, he also went on, this 

member went on to talk about how it’s dangerous and reckless 

because you’d have to spend millions and billions of dollars at 

risk. Well I think that’s an interesting way, and that’s the way 

the NDP thinks, I think. They think that in order to grow an 

economy you have pour billions of dollars into it, and that’s the 

only way to grow an economy, to grow our population, to make 

this place a great place to be. 

 

So certainly it’s interesting. And at that time, I should mention 

as well — and this is important to the current situation, Mr. 

Speaker — the opposition at the time, the Saskatchewan Party 

opposition at the time, they had a plan. They had a concrete 

plan that was very well talked about in throne speeches in ’02 

and ’03. It was called Grow Saskatchewan. And they had the 

audacious, the ridiculous plan, as they were told. They were 

mocked pretty mercilessly. They were panned by the 

government NDP at the time of growing this province of so 

much wealth, so many great entrepreneurs, that it would be 

impossible to grow 100,000 people in 10 years. And we’ve 

surpassed that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It couldn’t be done, they said. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — It couldn’t be done. Well in fact the 

economic . . . It was panned. So that’s sort of the idea we saw 

from the . . . And I saw a quote that kind of could sum up what 

the NDP thought of our province and what they were about. 

Abraham Maslow said once, “If you plan on being anything 

less than you are capable of being, you’ll probably be unhappy 

all the days of your life.” And I think that talks about we had a 

lot of unhappy people I think in the province, and we have a lot 

of unhappy people on the opposition now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly I think the NDP’s had a tough time with this 

growth. They’re not sure how it goes or how it should be or if 

that’s something good for our province, Mr. Speaker. But I 

think they’re gradually, grudgingly they’re being pulled to 

realize that, I think, growth is a good thing for our province. 



3626 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

Certainly it’s bad for them politically I believe. I think it’s bad 

for them politically. 

 

I think one anecdote is when I was door knocking in the last 

election, Mr. Speaker. I came upon a door, a nice, young 

family, and I was talking to the person. They had just moved 

back from Alberta. I’m sure that’s a familiar refrain from 

people on this side, Mr. Speaker. They had just moved back 

from Alberta, and I was talking to them. I asked them, well 

what do you think? Are you leaning one way or the other? And 

the gentleman said to me, well we didn’t move back to 

Saskatchewan to vote for the NDP. I think that says it all right 

there, Mr. Speaker. I think that says it all. 

 

So it’s interesting that . . . Okay, I think they’re grudgingly 

coming around to this idea of, they call it smart growth now. 

They’re calling it smart growth. And certainly I think that tells 

us a little bit of hubris on that side, Mr. Speaker, that . . . Well 

what are they going to do? Growth’s okay, but we’re going to 

do . . . It’s going to be smart growth. We’re going to bring apart 

smart growth, that they’re so smart that they’re the anointed 

ones, Mr. Speaker, that will lead us to the promised land, Mr. 

Speaker. That sounds a lot like, to me — and it’s a sort of a 

subtle difference, Mr. Speaker — it sounds like more 

government to me, Mr. Speaker, more big government. You 

know, it’s up to them to do it. 

 

Where I think on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we 

think that growth happens by getting out of the way a lot of 

times, Mr. Speaker. We want to get out of the way of the 

entrepreneurs, the business people, the hardworking people of 

our province. I think that’s an important difference. So we let 

growth happen. 

 

We partner of course with the private sector, where I think 

members opposite, they want to overtake the private sector. 

They want to substitute themselves in for the private sector, Mr. 

Speaker, a top-down approach, Mr. Speaker. So I think that 

takes a bit of a step, and I think this government was able to do 

that. It takes a little humility to say, you know, we can get out 

of the way of this sector. We can let other people grow this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have to dump billions and 

billions of dollars into the economy in order to make it go, to 

attract people, to create opportunities right here in the great 

province of Saskatchewan. And I think humility is something 

that’s been lacking over there over time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know, I spend a fair amount of time, you know, I guess 

talking about the opposition, Mr. Speaker. And you know, I 

don’t know if that encourages debate or moves, advances the 

debate. But I think it’s very important to look back where we 

came from, from the time to that last Grey Cup that was here in 

our province, Mr. Speaker, and to see where we’ve come. 

Because this is a big story. It’s a big story. 

 

You know, I’m so proud of our province, how we’ve grown, 

not the government, but the entrepreneurs out there, the people 

out there who go to work every day and grow our province, risk 

their money, and they just do a great job for our province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I should have spent more time on the Throne 

Speech. I know that we have lots — well sorry — lots of 

members over here. I’m losing my voice. I usually don’t talk 

this long, Mr. Speaker. But we have lots of members on this 

side that will go over in a little more detail, Mr. Speaker. But 

there’s a lot of good things. There’s detail in it, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s a lot of great initiatives that will help keep moving this 

province forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was going to talk a little bit about P3s, but again other 

members will I’m sure join the debate and talk a lot about that, 

Mr. Speaker. We recently had a referendum here in Regina on a 

wastewater treatment plant. Certainly that’s a city-led initiative, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, I’m so happy for the way this province is going. 

I took the time and, despite what my wife said, I’m glad I did. It 

really cemented my reason for running for this side — the party 

of growth, the party of moving forward, and the party that I 

think is best suited to move this economy forward, Mr. 

Speaker. So you know, again, it’s the reason I ran. 

 

And you know, and I brought it up too because the members 

opposite, they were wrong about my province. They were 

wrong about our province. They said it couldn’t grow. They 

said we couldn’t have more people in this great, great province. 

We couldn’t grow this economy by any reasonable measure, 

Mr. Speaker. So they were wrong. And I think that needs to be 

said, and so that’s why I spent my time today talking about it. 

 

And again we have a great plan going forward. The growth 

plan, Mr. Speaker, is a great document, and it sort of puts our 

priorities in order, Mr. Speaker. This is a . . . I would call the 

Speech from the Throne a bit of an addendum. 

 

I was also going to talk quickly about what . . . You know 

what? I won’t get to that. Maybe in another speech. I want to 

give my colleagues a lot of extra time to do a great job of 

talking about our great province and how this province will be 

moving forward under this government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am charged and have the great honour of 

saying I move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland, the motion that reads as follows: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Dewdney, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Sutherland: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3627 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First 

of all, I’d like to start out with saying that I wholeheartedly 

support the motion made, brought forward by my colleague 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to get up and second the motion for 

the speech throne. It’s hard to figure out where you want to start 

with this huge task that we’ve undertaken for this legislative 

session. 

 

We’re talking about growth. We’re talking about how we’re 

going to grow the province in many aspects. We’re also talking 

about most importantly what are we going to do with that 

growth. How are we going to handle some of the challenges of 

growth? 

 

But before I get into that, I’d certainly like to thank my wife at 

home, Leane, and my kids for again being able to support me 

while I’m down here in Regina working on behalf of Saskatoon 

Sutherland. I’d also like to thank my mother, Marie, and my 

father, Ted, who I think are at home watching right now and 

have been very supportive as far as counsel and helping me out 

with my family duties while I’m out of town. So I wanted to 

say thank you very much to them. 

 

Today I’m going to talk about the benefits of growth and again 

the challenges of growth and what growth allows us to do. Mr. 

Speaker, I have to say throughout question period it was a little 

disappointing that the opposition, all they talked about is how 

things have been done, how things were done, and how things 

in their opinion should be done. And I’m not quite sure if 

they’ve evolved past what has been done. 

 

Things are changing very rapidly in our world, Mr. Speaker, 

and very rapidly in Saskatchewan. Just in the last six years, 

we’ve increased our population by 10 per cent to 1.1 million. I 

think that’s a huge accomplishment for a government to 

undertake, especially when the members opposite said that that 

was next to near impossible. 

 

I’m going to get a couple of quotes here. Quote from Hansard 

of March 24, 2003: 

 

. . . they propose to increase the population of 

Saskatchewan by 100,000 people over [ten years] . . . I 

forget what number of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well it is [well] . . . over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. 

Speaker, that it flies in the face of reality. 

 

That was NDP MLA Harry Van Mulligen on March 24th, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t understand how they can not conceive the 

aspect of growth. And I sit and I think about it, as well as my 

colleagues. We can’t figure out why this is . . . It’s a fear factor. 

 

And I think Minister Boyd when he was up in Saskatoon 

speaking, the MLA from Rosetown or MLA from Kindersley 

— somewhere southwest of Saskatoon, also known as God’s 

country, thank you — said they’re fearful of what is the growth 

because there is 100,000 more people in Saskatchewan who 

have never been under the government of the NDP. They fear 

that. They have their core base, but they’re just fearful of 

anything growing in this province. They’re fearful of growth in 

our schools. They’re fearful of growth in the health care 

system. They’re fearful of population. Everything is a fear 

factor for them. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And I think what it comes down to, Mr. Speaker, as we saw in 

the 2011 election when they promised $5 billion worth of 

spending, they can’t evolve. They can’t evolve past their roots 

of 30 to 40 years ago when they believed government should 

run everything. They’re not moving forward with the rest of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it is very disappointing. 

 

They can’t understand the concept of P3s, Mr. Speaker. Why? 

Because in 2004 there were some P3s that had some troubles 

just when P3s were getting started. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if 

the opposition has noticed, but a lot of things have changed 

since 2004. Who thought in 2004 that we would all have mobile 

devices with the Internet and our email and absolutely every 

app that we could possibly have? They’re still living in things 

ten years ago. They can’t evolve, Mr. Speaker, and it’s very, 

very disappointing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to get on some of the aspects of growth. 

But our north star within this government is fiscal 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker. It is the cornerstone. Since 2007 

the Saskatchewan Party government has reduced our debt by $3 

billion absolutely overnight, absolutely overnight. That debt 

was cut down in half . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Overnight, right on. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Absolutely. By wise investments on this 

party. We didn’t debt finance. We didn’t do anything. We 

didn’t promise $5 billion.  

 

During the election, Mr. Speaker, all they would do was go 

around and promise another town another little prize, Mr. 

Speaker. They would say, we’re going to give you this, and 

we’re going give you that, and we’re going to spend, spend, 

spend. Obviously they don’t know what they’re doing over 

there, Mr. Speaker, because the Saskatchewan people said, we 

don’t want to spend. Nobody in Saskatchewan wants to have a 

third and fourth mortgage on their house. But the NDP were  

 



3628 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

prepared to put a third and fourth mortgage on this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to talk about some of the expansion that’s happened in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In 2012 Saskatchewan companies 

exported a record $32.6 billion worth of product out of this 

province. That’s a 10.3 per cent increase from a year and triple 

the amount a decade ago, where the NDP are still stuck. 

Saskatchewan is now the largest per capita exporter, and as our 

Premier has said many times, that’s not too bad for a province 

without a port. 

 

Our government has worked hard to ensure that international 

uranium markets are available for Saskatchewan uranium. We 

have just ventured in to be able to put uranium into the private 

sector reactors in China. This is a huge step for Saskatchewan. 

And I have to say, I have to give credit to our federal 

counterparts for enabling to make this happen for Saskatchewan 

to continue to allow us growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the competitiveness things that we would 

like to talk about is how Saskatchewan is evolving. We have 

recently evolved over the last six years to be number one in 

Canada in so many areas — number one in growth, certainly 

the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. The growth that is 

going on is absolutely unbelievable. There are lots of people 

that are coming back to Saskatchewan because of the growth. 

People are coming here, starting up businesses, returning home. 

Expatriates are coming back. People are coming from around 

the world, Mr. Speaker, because they want to be a part of the 

new Saskatchewan. 

 

We have the fastest growing economy in the country and the 

lowest unemployment rate. Our government is working with the 

educational institution and employers to create 1,000 new 

training seats this year because we understand, Mr. Speaker, 

that there is a labour shortage in our province. Now I guess 

stepping back we would have to ask ourselves, why is there a 

labour shortage in the province? Maybe it was because 16 years 

of people for graduation gifts getting suitcases, packing up, and 

leaving Saskatchewan. We have almost an entire generation of 

people that left Saskatchewan for greener pastures. 

 

Now we have an entire generation of people coming back and 

choosing to stay here in Saskatchewan. We had almost 40,000 

people access our grad retention. That means our students 

aren’t graduating and leaving, Mr. Speaker. They can claim up 

to $20,000 for their grad retention. That shows that we’re not 

just actually pulling people in from around the country. We’re 

developing with our First Nations. We’re certainly developing 

our graduates to be able to keep Saskatchewan going because 

we see the long term. 

 

We see past the next election, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we 

created a growth plan, 2020 and beyond. We want to ensure 

that the province has a vision. That is our new north star. The 

throne from the speech, Mr. Speaker, is what is exactly going to 

build into that growth plan. We need to make sure that every 

speech, every budget is tying into that growth plan, Mr. 

Speaker, because that is where Saskatchewan is going. And 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, as you can see in the representation in 

here, Saskatchewan people want to go that direction. They want 

to grow, Mr. Speaker. They want to make sure that they can 

have a great future for their children. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on education. As a parent of 

four, I think it’s very important. What I want to talk about is 

how we’re investing in our education. Our Premier just this 

week announced new schools throughout Saskatchewan 

because we are responding quickly to the pressures of growth. 

 

We know there’s going to be pressures of growth, Mr. Speaker, 

but we want to be able to respond quickly, and we don’t want to 

have a knee-jerk reaction. We want to look at other models that 

are happening across the country, and we want to make sure 

that we are making the right choices. Instead of just throwing 

up a school here or throwing up a school there, we’re bundling 

the packages to make sure that we can save money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’re also making sure that those schools are put in the exact 

locations of where the population is growing. Now 

understandably that’s mostly in Regina and Saskatchewan, but 

we also want to make sure that the schools throughout the 

province . . . that everybody is receiving the same quality of 

education throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was again disappointing as a Saskatoon MLA 

that when the school was announced in Hampton Village . . . As 

we sit here, our members of the government, and had to listen 

to the Leader of the Opposition 51 times — up every day, 

talking in petitions, mentioning it in his speech — we need a 

school in Hampton Village. So how do we respond, Mr. 

Speaker? They get a school in Hampton Village. Well now they 

don’t like it, Mr. Speaker, because they don’t like the process 

that it’s going on, Mr. Speaker. They need to understand this. 

They want to slow it all down, government pay for everything. 

 

Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? I think as a Saskatchewan 

person who’s been living here since I’ve been 15, Mr. Speaker, 

I have heard the stories on how there have been public-private 

partnerships going on in Saskatchewan since day one. They 

weren’t called P3s, but I’m pretty sure when they were building 

a rink in Kindersley or they were building a rink in Willow 

Bunch, I’m pretty sure that the people that own the farms — 

their private businesses — were there with their tractors, were 

there with their tools. They were helping out. They were 

investing some of their private money into a public facility, Mr. 

Speaker. And I don’t understand why, this province was built 

on this type of mentality, and exactly why the NDP keep saying 

that this is not a good thing for Saskatchewan. 

 

They’re coming up with some magical terms and some funny 

financing thing, and again they reference things that happened 

10 years ago, Mr. Speaker. Well things have changed, but one 

thing that hasn’t changed is the NDP. It is the same old NDP 

that just wants to control everything within the government and 

kill the private sector. We want to partner with the private 

sector, help them out, support them, and let them grow, Mr. 

Speaker. All they want to do is stifle them. 

 

I can recall during the 2011 election when their leader at the 

time, Dwain Lingenfelter at the time, he said, you know what? 

If the private industries can’t do potash, we’ll step in. We ran 

potash once before; we can do it again. Everybody in 

Saskatchewan just clinched up, Mr. Speaker. Didn’t they realize 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3629 

that the only time potash was really developed is when the 

private industry stepped in? It was very, very scary times. They 

just wanted to nationalize everything. Mr. Speaker, that is just 

the old way of doing things, and they just — I’m sorry, Mr. 

Speaker — they can’t move forward. It’s very depressing. 

Certainly that’s why I want to make sure that we as a 

Saskatchewan government talk to businesses, talk to all the 

stakeholders, find out what is it that they need, how can we 

support. Because that’s our role as government is to provide 

support, not to control everything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the highways. It’s 

coming up to that time of year where everybody’s going to be 

travelling. And again with the MLA from P.A. Carlton was 

talking about the new highway traffic Act, we want to make 

sure that the roads are safe. So how are we doing that, Mr. 

Speaker? We’re spending more than $500 million on highways, 

bringing the total investment — and again this is a huge 

number, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think the NDP quite grasp 

this — $3.7 billion into our highway infrastructure. That’s a 76 

per cent increase than the last six years that the NDP were in 

government. 

 

In recent weeks, certainly in Saskatoon, it’s exciting times. We 

opened the Circle Drive South bridge, Mr. Speaker. Very 

exciting for Saskatchewan. Very exciting for Saskatoon. This is 

the new gateway from the south part of the province up. Now 

the traffic can move around the city. It’s creating less 

bottlenecks. It’s freeing up transportation. 

 

We need to make sure that out of that $30 billion of product 

that we’re shipping around the world, we’ve got to get it out of 

the province. And we’ve got to do that through our highways, 

our rail system, to make sure . . . And of course the other aspect 

of it is through the pipelines. We want to make sure that we can 

get our product to market, Mr. Speaker. So it is very, very 

important that we are making sure that the highways are safe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just in touching base on what the member from 

P.A. Carlton was talking about, we have seen increases in the 

number of fatalities in Saskatchewan. He was just referencing 

the young man, the conservation officer just outside of 

Saskatoon that was struck by a vehicle. We need to make sure 

that we are reacting to any emergent needs that are coming out 

through the province. This is an emergent need, Mr. Speaker, 

and we want to make sure that we get this. And I thank the 

member opposite from Saskatoon Riversdale for sitting on the 

committee, as well as all the committee members, to make sure 

that we had a good cross section of what we needed throughout 

Saskatchewan to make sure that our highways are safe, that our 

families are safe, and that people that are habitual breakers of 

the law in their motor vehicle, that they are dealt with in a more 

severe and swift way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the health care. As a 

parent and as a citizen of Saskatchewan, this is critical. 

Everybody that I talk to, one way or another, it comes around to 

health care. We had the Saskatchewan surgical initiative. We 

said we can reduce the wait times that were the worst in the 

country that we inherited by the members over there. The 

member from Regina Lakeview who was the minister just kept 

letting the list get longer and longer and longer. 

 

It was very, very upsetting to get . . . to be able to have a 

surgery put off and put off. And, Mr. Speaker, I had this first 

hand. When my daughter needed an MRI [magnetic resonance 

imaging] in 2001, we had to wait 18 months to be able to get an 

MRI. Well when a child’s suffering from epilepsy and having 

massive seizures every day, it is very disconcerting. 

 

And I think that’s why back in 2001 that my father started to 

get into politics because he knew we that we couldn’t rely on 

the government to change things. We have to make sure that the 

people understand that the government is responsible or is 

responsive to what their needs are. We can’t wait that long. The 

seniors are going through. The baby boomers are pushing 

through. We cannot have 18 months to wait for surgeries. It is 

just unbelievable. It’s absolutely deplorable that the NDP let 

things get like that. All they did, Mr. Speaker — and you’ll see 

this throughout education, health care, highways — all they did, 

Mr. Speaker, was put band-aids on everything. They just put a 

little band-aid here and a little band-aid there, just enough to 

keep it okay, and very cheap band-aids, the no-name band-aids. 

 

Now what we’re doing is once we start peeling back these 

band-aids since we got elected in 2007, well we can’t believe 

all the wounds underneath are festered, Mr. Speaker. The 

highways are falling apart. The schools are falling apart. The 

hospitals are falling apart. All of the infrastructure that we 

thought had some stable footing is now gone, Mr. Speaker. So 

we have to invest billions and billions of dollars. But what 

we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is we’re making sure that we don’t 

debt finance that. We’re just not throwing money at the 

problem. We’re finding innovating ways, we’re finding lean 

ways to be able to make sure that we can fix these problems 

that are out there, Mr. Speaker. But we can’t do it overnight. 

This is not going to happen overnight. And as the Premier has 

said and our ministers have said and everybody on this side of 

the House, we’ve got more work to do because frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, we inherited an absolute disaster. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Well I guess the member who sits opposite is laughing about 

the deplorable schools, and it’s very depressing that he doesn’t 

take this serious because this government certainly does take it 

serious. Lots of laughing on the other side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, because they didn’t take anything serious. They had 

16 years to solve all of these problems, Mr. Speaker, and now 

they laugh. Well it wasn’t so funny when people had to wait 18 

months for health care. They couldn’t get into the schools. And 

what did they plan? They just planned on a status quo, Mr. 

Speaker — no growth, no nothing, let’s just keep putting 

band-aids on. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that they were really good at was 

making announcements. We’re going to announce this. For a 

prime example the Health Sciences Building in Saskatoon at the 

University of Saskatchewan. We’re going to announce it. Well 

then they announced it again, and then they announced it a third 

time. But did they ever put a shovel into the ground, Mr. 

Speaker? No, no, no. They just announced it because they were 

trying to appease voters. We’re not trying to appease voters 

over here, Mr. Speaker. We’re just trying to get things done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, something that certainly, as my executive director 



3630 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

time at the Food Bank, social services is something near and 

dear to my heart. And I am so proud of the Minister and the 

former minister of Social Services for setting up the SAID 

[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. This . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Absolutely. This program is set up, when 

you boil everything down, it’s set up to give people with 

disabilities some dignity, to make sure that they have the 

option, that they aren’t treated like everybody else who is on 

social assistance. This is a special, unique group. We are 

making sure that they are taken care of. We are increasing the 

funding. We have more than 11,000 people on the SAID 

program right now, Mr. Speaker, and it just absolutely warms 

my heart. And I mean, we talk to people out on the street. That 

is something that they are very proud of that this government.  

 

Now this is a government that they said — that the opposition 

said — they don’t care about the people; they just care about 

the business. Well I’d certainly like to them to go out and talk 

about the SAID program to the people and say, are they only 

worried about the businesses, Mr. Speaker, or are we worried 

about everybody in Saskatchewan? 

 

Yesterday I had the honour of attending and speaking at the 

partners for workplace inclusion program. This program, Mr. 

Speaker, talks . . . It is taking people with disabilities and 

putting them right into employment — sit down with the 

manager, sit down with the business, have follow-up after 

placement, make sure up to five years of following up the 

individual to make sure that they’re still a fit in that program. 

And again this program is setting up for people to be able to 

have some dignity and to find some meaningful work in their 

life. 

 

We do have a labour shortage, and I’ve talked to the Minister of 

Social Services about this. We have a labour shortage within 

Saskatchewan, so we’re trying to tap into every possible 

potential that we can: people with disabilities. We’re tapping 

into the international community. We’re tapping into the 

national community. We’re tapping into the Aboriginal 

community. We’re trying to fill this labour gap any way we 

possibly can. And I commend the people at partners for 

workplace inclusion in Saskatoon for them doing their efforts to 

be able to make sure that people are having some meaningful 

jobs and that they have their dignity about them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess I should probably wrap up, Mr. Speaker. My . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. No. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — I see that as a sign of encouragement from 

my colleagues. Either that or they’re just busy working on their 

work right now and don’t want . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or maybe you’re getting better at this. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — And maybe I’m just getting better at this. I 

appreciate that. 

 

The NDP, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, they can’t move 

forward. It’s very, very depressing that they’re still stuck in the 

2004 P3 model. They’re still stuck with government control 

over everything. They are still stuck in the past. Why? Because 

the people . . . They might have a couple of different members 

elected there from the previous government, but guess what? 

The puppet masters are in behind them holding the strings, Mr. 

Speaker, and they’re making sure that they’re doing that. 

 

And when the puppet masters in Saskatchewan aren’t doing 

that, Mr. Speaker, guess what? We have Mr. Mulcair out in 

Ottawa dictating what the NDP are doing here in 

Saskatchewan. We have Mr. Mulcair saying that we have a 

disease out here. Still haven’t heard the Leader of the 

Opposition, still haven’t heard anybody on the opposition stand 

up publicly to Mulcair, Mr. Mulcair, and say, no we don’t have 

a disease. We have a growing economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t understand why they don’t do that. So I guess where we 

could see where the provincial NDP are: they’re really 

controlled out of Ottawa because they’re not allowed to step out 

of line or Mr. Mulcair will be here, and I guess he’ll be reading 

them the riot act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s very, very different. It’s very different. We just want to 

make sure that Saskatchewan is looked after, Mr. Speaker, or 

now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We want to make sure 

Saskatchewan’s interests are met first and foremost — certainly 

not Ottawa’s. We want to make sure that we answer to the 

people of Saskatchewan, while the members over there are 

answering to their leader in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. Maybe that’s 

why they’ve lost touch with what’s going on with the people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am going to wrap up, and I couldn’t cover 

off all of the things. My colleague from Regina Dewdney 

absolutely covered off many things, had a great sports analogy, 

and I very much appreciate him talking about everything. All of 

the initiatives, if I was to stand here and talk about all of the 

initiatives within our speech, I would be here forever, Mr. 

Speaker. And as it is the last day of the week in session, I 

would like some of my other colleagues to be able to speak, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Like Buckley. We want to hear Buckley. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Well we would like to hear somebody, 

maybe from the member from Athabasca. He’s usually good for 

a couple of laughs on what’s going on in his world. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to close by saying this. I want to close by 

saying this, Mr. Speaker: this province bleeds green. We are 

going to see that in Grey Cup week. And if everything goes 

according to plan, we’re going to see the green and white run 

out of that tunnel on Grey Cup day. We bleed green in this 

province, but you know what? I don’t think that we just bleed 

green for the Riders. 

 

The colour green, Mr. Speaker, I think we bleed green for 

growth. I think growth is some other type of green that we are 

being able to bleed out, Mr. Speaker, because the people in 

Saskatchewan know what growth is now. They understand the 

benefits of growth: the growth of our crops, the growth of our 

population, the growth of our tax base, the growth of our 

resource sector. And what is that growth? That growth allows 

us to have growth in our investment in health care, growth of 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3631 

our investments in social services, growth in our investments of 

the infrastructure within our province, growth in investments 

for education — K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] as well as 

post-secondary education — and most importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, growth in the dream of Saskatchewan and its full 

potential. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly 

my pleasure to take to my feet and enter the annual Throne 

Speech debate here today, Mr. Speaker, and do so on behalf of 

our constituency, my constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, before I guess I get into the actual Throne Speech 

itself, it’s rather interesting just to observe the tone and tenor of 

members opposite. We’ve only heard two speeches so far, I 

think the member there from Saskatoon Sutherland and Regina 

Dewdney. But a tone, Mr. Speaker, certainly that’s 

hyperpartisan, in a very sort of a strange or weird way, Mr. 

Speaker — hyperpartisan, negative, very much focused on, you 

know, sort of their own political interests, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly not focused on what matters to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I think that most Saskatchewan people would find it 

passing strange to listen to a speech like we just heard, which 

forayed heavily into this hyperpartisanship, deviations from 

reality, Mr. Speaker, when Saskatchewan people are a pretty 

sensible lot. When Saskatchewan people are willing to celebrate 

good efforts that are going on, they’re proud of the exciting 

things that are going on in the province, but they also recognize 

good work at different times and they also recognize areas that 

could have been done better at a different point in time in this 

province and that could be done better right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I just, I don’t think the hyperpartisan, negative, attack-like, 

inside baseball sort of tone that I’m hearing from members 

opposite reflects where Saskatchewan people are at, Mr. 

Speaker. And I guess that’s where we’ll cut down on this 

Throne Speech, is that we’ve been out there listening, working 

in our own constituencies and all across the province. Our 

leader’s been in every corner of this province listening to 

people and bringing from that the issues that matter to this 

Assembly. And that will be the focus of our opposition as New 

Democrats. 

 

Maybe just a little bit as it relates to the local aspect before I 

focus in on a Throne Speech that is rather disappointing for 

Saskatchewan people. As I say, we have a time right now in our 

province of such tremendous opportunity. We have some really 

special things happening in our province by way of economic 

activity, by way of population growth, by way of job growth, 

Mr. Speaker, for which we believe we should be building the 

next opportunity upon, building strength from that opportunity 

and building stable long-term prosperity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the Throne Speech disappoints on that front and many others 

as it relates to education, long-term care and seniors’ care, Mr. 

Speaker. And then I guess when I hear members get up to 

provide speeches here today — and maybe there’ll be members 

stand up and speak today with more humility than what we’ve 

heard thus far, and maybe with a greater reflection of the reality 

in Saskatchewan communities — but to date it very much looks 

like this Throne Speech is very much, sort of a focus, a 

rear-view mirror type focus, Mr. Speaker, looking to the past, 

and a lot of sort of back-patting of oneself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s not what Saskatchewan people deserve. 

Saskatchewan people deserve certainly a rightful pride in our 

place right now within Saskatchewan where successes are 

occurring. But then they deserve more than that. They deserve a 

government that’s going to provide their attention on the issues 

that matter and ensure that there’s progress in their daily lives, 

Mr. Speaker: in the classroom where it impacts our students, in 

our seniors’ care system, in home care where it impacts our 

parents and grandparents, and about ensuring that we can build 

on the economic opportunity we’ve been presented to build a 

diversified, stable, prosperous economy for the long term, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now just a couple of things, you know certainly I will bring the 

lens of my critic portfolios and meetings from across the 

province, but most importantly I’ll be bringing my perspective 

forward on behalf of the constituents of Regina Rosemont and 

the things that matter to the people in the communities of 

Regina Rosemont, whether McNab, or Normanview West, or 

Dieppe, or Prairie View, or Mount Royal, Mr. Speaker. Those 

are the perspectives that I’ll be bringing forward. 

 

I’d also, given the chance to enter the annual Throne Speech, I 

am thankful of the opportunity to thank family who each and 

every one of us know are such a big part of our ability to 

contribute and provide our voices here in this Assembly. And I 

certainly thank my loving, smart, intelligent wife, Stephanie. 

And she’s a strong voice within the community herself; she’s 

fully involved in all of our community activities and events and 

many know her very well. And she’s a fantastic teacher, Mr. 

Speaker, who cares deeply about her students, a grade 5-6 

group this year, Mr. Speaker, in George Lee up in Walsh Acres, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’d also like to recognize, in my own case, a broader 

family. We’ve got such wonderful sisters and brother-in-laws 

and nephews and mom and dad on my side, mom and dad on 

Stephanie’s side, that are sort of the broader family that are so 

important to allowing us to serve. And certainly those are the 

individuals for whom provide us the supports that we need. 

 

When I look at the ability to serve our constituency as best as a 

person would want to, I am so thankful for Gloria Patrick, 

who’s the constituency assistant in Regina Rosemont. She 

serves the constituents of Regina Rosemont with a sense of 

compassion, with a . . . comes from a perspective of caring. But 

she’s also incredibly efficient and effective in advocating and 

bringing forward the concerns of constituents, directly linking 

and communicating with myself, where we come together and 

sit down and hear about the circumstances that are causing 

stress in someone’s life, and then figuring out how we can best 

advocate and advance the challenges that constituents are 

facing. 

 

And you know, I think of the meetings after meetings. I’m 

going to some here this afternoon in the constituency office as 

soon as we close down the House here today, Mr. Speaker. But 

we’re not sitting down with people that want to be brushed off, 



3632 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

Mr. Speaker. They’re coming to us, often because they’ve 

exhausted many other avenues, Mr. Speaker. And there’s a high 

level of stress and strain, often that they’re facing within their 

life, that’s impacting a loved one or a family member or them 

themselves. And we have a very important role, Mr. Speaker, to 

tend to our constituents, to listen to those needs, and then to 

best advocate for them. And certainly Gloria in our office is just 

truly essential in assisting both myself and those constituents in 

being that liaison and that connection to meaningful progress. 

 

[12:15] 

 

It’s from those meetings as well and those challenges that I 

reflect on the Throne Speech. But it’s also, in many of those 

items that you’re dealing with, you just deal with in a very 

direct way with a minister’s office from time to time. And on 

that front, Mr. Speaker, from time to time I’m quite pleased 

when we’re able to resolve a matter directly with a minister’s 

office. And certainly I’m thankful to staff when they’re there to 

work through a challenge. 

 

But we’ll speak to some of the broader pieces here today, what 

either should be in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and then a 

couple of the pieces for which we certainly support as well. 

And I’ll do so thinking about all those leaders within our 

constituency that make a difference. 

 

You know, and I think of our schools. And I think just, you 

know, a few of them, whether it’s McLurg or St. Francis or St. 

Josaphat or Joan of Arc, Rosemont itself, the meaningful work 

that’s done in those schools every day, Mr. Speaker — certainly 

by teachers but not just by teachers, by an entire community, by 

students, and by volunteers, and by educational assistants, by 

fantastic administrators, by a community that partners to deliver 

really meaningful programs and to support student learning — 

and I know the passion of those in our schools, and I know the 

difference that it makes in the lives of our families. And I want 

to thank every one of those educators, students, parents, 

community members, and administrators for their leadership in 

our community. 

 

I think as well of those that invest themself into bettering our 

communities that assist with Meals on Wheels. Guys like Kurt 

Holstein, Mr. Speaker. Individuals who invest themself into 

Seniors Mechanism or into some of the housing and daycare 

co-operatives, Mr. Speaker, or who coach sports and run 

activities for youth and for the entire community, Mr. Speaker, 

even for programming for those seniors, our grandparents, Mr. 

Speaker, providing a quality of life that’s so important. 

 

And I think of one young community leader, Mr. Speaker, a 

gentleman by the name of Curtis Adams who has recently 

contributed his impressive talents as a rapper, Mr. Speaker, to 

the campaign to work against and to prevent bullying, Mr. 

Speaker. And Curtis is an impressive musical talent himself. 

And I know he’ll go far on those, on his skills. 

 

But he’s impressive in that he’s willing to use those skills for a 

greater good of society. And I enjoying sitting and chatting with 

Curtis and knowing how sincere his motivations are. And I’m 

so pleased he’s a part of the I am Stronger campaign. And I 

commend him for his work, his passion, and all that he’s 

providing, not just to our community — and he provides a lot in 

our community — but the province as a whole. 

 

I also think of our churches. We have many in Rosemont but I 

think of the important role that our churches play. And I think 

of St. James Anglican and how they bring together community 

by way of barbecues, by way of fall suppers, and how they 

reach out and in a non-denominational way many times as well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of St. Cecilia’s who has done some really impressive 

and supportive work for refugees, Mr. Speaker, taking their 

faith and putting it to action for the greater good of those 

around the world, Mr. Speaker. And it’s those sort of efforts 

that I’m so pleased to support, and it’s that sort of leadership 

that provide strength within the community. 

 

I think of those in our community associations, which are really 

active, just fantastic groups of people that are either working on 

improvements to park projects or bringing about community 

programming, Mr. Speaker, working to save their school, Mr. 

Speaker, to see it reopen or to address some of the challenges 

within a community. And I thank those community associations 

for their leadership, whether it’s Dieppe, whether it’s McNab, 

whether it’s Rosemont, Mount Royal, whether it’s Prairie 

View, or whether it’s Normanview West. 

 

And the beautiful new network of trails that connect to the 

Devonian pathways, Mr. Speaker, that certainly allow an outlet 

for all families to get out and to be outdoors in an urban 

environment but also to lead a healthy lifestyle. And for me, I 

often find that those trails are sometimes where Stephanie and I 

have our best conversations and probably most sincere 

exchanges with constituents who are so pleased to share about 

their own families but also to talk about what matters in their 

lives. 

 

So it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that I work with really good 

people, the good people that I sit with right here — our leader, 

the member from Massey Place, each and every one of the 

members of our opposition, the members just down the 

hallway, the staff in the caucus office. But I work with really 

good people in the community — Gloria Patrick in our 

constituency office, our family who supports us, and the 

network of community leaders, whether they be church leaders, 

community association leaders, leaders in sport, leaders in 

recreation, leaders in education who are vital to providing 

quality of life and opportunity for many, and vital for me as 

well to make sure I’m understanding what matters, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we have a time with a lot of opportunity in the province, as 

I’ve mentioned. We have a lot of good going on by way of 

population growth and economic strength, but we need to make 

sure we’re building on that opportunity for the long term. 

 

We have exciting things within the community. I mean 

Regina’s just such an exciting place. When you think of the 

activities, there’s almost every weekend if you think of the 

enriching activities that go on in this city, whether it be the 

Junos or the Folk Fest or the Queen City Marathon or the breast 

cancer run or the Grey Cup, which is coming up, which is just 

going to paint this whole city green. It’s going to be such an 

exciting time for Rider nation and that pride we have in our 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3633 

province. Or whether it’s India night and all the cultural 

celebrations that we have in this city, Mr. Speaker — I could go 

on and on and on — the market gardens or the farmers’ market, 

Mr. Speaker, and the place for people to connect there but also 

a place to access local food. 

 

We have really good people that are leaders within this 

province. We have really a rich array of cultural opportunities, 

arts opportunities, and sporting opportunities that enrich the 

lives of certainly my family but also my constituents and our 

city and province as a whole. 

 

But being reminded of the good things in the province isn’t 

enough. And to speak to those, we need to also be focused on 

where the challenges are, where the gaps are. It’s about being 

real with Saskatchewan people. It’s about being straight with 

our constituents and making sure we’re standing up on the 

matters that are of interest to them. 

 

And I think of the challenge of the shortage of pediatric 

neurologists, Mr. Speaker, across this province. And I think of 

how that’s impacted my constituent Jacqui Cameron directly, 

Mr. Speaker. And now Jacqui’s son Rylan — impressive, 

impressive young man, 12 years old — has a rare form of 

epilepsy, Mr. Speaker. And he was diagnosed quite a few years 

ago at a very young age, Mr. Speaker. Chatting with Jacqui 

Cameron and hearing about her life and Rylan’s life and the 

supports that she’s had from a team of pediatric neurologists in 

this province, Mr. Speaker, is something that speaks to the 

importance of making sure that team and complement is in 

place. This is a time of huge stress for a parent, uncertainty for 

a family, watching a child go through all the hurt and pain and 

to have their health degrade over time, Mr. Speaker. And the 

reliance and support that those pediatric neurologists have 

provided or provided Jacqui for the better part of a decade, Mr. 

Speaker, is pretty incredible. She speaks to me about when first 

having Rylan diagnosed, what it meant to have a team of 

pediatric neurologists close on hand who got to have a full 

understanding of Rylan, to review his files, and who were 

always available for her when she needed answers, when she 

was in great stress. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s sad that we’re . . . Right now in this 

province, we’ve lost that. And right now Jacqui’s under . . . 

Jacqui recognizes an issue that impacts many others. And it’s a 

matter that brings risk for a child, risk for a family, and 

certainly insurmountable stress and loss of peace of mind that I 

can only imagine, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I have a small window into this in a more personal way, 

Mr. Speaker, in watching my own sister and watching her 

young, I guess her middle boy growing here who all of a 

sudden was . . . It was recognized that he was experiencing 

seizures. And I watched that stress and strain for my own sister, 

Mr. Speaker, and then watching, not unlike Jacqui Cameron, 

Mr. Speaker, watching her then try to reach out to receive 

services. And in her case, Mr. Speaker, she was told that it 

would be over 14 months to receive access to a pediatric 

neurologist at a time where her son needed immediate attention 

to provide some answers, and in the end was forced out of 

province at her own cost, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now these issues don’t happen overnight, but they deserve 

and they need the full attention of government. And that team 

of pediatric neurologists that had served the province is 

something that’s really important to families and to families and 

children that are in vulnerable circumstances, Mr. Speaker. And 

as I say, I’ve learned this in a very direct way through Jacqui 

Cameron, my constituent, and I’ve learned it in a very personal 

way through the circumstances of my sister and her family. 

 

I also recognize the challenges in home care. Home care 

provides an area that we should be really supporting as a 

province, and this government, Mr. Speaker, just isn’t doing 

enough on that front. 

 

I have my constituent Michael Lilley, Mr. Speaker, who we 

heard about last year when we had the Leader of the Opposition 

raising the cuts to his home care services, Mr. Speaker, where 

he was asked in essence to go to the phone book to procure 

private supports to ensure that he had the independence and 

quality of life, Mr. Speaker, that he deserves. Well Michael 

Lilley deserves better than that, Mr. Speaker, and so do so 

many others, our parents and grandparents. And certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s important to us from a social perspective, it’s 

important to us to make sure that our parents and grandparents 

have the supports they deserve. But also, Mr. Speaker, from an 

economic perspective it makes huge sense to make sure we’re 

supporting our seniors with proper and the full supports they 

need by way of home care, as well as making the investments 

that we need to in really I guess the crisis that we see in 

long-term care right now, Mr. Speaker, or the crisis that we see 

right now in our hospitals, Mr. Speaker. So those are important 

areas. 

 

We have spoken a lot about education. We’ve heard from 

across the province the failures of this government to deliver 

education, and I see it right in Regina Rosemont most 

specifically, Mr. Speaker. I know the good work that goes on in 

St. Josaphat and St. Joan of Arc and McLurg and Dieppe — 

well, did go on in Dieppe, Mr. Speaker — and in Rosemont, 

Mr. Speaker, St. Francis. Such hard work that those that have 

taken on this task of teaching the next generation, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re delivering all they can, Mr. Speaker, working harder 

every day, being asked to do more, and doing so in an 

environment where this government is cutting the supports that 

they need, where this government is increasing the class size. 

So they have a more complex, more challenging classroom, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They’re committed to making a difference. They’re working 

every day to do just that. But it’s past time that that government 

stepped up to the plate and delivered in education. And their 

record of failure in education is something that comes with 

great consequences, not just in the life of a young person today 

but in the life of a province generations forward, Mr. Speaker, 

economically and socially. So these are important areas that 

need to be addressed. 

 

I think as well of the lack of action, no action that we’ve seen 

from this government, and I’ve raised it repeatedly. I’ve gone 

through times in committees where I’m hearing that there’s 

going to be action on this front. But no action with the 

unacceptable inundation of heavy-haul traffic up and down 

Dewdney Avenue. And this is something that I’ve raised with 

this government repeatedly, Mr. Speaker, in that they suggested 



3634 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

to me in committee that was going to be resolved. 

 

But there’s no resolution, Mr. Speaker. And the inundation of 

heavy-haul traffic that’s been directed on to Dewdney Avenue 

has impacted those on Dewdney Avenue, those families — any 

of which have been there for years, Mr. Speaker — in a major 

way. Peace of mind, Mr. Speaker, if you can imagine, really 

eliminated for so many that live right along this artery. And you 

know, I’ve experienced; I’ve been at the doorsteps. I’ve been in 

the houses. I’ve experienced the noise. I’ve felt and seen the 

shaking of the cupboards and the dishes in the cupboards, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve had individuals go and show me structural issues 

that they attribute to the shaking of their home by way of 

foundational cracking, Mr. Speaker. And this is more than a 

disturbance, Mr. Speaker. It could be costing them real dollars 

by way of taking away the integrity of their foundations or 

damaging infrastructure. 

 

But likely the biggest issue out of this should be simply the 

safety concerns. And Dewdney Avenue, I mean it was never 

intended to be this focused with this heavy-haul traffic, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not the route these great big rigs should be on, Mr. 

Speaker, moving way too quickly far too often. And what you 

have is this interface of young families and children and 

workers who are trying to get to work and come back to their 

family up and down Dewdney. You have circumstances where 

families are of course out onto Dewdney to access sports and 

school and activities, particularly so in Dieppe where, because 

of inadequate funding of this government, Mr. Speaker, the 

school has been closed, Mr. Speaker. So you have families that 

are out and interfacing with this heavy-haul traffic. And thank 

goodness we haven’t had a crisis in place yet, Mr. Speaker. But 

we need to see some action on this front, and it can’t be 

continued a time sitting with a minister and saying that it’s 

going to be resolved, all for naught, Mr. Speaker. There needs 

to be meaningful progress on this front, and I’ll continue to 

push towards a solution that’s acceptable to the community, 

that provides safety, peace of mind, and ensures that their 

investment is protected. 

 

[12:30] 

 

I think of Pioneer Village, Mr. Speaker. I think of the residents 

of Pioneer Village, such an incredible group, Mr. Speaker. They 

come together from all over the province to reside, often in 

their senior years, in Pioneer Village. And the support that that 

facility provides to families across this province is immense and 

to vulnerable seniors and to many seniors is so important. And 

these are seniors that come out of every corner of the province, 

whether it’s Swift Current or Estevan or the north or the south 

or the central region, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a facility that serves 

the province. And the degradation and continued degradation of 

the facility without maintenance, support for maintenance and 

rehabilitation, or what I hear from many is the need for a 

rebuild, Mr. Speaker — we just don’t hear anything about that. 

 

And these are our seniors, our parents, our grandparents from 

every corner of the province that make their home in Regina 

Rosemont and Pioneer Village that we need to do better for, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that if many were to walk through and 

talk with staff and meet with seniors, they’d find many that had 

come from their own constituencies, Mr. Speaker. They would 

see the urgent need to provide the rebuild that’s needed for 

Pioneer Village. 

 

It would be wrong for me to not bring up an issue that’s shared 

with me day in and day out, and that’s middle-class, 

hard-working families struggling with the affordability of life in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it’s on many fronts. They see 

it through certainly the cranked-up costs in their utility bills, 

Mr. Speaker, covering off for decisions of this government. 

They see it in their housing. They see it on so many fronts, and 

they see it in other fronts where their wages have been 

relatively flat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need to do better for these hard-working families, 

middle-class families that are working harder and harder and 

feeling as though they just can’t progress the way that they 

should be. They feel that they’re falling a little further behind. 

And you know, in a province that we’re so proud of the 

prosperity, Mr. Speaker, we just have to have more meaningful 

actions to ensure that that prosperity is felt by the families and 

households through the neighbourhoods and communities of 

our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I spoke about housing as being a critical piece there. We need 

to make sure that the full range of housing is a priority for this 

government. We continue to see the government focus just sort 

of on tinkering around with the edges of market affordability, 

and we really do need to see a focus on the full range — social 

housing, co-operatives — of real affordable housing, not 

affordable housing as these guys, as that government 

characterizes it, Mr. Speaker. But there’s a real lack of 

affordability for many, and we need to do better. And I hear it, I 

hear it particularly so for many . . . conveyed through many in 

their 20s and 30s, but I also hear it from a lot of parents talking 

about their children in their 20s and 30s and the challenges that 

they’re facing. 

 

And those same parents are often talking to me about the issue 

that we’ve been speaking about, and that’s the cost of senior 

care and the lack of access to quality, affordable senior care, 

which takes me to a matter that’s been front and centre for our 

opposition, front and centre by the Leader of the Opposition, 

and that’s that simply the seniors of this province, our parents 

and grandparents, deserve better than they’re getting as it 

relates to the options for senior care. 

 

We need to be doing more in home care. We need to be doing 

more to make sure that our seniors aren’t being forced to be put 

up in overcrowded hospitals. We need to do more to make sure 

that our seniors can actually afford and have the dignity and 

quality of life that they have. And we need to make sure that 

quite simply there’s more spaces and more choices for our 

seniors. And when we hear about the absolutely undignified 

and devastating examples of having seniors that have spent and 

built their life, the pioneers of this province, spending their life 

in this province, investing in this province, now spending their 

senior years in a care facility that doesn’t have the staff it 

requires to meet their needs, isn’t getting the bath they require, 

horrendous stories of being left on toilets unattended for hours, 

Mr. Speaker, stories about laundry now that’s not being done 

when we know all the pressing concerns around viruses and 

bedbugs — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the prosperous 

Saskatchewan I envision, Mr. Speaker, and it’s certainly not the 

sort of treatment that our seniors deserve. And this is an area 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3635 

that we certainly need to do a better job on. 

 

I see we have many new people moving to Saskatchewan. It’s 

an exciting time on this front, but we need to do a better job of 

making sure that these new Canadians, these newcomers, these 

immigrants are supported, Mr. Speaker. And I see the cuts 

actually quite often that we’re . . . The cut of the office by the 

federal government in Regina is having a very direct impact on 

those that are interfacing with the immigration system, Mr. 

Speaker, and they’re kind of left to their own devices. And 

often they’re working hard to build their life here. They’re 

working hard in a real literal sense in their places of 

employment. And we need to do a better job of making sure 

that they understand their rights, that they understand the 

provisions within the immigration system and the supports that 

are there. And that cut, along with attention that’s not always 

provided by this provincial government, needs to be improved. 

 

I think of child care. Certainly we need to be making progress. 

What people are getting frustrated with is throne speeches that 

announce new spaces, but spaces, Mr. Speaker, that aren’t 

realized back into communities. And I understand that there’s 

been many child care spaces that have been announced by this 

government. And then members of government get up and 

back-pat themselves on them, but then they fail to make sure 

that they get the work done to get the doors open to those child 

care facilities and making sure that we provide that important 

need to families. 

 

And I think of our hospitals. You know, our hospitals, Mr. 

Speaker, we have an example here in Regina that’s a real crisis 

right now which is the emergency room overcrowding. 

 

You know, it’s funny, Mr. Speaker. You know, one member in 

the back, he gets worked up and he shouts loudly from his seat, 

but he sounds like he’s done. But now the Premier seems like 

he wants to offer some words. 

 

But the point that I’d like to make, Mr. Speaker, is we have a 

real challenge in our hospitals right now, Mr. Speaker. We have 

emergency room overcrowding with lack of supports for health 

professionals, inadequate support to ensure that the staffing 

components are in place for the health professionals that the 

residents of Regina and all throughout the province need, and 

that crisis is real in the emergency rooms of Regina. And we 

need to make sure the sustainability of those hospitals, those 

emergency rooms, and we need to make sure that those that are 

accessing those services can count on having the health 

professionals there when they need them. 

 

I think as well of the challenge that so many are facing as it 

relates to access to a family doctor, to a general practitioner, to 

a GP. And I know, I’ll just share, I mean I know this is an issue 

that goes right across the province, but I’ll focus on northwest 

Regina. If you look at the current circumstance for family 

doctors, and so many constituents can’t get access to a family 

doctor, and then you go chat with the family doctors, and 

they’re all sharing with me that they’re at a stage where they’re 

all quite close to retirement if not, you know, if it’s not looming 

right now. This is a potential crisis, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

the opportunity to be ahead of, but we don’t see any actions or 

plans to ensure succession on that front and ensure that families 

have the access to a family doctor that they deserve. Of course 

we know how important that is. 

 

We see our important role of our university, Mr. Speaker, the 

University of Regina. We think of SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology], our college, Mr. 

Speaker. These are important facilities. As it relates to our 

university, we have to do a better job, or this government quite 

frankly has to do a better job, of making sure they receive the 

capital dollars they require, Mr. Speaker. The University of 

Regina is an exceptional university that needs some critical 

investment, and certainly we’ll play a role in advocating for 

those needed capital dollars. 

 

I was privileged to join the College Avenue Campus 

announcement last week along with the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. And you know, this is a historic facility. 

It’s a beautiful facility right there on the south side of 

downtown and on the shores of Wascana Lake. And this is a 

facility that’s served our province for a century, Mr. Speaker. 

But it’s critical as well that that infrastructure be renewed, 

rehabilitated to serve us well into the future. And that facility 

could be a place of vibrant learning that connects community, 

that provides and provides such an incredible place to do so. It 

should be a real, a real gem, Mr. Speaker, for our province and 

for our city. But to do that, it needs the capital commitment of 

this government, something it hasn’t yet received, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ve looked a little bit on sort of the very local and 

constituency-based perspective. And I’m drawn back to the 

very focus of our opposition where we’re focused simply on 

what matters. And certainly it reflects what’s going on within 

my constituency and our community as well. And you know, I 

know as the leader and as I and others have been out working 

with stakeholders, listening province-wide, Mr. Speaker, we 

know that the priorities we’re working towards are important 

for communities. It’s the very communities that have told us 

that that’s where they need our top priorities to be focused. And 

I think of seniors’ care; we need to certainly do so much more 

on this front. 

 

We look at the failures of this government in education, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a shame. We need to make sure that we’re 

supporting our teachers, supporting our classrooms, supporting 

students, Mr. Speaker, to ensure they can fulfill the 

opportunities that they should have. And we need to be doing 

more, Mr. Speaker, to diversify our economy to ensure 

long-term, stable prosperity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we have a pretty special time going on within 

Saskatchewan, as I’ve said, by way of the resource activity and 

economic strength in many areas. But we need to do a better job 

of building on that opportunity. And I think as I talk a bit about 

the economy and that diversification I’ve, you know, I’m really 

reminded of the really poor record of this government on this 

front. A government, that government really has failed to be 

focused towards a plan that will diversify for the long term. 

They certainly haven’t had anything that’s reflected the sort of 

smart growth agenda that Saskatchewan people deserve. 

 

You know, I think of a very fresh example that’s just occurred, 

which is the closure of SpringBoard West, Mr. Speaker, an 

incubator with a lot of potential and working in an important 

way and closed by that government, Mr. Speaker. And you 



3636 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

know, it’s that sort of a program, Mr. Speaker, SpringBoard 

West and the closure of it by that government, Mr. Speaker, 

that isn’t helpful to the economy over the long term. 

 

It’s these sorts of programs that we can refine and work with to 

build a multiplier effect within our economy moving forward 

and making sure that we’re not just amplifying the highs and 

the lows of a resource-driven economy, but in fact that we’re 

filling those troughs, that we’re building on strength, that we’re 

providing stable, long-term prosperity for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

We also see that same wrong-headed approach with the cut of 

Communities of Tomorrow here in Regina. Communities of 

Tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, was driving innovation in this 

province, bringing together entrepreneurs and working directly 

with municipalities to deal with the infrastructure deficit that 

we have as a province, and looking for creative, innovative but 

as well the most efficient, effective ways possible to build the 

infrastructure we need. That’s the kind of approach that returns 

value for dollar to taxpayers but also provides opportunity to 

drive the economy that we should be building, Mr. Speaker, and 

that was cut by this government. 

 

Then we think of the cut to the film industry, Mr. Speaker, 

driving away investment of millions of dollars from this 

province, driving away families that had built and invested their 

life in this province, Mr. Speaker, and a loss, a cultural loss, 

Mr. Speaker, for us as a province as well. 

 

I think of the cuts to the Aboriginal employment development 

program and really the fact that, you know, on this one it 

certainly is sort of one step forward by way of the fact a few 

years ago we had all this economic opportunity, and then a 

couple steps back, a deliberate cut that prevented the sort of 

gains that we should be making for all Saskatchewan people, 

Mr. Speaker, extending that opportunity, but certainly for First 

Nations and Métis people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we’re talking about the economy, I mean these aren’t 

. . . or you know, the economy isn’t in a silo all of itself, Mr. 

Speaker. We need to think of what’s going on in education. 

And that government’s failure is in the classroom, that 

government’s disrespect for teachers. That government’s failure 

for students, Mr. Speaker, has direct consequences on the 

learning of students, has direct consequences. And those 

consequences aren’t just felt this year, Mr. Speaker. They’ll 

manifest themselves in negative ways into the economy, into 

our community, socially, economically, many years forward. 

And I believe that the foundation of a strong economic plan is 

an education system of excellence, and that’s a top priority, that 

supporting student learning . . . And this government’s failure 

in education is certainly a move, steps in the wrong direction. 

 

[12:45] 

 

We see, you know, the important, balanced economy that’s 

been built out in Saskatchewan at different times by way of the 

role of our Crown corporations. And we certainly know it’s so 

unhelpful to Saskatchewan’s economy, let alone for 

Saskatchewan families and workers who no longer are having 

opportunities extended to them or the benefits of a strong 

Crown sector extended to them, to see the weakening and 

erosion, piecemealing of our privatization within our Crown 

sector, Mr. Speaker. These are real issues that impact our 

economy. They’re real issues that impact workers, and it’s 

something that we have a lot of concern about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of the fact that we can’t get a commitment from the 

provincial government as to whether or not they’re going to 

follow their federal cousins and hike taxes on the credit unions, 

Mr. Speaker, something that would be devastating to the credit 

unions in this province. And if you think of the credit unions, 

they serve over, you know, 500,000 members or have over 

500,000 members. They provide over 55 per cent of the lending 

to small- and medium-sized business, the drivers of the 

economy, Mr. Speaker. And if this government follows suit 

with their federal cousins to hike taxes on credit unions, it’ll 

have a direct impact on that lending, direct impact on their 

ability to service an entire province with their rural branches 

and otherwise, and a direct impact on their ability to make 

community investments. 

 

So that’s why we’ve . . . some of the areas that we’ve been 

focused on. The leader’s also been focused on, and we have, on 

ensuring that we have an aggressive labour force agenda, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a critical challenge to our province, and we need 

to do a better job of extending opportunity to all to make sure 

we’re providing those training opportunities, to getting rid of 

adult basic education wait-lists, to ensuring aggressive action 

on apprenticeship, Mr. Speaker. We saw some of those 

mentions in the Throne Speech, and if we now see progress 

from those words, that’s a good thing. But certainly we’ve seen 

a lack of focus on diversifying, diversifying our economy for 

the long term. And we certainly need a smart growth strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the other challenges that we 

have as a province. And we’ve been calling for schools to be 

built for a long time, as an opposition. You know, we recognize 

that many communities are without schools. But we also 

recognize that many schools need to be repaired. And these 

aren’t just, you know, cosmetic repairs, Mr. Speaker, the repairs 

as it relates to asbestos and electrical challenges. And from that 

government, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t seen the support that 

those schools, that those students, that those teachers require. 

 

So we’ve been calling for new schools to be built in 

communities that don’t have them. We’ve been calling for 

gyms — like that of Sacred Heart which is crumbling, Mr. 

Speaker — to be built, not the temporary solution that’s in 

place right now. We called for schools like Pleasant Hill with 

asbestos and electrical issues to be addressed. But we didn’t see 

much of that in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we did have sort of popped on Saskatchewan people is 

this P3 school scheme that government brought forward. And 

you know, we’ve done a lot of research on P3s and certainly 

done our homework. And I certainly don’t oppose P3s on 

ideological grounds. We do so on the evidence, Mr. Speaker. 

We do so from a perspective of common sense, do so from 

learning from other jurisdictions like Nova Scotia, like New 

Brunswick, like Alberta, Mr. Speaker, like the United 

Kingdom, Mr. Speaker. And what we see in the experience of 

these P3 schemes, Mr. Speaker, far more often than not, is 

excess costs, dollars that are simply costing, these facilities 

simply costing taxpayers more than they should. And if you 



October 24, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3637 

think about cost, any dollar that’s going to this private sector 

scheme, Mr. Speaker, that’s not going directly into the 

classroom is wrong-headed, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So these excess costs are certainly a concern. We see that by 

way of the fact that the private sector consortia is often 

international or certainly borrowing at a much higher rate. We 

see so as well in the fact that the ability to put together these 

complex contracts jack up costs, costs for putting together these 

structures, Mr. Speaker. And then we know as well, we know as 

well that these are expensive to monitor. 

 

So you know, it’s kind of, you know, it’s disappointing, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve been calling for schools to be built, to be built 

in the communities that need them like Hampton Village, like 

northwest Regina, like southeast Regina, Mr. Speaker. But 

people don’t want privatized schools, Mr. Speaker. They want 

schools that are affordable, that meet the needs of their 

community, that reflect their community. 

 

You know, and I think when you talk about even the reflection 

of a community, I think of Arcola School or Douglas Park 

School. I think of Arcola School, Mr. Speaker, that was built in 

concert and with discussion with a community to reflect 

community needs. Well that’s all lost in this sort of 

rent-a-school approach that we see from government; this buy 

now, pay it later scheme; and this sort of bulk buy that they’re 

going to do for schools across the province. 

 

And, you know, what I get a kick out of, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think what most people get a kick out of is this government last 

year took over the purchasing of portables for all the school 

divisions. Of course the school divisions have had a great 

history in getting the portables that they needed built and in 

place to meet the needs of their divisions. And they did so at a 

very affordable rate. But this government decided that it would 

take that over, that they would bulk buy them, that they’d 

actually contract out of province. Actually quite a few 

contractors that had been doing this in Saskatchewan lost out in 

that piece as well. And they promised, oh it’s going to be 

cheaper. It’s going to be better. Kind of the same kind of 

language and rhetoric we hear around P3s. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to look to the recent record 

on this. The school year came along. We had classrooms with 

over 50 students inside them, Mr. Speaker — 50 students in a 

classroom, if you can imagine. And we had portables that were 

nowhere to be seen. And when they came, Mr. Speaker, late, a 

couple of months late, Mr. Speaker, what we found with those 

portables — hearing from school divisions — is they sent them 

the wrong product. They sent them the wrong classroom. So 

you know, I get a kick, Mr. Speaker, for a government that 

can’t even procure portables, can’t even buy a few relocatable 

classrooms, Mr. Speaker, in a bulk buying process, to think that 

it can now go out and deal with international private sector 

consortiums to build private sector schools for tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I say, we oppose the plan they put forward on 

common-sense grounds. We know the delays that are in place 

to get a P3 school up are significant. We know that we can get 

those schools built faster and quicker dealing with them in a 

traditional way. We know the experience of Nova Scotia, that 

when they went out and built these — and it was a Liberal 

government that built the schools, P3s — that that scheme was 

then cancelled or scrapped by the Conservative government 

who said it was far too elaborate, far too costly. And the 

Conservatives and then the auditor weighed in afterwards and 

said that the new schools built through a traditional perspective 

were saving them $2 million a school, Mr. Speaker. Those $2 

million, Mr. Speaker, are $2 million that can be placed directly 

into the classroom where it directly impacts student learning, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we don’t need costly, expensive private schemes of this 

government. We need real solutions that matter to students, and 

we need the schools that they need to be in the shape that they 

deserve. And we need the schools that are needed in 

communities that don’t have them. We needed them yesterday. 

We needed them last year. But in this case, no more delays are 

acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look at some of the other areas as well, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, my wife was here observing the Throne Speech, and 

she’s a teacher. And she was looking at the education piece, and 

she opened it up and listened and walked out afterward. And I 

said, well what did you think, hon? What was your perspective 

on the Throne Speech? And she went right to education, and 

she says, what’s this? She knows the challenge that teachers are 

facing. She’s a teacher herself. She’s in the classroom. More 

challenging, more complex classrooms than ever before, 

increased class size, cut supports by this government, Mr. 

Speaker, and not a mention of anything to alleviate those 

pressures, to support student learning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some mention of further consultation, Mr. Speaker. Well the 

fact that consultation with the education sector and with 

teachers has become a novel concept with this government is a 

sad statement in itself. That’s how it’s supposed to work. That’s 

how we’ve built the province that we have. That’s how the 

education sectors work. It’s not always worked out perfectly, 

but it’s a collaborative. It’s about working with educational 

partners. 

 

And the fact that this government I thought had recognized 

their failures in education, I thought had gone out and 

apparently had listened — I know the Premier listened to a few 

teachers in a few different cities, Mr. Speaker — what I thought 

was we’d see a vision and a plan to support students’ learning, 

to address the challenges in the classroom, to address the class 

size pressures that are in place, to scrap the wrong-headed, 

costly standardized testing agenda that this government 

continues to push without any evidence or support, Mr. 

Speaker. But we didn’t see any of that. What we saw is that 

they’re going to talk some more, Mr. Speaker. Well I think 

teachers and students and parents are getting tired of the talk, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re looking for some action and they’re 

looking for some support, and our students deserve nothing 

less. 

 

When I go across to my critic areas meeting with 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker, our municipalities are feeling the 

direct pressures of growth. They’re on the front lines of growth. 

They need to be supported. And this government has failed to 

support municipalities with the infrastructure dollars they 

require. And without doing so, it’s compromising the 

infrastructure that’s in place within our municipalities, but it’s 



3638 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2013 

also coming with a big added cost to property tax payers, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s adding debt to our municipalities. 

 

So when we’re talking about whether it’s transportation 

networks in Lloydminster, whether we’re talking about bridges 

in Prince Albert, whether we’re talking about waste water and 

sewers in almost every community in this province, the 

communities of this province, the municipalities, our cities, our 

towns, they need a dedicated infrastructure funding mechanism 

— something that’s not in place. And I didn’t see that in the 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On that same file we need to make sure that we’re not just 

responding to crisis by way of weather-related crisis. We need 

to make sure that we’re allowing municipalities, rural and 

urban, to be making the investments they require to bring about 

flood prevention projects. Something that right now there’s 

dollars for crisis and cleanup, but there’s nothing for front-end, 

proactive, preventative work, Mr. Speaker. So these are all 

areas that matter. 

 

You know, we know our finances. We don’t see the progress 

that Saskatchewan people deserve there. This government 

continues to push forward with its outdated set of books, its two 

sets of books, reporting, Mr. Speaker, that’s been called wrong 

and misleading by the Provincial Auditor. And Saskatchewan 

people deserve better than that. They deserve the whole picture. 

They deserve better than special reports from the auditor, 

investigations that have to expose that the government’s hiding 

billions of dollars of debt from Saskatchewan people only to . . . 

you know, for political games I guess or trickery. But 

Saskatchewan people are smart people, and they see through 

that sort of behaviour. 

 

You know, we see nothing significant yet as it relates to the 

Senate. We’ve heard some squawking from the newly 

converted, but we haven’t yet seen any meaningful action to 

provide leadership on behalf of this province to provide the 

voice to abolish our Senate, Mr. Speaker, our unelected, 

unaccountable Senate. So we’ll be waiting for that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But as I say, when I look at this Throne Speech and as we look 

at this Throne Speech, we look at it through the lens of our 

constituents’ needs from a regional perspective and then a 

provincial perspective, and we’re focused on what matters. And 

this government’s speech was certainly a disappointing tone. 

This government doesn’t have a plan to hold up its end of the 

bargain to Saskatchewan people. And we see it in our 

municipalities. We see it in our schools. We see it with 

everyday families. People, communities, school boards, 

teachers, students are working harder than ever to hold up their 

end of the bargain, and they’re delivering good news. You think 

of the businesses and the entrepreneurs. But this government, 

Mr. Speaker, isn’t holding up its end of the bargain. 

 

And you know, I thought the Throne Speech itself was 

disappointing, that at this time of special opportunity in 

Saskatchewan that it was so backward looking, so focused on 

the past, so focused on back-pattery that Saskatchewan people, 

they don’t care about the political partisan interests of that 

government. They care about the interests of their family. They 

care about the interests of their province. And I find that the 

tone and sort of . . . It’s like these . . . It just reflects a 

government that’s maybe seeming to fall out of touch with 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I guess I, on that front, I’m sure proud I stand with the 

people I stand with to be able to focus on what matters for 

Saskatchewan families, to give credit where credit is due, Mr. 

Speaker, to the hard-working families, to the entrepreneurs, to 

the universities, to the school boards, to the teachers, to the 

students that are making a difference, Mr. Speaker, and then to 

focus on where we can make some improvements. 

 

And so as I say, Mr. Speaker, we expected more from this 

Throne Speech. I know Saskatchewan people expected more 

than a look through the rear-view mirror and a government to 

pat itself on the back. And I know most Saskatchewan people 

would feel, you know, that the headline of The StarPhoenix 

editorial today that the speech offers no vision would reflect 

how they would feel about the speech if they read it. 

 

And I know that many that understand the cuts of this 

government would understand Bruce Johnstone’s article a few 

weeks ago where he critiqued the economic agenda of this 

government with the article, “Saskies’ growth plan adrift,” 

talking about the cut after cut, Mr. Speaker. But I’ll have more 

time to enter into this Throne Speech debate and its . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of adjournment, 

this House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m., October 28th, 

Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3611 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3611 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3611 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3611 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3611 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3611 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Combined Lab and X-ray Technicians’ Day 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3612 

 Travels in Saskatchewan 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3612 

 Foster Families Week 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3612 

 Amachewispimawin River Gathering in Stanley Mission 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3612 

 Ranchers Win Environmental Stewardship Awards  

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3613 

 Nine New Schools for Province 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3613 

 Opposition Ideology 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3613 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Special Care Standards and Staffing 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3614 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3614 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3614 

 Combatting Bullying 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3616 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3616 

 Provision of New Schools 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3616 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3616 

 Traffic Safety 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3618 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3618 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Special Committee on Traffic Safety 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3618 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3620 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3622 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3622 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3622 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3627 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3631 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




