


















































Hansard: October 23, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 66A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 23, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3599 

 October 23, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

  

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — I’m advised that Her Honour is here for 

prorogation. 

 

PROROGATION 

 

[At 10:02 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. Her Honour was 

then pleased to deliver the following speech.] 

 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Nearly one year ago I delivered to you my government’s vision 

for the second session of the twenty-seventh legislature of the 

province of Saskatchewan. As this session draws to a close, I 

can confidently say that my government continues to move 

forward with “Planning for Growth,” the title of the 2012 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

The growth Saskatchewan has seen over the last several years is 

unprecedented. Last month we learned that Saskatchewan has 

grown to over 1.1 million people for the first time in our 

province’s history. That represents an increase of over 100,000 

people since 2007 — the year that my government took office. 

Our children are staying in Saskatchewan, our expatriates are 

returning, and people from across the country and around the 

world are flocking here to share our success. 

 

Saskatchewan now has the lowest unemployment rate and our 

wages are growing at one of the fastest rates in Canada. Our 

exports put food on tables and energy in communities around 

the world. Last year Saskatchewan surpassed British Columbia 

to become the fourth largest exporter in the country. It seems 

that Regina’s mighty shores are eclipsing even the port of 

Vancouver. 

 

The hard work, resilience, and dedication of Saskatchewan 

people have allowed our economy to lead the nation. In fact, 15 

per cent of workers in Saskatchewan are self-employed 

compared to 9.5 per cent nationally. The entrepreneurial spirit 

and determination in our province means the best is yet to 

come.  

 

Last year my government released The Saskatchewan Plan for 

Growth: Vision 2020 and Beyond. It is a plan that outlines my 

government’s goal of a Saskatchewan with 1.2 million people 

by 2020. It is a plan that seeks to balance economic growth with 

social progress, a plan that will ensure an improved quality of 

life for all Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Our goals are bold. My government believes that Saskatchewan 

can: 

 

 Lead the country in grade 12 graduation rates by 2020;  

 Eliminate wait times in emergency wait rooms by 2017; 

 Invest $2.5 billion in infrastructure over the remaining 
course of this term; and, 

 Cut the provincial debt in half from its 2007 levels by 
2017. 

 

Over the past year, much has happened in our Assembly that 

will help these goals come to fruition. On March 20, my 

government tabled its sixth consecutive balanced budget. One 

of the biggest challenges of a growing economy is providing the 

necessary infrastructure so that our growth is not impeded. 

 

To this end, my government is investing $847 million in 

infrastructure projects this year, including: 

 

 $119.6 million in capital funding to advance a number of 
school projects. 

 $164 million for health care facilities, including the Moose 
Jaw Hospital and continued work on long-term care 

facilities in 11 communities. 

 $576 million to improve our province’s highway network. 
 

My government does not believe in growth solely for the sake 

of growth. My government believes in growth so that 

Saskatchewan will be the best place to live, work, start a 

business, and raise a family. In order for our province to be all 

of those things, we need to make sure that we take care of our 

most vulnerable citizens.  

 

This year my government increased support benefits for the 

Saskatchewan Assured Income for Disability program and the 

Seniors’ Income Plan. More than 10,000 people will receive 

increased monthly benefits through the Saskatchewan Assured 

Income for Disability program. And by 2015, people with 

disabilities will receive $4,200 more per year through the SAID 

program. 

 

The Seniors’ Income Plan benefit is now $250 a month, up 

$160 a month or 178 per cent since 2008. Caring for those who 

have helped grow our magnificent province with dignity and 

respect is a priority of my government. This is why my 

government has invested $2 million in an innovative home care 

pilot project in Regina to allow our seniors, the people who 

built this province, to live in their own homes for as long as 

possible with the dignity that they deserve. My government has 

also provided $800,000 in funding for a new transition house in 

Melfort – the first of its kind built in Saskatchewan since 1989 

– and the expansion of women’s shelters in Regina and Prince 

Albert. 

 

The future of our province is dependent on the success of our 

youngest generation. This is why my government has increased 

overall education funding by 6.7 per cent from 2012-13, 

including the first ever mid-year enrolment increase of $17 

million to help school divisions address the challenges of 

growth. 

 

During this session, my government made some important 

legislative and regulatory changes including: 

 

 The Saskatchewan Employment Act – a comprehensive 
bill that protects workers, promotes growth, increases 

accountability, and indexes the minimum wage; 



3600 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2013 

 The Information Services Corporation Act – which 
allowed for a successful share offering where 45 per 

cent of Saskatchewan residents and over 275 

employees now own shares in this profitable 

corporation; 

 The Traffic Safety Act – which tripled the fines for those 
speeding in construction zones and enabled law 

enforcement to utilize photo radar in construction 

zones, increasing the safety of our highway 

construction zones; and, 

 The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act – 
which modernized 70 different liquor regulations in 

the province, many of which hadn’t undergone a 

comprehensive review for decades. 

 

These are just a few of the many highlights of the past 

legislative session.  

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty to 

discharge you from further attendance of the second session of 

the twenty-seventh legislature. Saskatchewan farmers start 

planning for seeding the moment the harvest is in the bin. Let 

the end of this session be the start of your work for the coming 

session. 

 

In relieving you of your duties, I also wish to congratulate you 

on the work you have completed over the past year and to 

commend you for the diligent and empathetic manner in which 

you have approached your duties. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker and members of the 

Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour 

the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until later today, the 23rd day of October, 2013 at 2 

p.m. The Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 

 

[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:11.] 

 

 



 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


