




















































Hansard: April 10, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 44A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 10, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3135 

 April 10, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I 

want to introduce 15 grade 11 and 12 students from the Bert 

Fox Community School from Fort Qu’Appelle, the beautiful 

community of Fort Qu’Appelle. Hello there. They are, as I said, 

15 grade 11 and 12 students that are taking law 30 and social 30 

classes. They’re accompanied by their teachers Valerie Brooks, 

Cory Cochrane, and Melanie Black. 

 

I will have the opportunity to talk to them or visit with them, 

get a picture taken, and then visit with them after. I would hope 

that the question period is quite a bit like it was yesterday so the 

explanations of what actually goes on in question period is 

much easier because it was a very quiet day in the House 

yesterday. Anyway I’d like all members to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to introduce some very special guests that 

we have in the gallery today from the Canadian Red Cross Day 

of Pink celebrations that are taking place. 

 

From the Red Cross, Mr. Speaker, we have Rebecca Benko, 

thank you; Donna Brewster, RespectED assistant coordinator, 

thank you; and Diane Francoeur, a RespectED coordinator. And 

along with them, Mr. Speaker, from Wilfred Hunt School in 

Regina, April Howard and her grade 8 class. Give us a wave. 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well the best place to start with preventing 

bullying is through the education and empowering our students, 

Mr. Speaker. And so I want to thank this group for all the work 

that they’ve done on bullying prevention in our province. And 

I’d like all members of the Assembly to help me welcome all of 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

join, on behalf of the members of the opposition, I’d like to join 

the Minister of Education welcoming the folks from Red Cross 

and the work they’ve done on Day of Pink, and highlighting 

how important this issue is for all of us, but particularly young 

people in our schools. And the role of the ministry is really 

important and the role of the Red Cross is huge in that 

leadership. So thank you very much from all of us in opposition 

and all of us in this House today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce through you and to members of the Assembly and 

welcome them here today, there are 19 public service 

employees seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are 

participating in the parliamentary program for the public 

service. The ministries that are represented today include 

Advanced Ed, Agriculture, Economy, Education, Health, 

Highways, Justice, Provincial Capital Commission, Public 

Service Commission, and Legislative Assembly Service, which 

I think covers off almost every ministry. 

 

I’m not sure if they’ve already done it, but they’ll be doing a 

tour of the building and also getting briefings from various 

branches within the building: library, Legislative Assembly, 

committees branch, Executive Council — that sort of thing. 

And it’s my pleasure to be able to meet with them after question 

period today to give them a bit of insight about what it’s like to 

be a minister and what we do. And, Mr. Speaker, we know as 

ministers that we can’t do our job without the public service, so 

I want to publicly thank them for all the work that they do and 

ask all members to welcome them to their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 

behalf of the official opposition to join with the minister in 

welcoming all the members of the civil service here today. We 

all know that professional public servants are the core of good 

governance. And Saskatchewan has a long history of 

professional public service, dating back to the 1940s where we 

both imported our systems and our civil servants to other parts 

of Canada. And I know that you keep, you carry on that 

tradition. 

 

So thank you for all that you do. And I look forward to, after 

the minister speaks to you, having the opportunity to chat a 

little bit about the role of an MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] in the official opposition. So I look forward to that 

and ask all members to join with us in welcoming these folks to 

your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

addition to joining in the welcome of folks from the Red Cross 

and all of those young people who are joining in anti-bullying 

day by wearing pink, I’d also like to acknowledge and introduce 

to you a couple from Swift Current, constituents of mine and 

friends of mine. Myles and Cindy Penner, I see, have joined the 

group there in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker. And they’re 

great contributors to the city of Swift Current, and I just wanted 

to take the opportunity to welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce in your gallery a good friend of mine. His name is 

Quinn Moerike. He’s one of our people that has gone away to 



3136 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

Alberta for school, and I am trying very hard to convince him 

and his family to come back to our province and join his family 

that’s trickling back one by one that left the province years ago. 

And I’d like to introduce him to the Assembly, and hopefully it 

will soon be his Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

my colleagues in welcoming the members of the public service, 

also in particular two of my old colleagues in immigration 

settlement, Tim Helfrich and Elizabeth Fix. We had the 

absolute pleasure of performing and finishing 44 orders in 

council in one year on behalf of the ministry. So we’ve done an 

awful lot of work, and I’d really like to get all members to help 

join me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased today to stand up and present a petition in 

reference to cellphone coverage for northwestern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First 

Nations, also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of 

Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nations along with the 

community of Turnor Lake, including all the 

neighbouring communities in each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition have 

come from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular 

petition, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed it are 

primarily from Turnor Lake. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 

petition today calling for the reconsideration of passing Bill 85, 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And since the employment 

Act was introduced in December, literally hundreds of hours of 

study and comparison have been carried out in the interest of 

due diligence. And if this bill does become the new 

consolidation of labour laws in Saskatchewan, working people, 

especially young workers, immigrant workers, and other 

vulnerable workers will suffer from a hasty watering down of 

our current labour standards which set the mandatory 

minimums for all Saskatchewan workers. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Red Cross Day of Pink 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

in the House today to recognize our government’s continued 

commitment to anti-bullying in Saskatchewan. Yesterday I 

attended the Red Cross Day of Pink student rally with over 

1,000 young people at the Turvey Centre. The Minister of 

Education has proclaimed April 10th to be Canadian Red Cross 

Day of Pink. Today, Mr. Speaker, the Red Cross along with 

SaskEnergy invited schools and businesses across the province 

to wear pink to help raise awareness about the impacts of 

bullying on children and youth. This initiative provides 

students, staff, and the larger community with the opportunity 

to discuss the impact of bullying and to learn how they can 

assist in creating safe and respectful environments for everyone 

in the community. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I support Day of Pink by wearing pink to 

raise awareness about the impacts of bullying on children and 

youth. And I’m eager to support the work of the Minister of 

Education and the ministry in my new role as Legislative 

Secretary. I look forward to travelling the province and 

engaging communities in public consultations to discuss 

anti-bullying initiatives and strategies. We believe that all 

students have the right to a caring, respectful, and safe 

environment where bullying is not tolerated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage this Assembly to join me in showing 

support for this initiative by wearing pink and by participating 

and supporting anti-bullying events in their constituencies. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Apology 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in 

members’ statements, it was brought to my attention by the 

member from Sutherland about the inappropriate use of social 

media by a staff member and, Mr, Speaker, I want to apologize 

for that. And I thank the member for bringing it to my attention, 

and I hope members will accept that apology for what took 

place. 

 

And it’s a good reminder, Mr. Speaker, I think for all of us in 

this building, whether we’re a staff member doing research, 

whether we’re an MLA doing a member’s statement, or 

whether we’re a political party doing an ad, is that we all have a 

choice to make. We can either be part of improving and 

elevating the political discourse in the province, or we can be 

part of a race to the bottom. 

 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3137 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, very clearly, that under my 

leadership, the NDP [New Democratic Party] is committed to 

positive and constructive politics here in the province, and we 

look forward to doing that in the years to come. So I thank you, 

Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to make this apology. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Skate4Smiles Fundraiser 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 

to tell all members about a successful fundraising event done in 

White City. This year Skate4Smiles raised $66,000. 

Skate4Smiles is a fun, family-oriented skate-a-thon held in 

memory of Dawson Ellert. The Ellert family hosts this event to 

raise funds and awareness for the Children’s Hospital 

Foundation of Saskatchewan and to honour Dawson, who loved 

to skate. 

 

In early 2010 Dawson was diagnosed with a brain tumour. The 

surgery to remove it seemed to be a great success, but he 

suffered a massive stroke during recovery that ultimately 

claimed his life. He died on February 15th, 2010 at eight years 

old. 

 

Dawson’s hospital stay was a frightening experience. Children 

have different fears than we do as adults. They still need to be 

happy. They need to play. They need to have their parents near. 

They need to feel comfortable, and they need to feel safe. The 

new Children’s Hospital will address these issues. It will 

provide for a stay that’s as comfortable as possible for both the 

child and the parents. 

 

Through the continued effort of the Ellert family, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, the generous sponsors and many 

participants, and of course to all those who donate, we are one 

step closer to a children’s hospital right here in Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Red Cross Day of Pink 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to stand 

in support of youth across Canada who are participating in the 

Red Cross Day of Pink. Red Cross Day of Pink is a day to stand 

in solidarity with youth who are experiencing homophobic or 

transphobic bullying in their schools and communities. It’s a 

day to say that we will not tolerate violence in our communities. 

And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, the Day of Pink is a day 

for expressing kindness, compassion, and courage. 

 

It is expected that 20,000 youth across Saskatchewan will be 

participating in the Red Cross Day of Pink today. The youth are 

asking us to follow their lead. And this means that we must also 

participate in the Day of Pink not just by putting on a pink shirt 

or a tie, but by committing to addressing bullying when we see 

it at work, at community events, or in activities that we 

participate in with our kids. It is up to all of us to create 

communities that are safe for LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 

transgender] youth. 

Mr. Speaker, bullying is a complex issue and youth are 

demanding that we help provide solutions. We must listen to 

our youth leaders in our communities and the solutions they are 

offering, and we must adequately fund anti-bullying workshops 

and programs for youth and adults. And all of us must take the 

time to educate ourselves about the issues that LGBT youth are 

facing in our communities. Most of all, Mr. Speaker, we must 

show compassion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that my fellow members of the House join 

with me in standing up for our youth and join with them in 

addressing bullying and discrimination in Saskatchewan on 

today’s Red Cross Day of Pink, and every day. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Saskatoon Contacts Win Western Regional Championship 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

rise in the Assembly today to recognize the Saskatoon Contacts 

hockey team, who won the Midget AAA Western Regional 

Championship this past weekend. To get to the regionals, the 

Contacts played the P.A. [Prince Albert] Mintos in a nail-biting 

series, with the Contacts winning the provincial title three 

games to two. Mr. Speaker, the regional tournament took place 

in Kenora, Ontario where the winner advances to the national 

championship in Sault Ste. Marie being held April 22nd to the 

28th. 

 

On Saturday, the Contacts scored three first-period goals to 

finish with a 4-1 win over Winnipeg Wild. The Contacts’ goalie 

Rylan Parenteau made 30 saves for Saskatoon’s win. Mr. 

Speaker, the Contacts finished the round robin portion of the 

tournament with a 2 to 1 record. On Sunday, the Contacts 

trumped the Thunder Bay Kings for a 3 to 0 win, which secured 

them the regional champion title. Vukie Mpofu scored a first 

period goal, and Cameron Hebig racked up a point on the power 

play 36 seconds into the second period to help secure the win. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale and I are seldom on 

the same page about issues in the Assembly, but in this case we 

are. The member’s brother, Marc Chartier, is a coach of the 

Contacts and my grandson, Terrell Draude, is number 7 on the 

team. I guess in some places politics doesn’t matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Assembly join me 

and the member from Riversdale in congratulating the 

Saskatoon Contacts on their Western Regional Championship 

and wish them all the best of luck in the nationals in Sault Ste. 

Marie. Go Contacts. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Briercrest College and Seminary 

Receives Degree-Granting Authority 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

morning I had the pleasure of attending a ceremony with the 

Premier and Minister of Advanced Education at Briercrest 

College and Seminary in Caronport where the Premier 

announced that Briercrest had been authorized to grant a 



3138 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

Bachelor of Arts and Humanities effective July 2013. 

 

After The Degree Authorization Act and regulations came into 

force last fall, Briercrest’s application was the first to be 

considered for degree granting by the newly created 

Saskatchewan Higher Education Quality Assurance Board. As a 

result, Briercrest becomes the first Saskatchewan 

post-secondary institution outside of the University of 

Saskatchewan and University of Regina to be able to grant 

degrees other than theological degrees in the history of our 

province. 

 

Today marks a new era in post-secondary education, one with 

expanded choice for our students and one that recognizes the 

quality of our students. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to offer my 

sincere congratulations to Briercrest on this great 

accomplishment. Yesterday’s announcement is clearly a 

reflection of the hard work, dedication, and commitment to 

quality education they have demonstrated for the past 74 years, 

and I was honoured to celebrate with them yesterday. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Samuel McLeod Business Awards 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise in 

the House today to recognize a wonderful event I was able to 

attend last night in Prince Albert, along with the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote. We had the great opportunity of 

attending the Prince Albert Chamber of Commerce Samuel 

McLeod Business Awards. These awards, which are named 

after one of Prince Albert’s early settlers and entrepreneurs, 

recognize outstanding businesses in Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the recipients and their 

respective awards today: Prince Albert Ice Hawks for 

community involvement, the Royal Bank of Canada for 

investment, Mark-It Signs in the marketing category, Prince 

Albert Brewing Co. for new product or service, G & P 

Plumbing & Heating for new venture, Granite DKC for Service 

Award, Centennial of Flight for tourism, Graham Hodges of 

Mark-It Signs for Young Entrepreneur, and the prestigious 

Business of the Year Award went to Prince Albert Brewing 

Company. Additionally, the Business Legacy Award winner 

was Mr. Leo Fontaine who was formally recognized at an 

awards brunch. 

 

I would also like to recognize the event sponsors who made the 

event possible: Prince Albert Daily Herald, PotashCorp, 

SaskEnergy, Saskatchewan Research Council, CIBC [Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce], and Advantage Credit Union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

all of the worthy businesses and the recipients today whose 

entrepreneurial spirit greatly contributes to this province. Thank 

you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Combatting Discrimination and Bullying 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we have 

already discussed today through member statements, today is 

known as the Day of Pink and it’s the international day against 

bullying, discrimination, homophobia, and transphobia. 

 

One of the first things I did, Mr. Speaker, after becoming the 

Leader of the Opposition, is to appoint the member from 

Saskatoon Centre as our new critic for diversity, equality, and 

human rights. I made this critic appointment, Mr. Speaker, 

because I think we have so much more to do in this province 

when it comes to fighting discrimination, promoting equality 

and, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has not been doing enough on 

these fronts. So my question to the Premier on the Day of Pink 

is this: what specific steps has he taken to eliminate 

discrimination, make all forms of bullying unacceptable in our 

schools, and fight homophobia and transphobia in our society? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for the question today. Mr. Speaker, this is a very 

important day, not just for the people of the province but, you 

know, far beyond our borders. Mr. Speaker, we wear pink today 

to remind all of us of the importance of anti-bullying, the 

importance of preservation and the protection of rights for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to go beyond wearing a certain colour on 

a certain day of the year. Mr. Speaker, certainly this 

government takes the issue very seriously. In a recent 

announcement in the appointment of Legislative Secretary 

duties for the government caucus, we’ve asked the member for 

Saskatoon Fairview to make a special focus, a special point of 

this very issue, working not just with the Ministry of Education 

but other ministries in government as to how we can, frankly, 

have better policies, better protections, the likes of which have 

been referred by the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, we 

look forward to her good work as well as the continued efforts 

of the public service and the various ministries involved in this 

particular issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m glad that the 

Premier is talking about specific actions that can be taken. 

We’ve had a focus as an opposition, Mr. Speaker, on the need 

for a mandate of zero tolerance on any incidents of queer 

bashing or other related harassment and discrimination in our 

schools. 

 

And when we look at what specific steps can be taken in our 

schools, Mr. Speaker, one avenue in order to help students are 

gay-straight alliances. We believe it’s a common sense 

approach, Mr. Speaker, that could help combat bullying and 

ensure that our schools are safe and welcoming for all children. 

If students and teachers and allies want to get together, Mr. 

Speaker, in order to form these clubs, we think that’s a good 

thing. 

 

So my question to the Premier is: what is the Sask Party’s 

position on gay-straight alliances? Do they support them in our 

schools? And if the Sask Party government does support 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3139 

gay-straight alliances in our schools, what steps is the 

government taking to promote the establishment of these clubs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these clubs can be formed in 

schools today in the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t think the 

Government of Saskatchewan would stand in the way of that 

happening. I would say this as well, Mr. Speaker, that the work 

that we’re going to be receiving from the member for Fairview, 

the member who’s been tasked as the Legislative Secretary 

specifically on the issue of anti-bullying, I’m sure will touch on 

this and touch on a number of other important issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this House will know that the 

Ministry of Education has an anti-bullying initiative today. 

School boards, school divisions in the province, are undertaking 

their own program. I noted today on social media that even the 

town of Eston is, as a community, as a municipality, is passing 

its own bylaw with respect to bullying. So, Mr. Speaker, there is 

more work to be done in the file. That’s why we’ve tasked 

someone specifically to do this very thing within government, 

Mr. Speaker. And there’s a track record there. 

 

We also asked this very same member to focus more on the 

involvement of women in boards of Crown corporations. I’m 

happy to report to the House the work was done. A very 

excellent list of women who are interested and more than 

qualified to serve on boards was submitted and the 

appointments have already begun. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s good when cities 

and towns and when school divisions show leadership, Mr. 

Speaker, for the establishment of such clubs and the extension 

of safe places for children who may be vulnerable to bullying. 

That’s a good thing. But the provincial government and the 

provincial ministry could be showing much more leadership on 

this front. 

 

One thing, Mr. Speaker, that the ministry could be doing is 

providing information on their website, able to access in an easy 

manner, that could provide information about these clubs, the 

benefits, how students or teachers could go about establishing 

these clubs, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen stronger leadership 

from other provinces where this information has been available, 

where there have been more targeted efforts to reduce bullying 

and ensure that all children have a safe and welcoming place to 

go when it comes to school. 

 

So my question to the Premier is this: will the Sask Party 

government commit to providing, on the ministry’s website, 

additional information so that when there are students, teachers, 

allies, who are interested in establishing a GSA [gay-straight 

alliance], they are able to access the information that they need 

and not simply rely on what might be occurring through a 

school division or what might not be occurring through a school 

division? Will they commit to that today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think the 

government would preclude anything. I think we want to let the 

member from Fairview do her work, let the ministries do their 

work. We’re happy to take advice and counsel from the Leader 

of the Opposition, from members opposite. 

 

There are some other issues in provinces that we’ve noted and I 

think we need to explore those issues with respect to the 

alliances. And I think specifically of religious schools that are 

operating in the province today, not just Christian schools. We 

have to be concerned, and I hope the member is concerned 

about the protection of freedom of religion as well. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s very much a part of the sentiment that we 

support, expressed today in the House. 

 

So there are a number of issues. The work is going to be done 

by the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education, in 

conjunction with the ministries that are involved, Mr. Speaker. 

And I expect, as we’ve seen in the past from this member from 

Fairview, an excellent report and good work and we’re open 

certainly to the advice and counsel that might come from 

members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

SaskPower Finances and Infrastructure 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

today’s SaskPower annual report, the government promised it 

won’t take any more dividends from SaskPower because the 

corporation is now strapped for cash. In fact the debt/equity 

ratio for SaskPower is already 63.8 per cent and it’s projected to 

grow to an extreme high of 71.3 per cent this year. 

 

The public has heard this story before, only to see SaskPower 

have its assets stripped of $120 million to shore up the books of 

the province. The government still ran a deficit, Mr. Speaker, 

according to public accounts, and then increased people’s 

power bills by 5 per cent. Nevertheless the report says there will 

be no dividend this year. 

 

What assurance does the public have that SaskPower and the 

Sask Party government have their books in order so that power 

prices won’t go up to pay for the Sask Party’s budget blunders? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to the 

member for the question. The question around the $120 million 

dividend that the member references is as a result of the year 

that we had very significant flooding in our province. While we 

had significant flooding, there was also the unanticipated 

benefit of a lot of water in our dam systems that we were able to 

generate much, much more hydroelectricity as a result of that. 

So we felt as a government that while SaskPower benefited 

from that and we were in a position where we had significant 

flooding, it was appropriate to move $120 million to support the 

efforts in flooding. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The SaskPower 



3140 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

report also shows that the projected capital costs are $10 billion 

to replace aging infrastructure and bring on new generation 

capacity. What it doesn’t say is how the province is going to 

pay for those $10 billion. And judging from past behaviour, it 

will be Saskatchewan industry and people who pay this new 

$10 billion bill through increases in their power rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government should use this annual 

report as an opportunity to be straight with the public. Releasing 

a projection of future rates is the transparent thing to do. Who 

will be paying for the 10 billion in new capital costs for 

SaskPower, and what will be the future rate increases for people 

and businesses? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the NDP, you 

would be of the view that they never ever took a dividend from 

SaskPower, never ever did it according to that member, if you 

listen to her. The fact of the matter is they took dividends year 

after year after year: $35 million in 1993, 100 per cent of 

earnings from SaskPower; in 1998, $200 million, 114 per cent 

of the dividend; and in 2001 — and we can go down the list — 

181 per cent of the profits of SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is indeed investing very significantly 

into our infrastructure network — $981 million. There are $226 

million dedicated just for the growth of this province, for new 

customers alone here in Saskatchewan, because of the 

unprecedented growth in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just wish the 

minister would pay as much attention to his debt to equity ratio, 

which is going upwards under his watch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskPower’s annual report reveals that the Sask 

Party has a long ways to go to modernize our energy grid, not 

only on the fiscal side, but also on the supply side. The report 

shows wind power makes up only 5 per cent of the province’s 

grid compared to coal at 41 per cent. New wind projects won’t 

be fully online until 2016. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province’s emissions are growing every year 

and coal-fired generation is one of the leading causes of those 

emissions’ growth. That’s why, in the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies final report of April 2010, there 

are clear recommendations from this legislature to add new 

renewable power generation wherever possible. Mr. Speaker, 

that report is now three years old. The growth in renewable 

energy has been stagnant. Why has the Sask Party government 

moved so slowly at bringing on new, renewable power 

generation to the province? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

premise of the member’s question is completely incorrect. We 

have just finished completing the construction of a 

177-megawatt wind project near Chaplin, Saskatchewan. Just 

finished completing it; it’s coming on stream right away here. 

We would invite the member to come out to Chaplin and take a 

look at the facility out there to verify that it actually exists, if 

you don’t believe that it does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a whole host of projects that SaskPower 

is involved in. In terms of clean coal, we’re investing over $1.2 

billion down in the southeast part of our province to address the 

concerns about CO2 emissions. It will have with it the added 

benefit, obviously, of enhanced oil recovery — a very, very 

good project for our province. And indeed we’re seeing 

countries from all over the world sending people to 

Saskatchewan to take a look at that very cutting- and 

leading-edge project down in the southeast part of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The annual report 

shows peak demand is expected to increase 2.9 per cent this 

year. Clearly energy conservation, the most affordable option in 

terms of grid capacity, isn’t being utilized at the level it needs to 

be. Mr. Speaker, the power grid of tomorrow needs to be clean 

and efficient. And the most affordable way to do this is through 

energy conservation. In fact, conservative estimates back in 

2010 showed SaskPower had at least 100 megawatts of 

conservation to find, and they haven’t even met half of that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Everyone knows energy conservation is the most affordable 

choice for consumers, for businesses, for SaskPower, and for 

the province. Why does the Sask Party government stall on 

energy conservation as the most common sense, affordable way 

to renew our power grid? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has an enviable 

record with respect to environmental initiatives that they have 

taken. And that’s precisely the reason why they just were 

awarded the Canadian Electricity Association’s Environmental 

Commitment Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are committed to it in our administration. 

Clearly SaskPower is moving forward with respect to this. In 

terms of investment in our province, under the NDP over the 

last 10 years that they were in government, there was a 

commitment of $3.2 billion for infrastructure from SaskPower. 

We have now over $10 billion of investment scheduled over the 

next 10 years in our province for infrastructure, renewable 

projects under SaskPower. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday 

we raised a Provincial Auditor’s report that we’ve just recently 

obtained, one though that was sent almost three years ago to the 

Minister of Finance and to the former minister for Advanced 

Education as it relates to the Sask Party government’s IPAC 

[International Performance Assessment Centre for geologic 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3141 

storage of CO2] affair. 

 

It highlighted millions of taxpayers’ dollars that have flowed, 

that were at risk at that very time and continued to flow. And 

that government knew there was problems at that point in time, 

or at least they should have, because they had three board 

members on the board in November of 2009 when it was 

reported to them. 

 

It’s clear that no action was taken by that government to protect 

taxpayers’ dollars from waste, yet that minister continued to 

make even more claims on Monday suggesting her government 

had acted, something that the facts and timeline entirely refute. 

Why is that government so intent on making more baseless 

claims, pretending to have acted instead of providing the 

straight answers and real accountability taxpayers deserve over 

their wasted dollars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m so 

pleased that the member got up today to reference questions he 

asked in the past, because he referred to a memo. And I 

understand that the member opposite gets quite confused when 

it comes to this particular file, but there is a difference between 

a memo to someone and a letter. And what he calls a memo to 

government ministers is actually a letter that was written by the 

Provincial Auditor. Oh, Mr. Speaker, what a surprise. Who was 

that letter to? Well, Mr. Speaker, it was to the board of 

governors at the University of Regina. 

 

The Minister of Post-Secondary Education quite logically was 

cc’d [carbon copy] as well as the Minister of Finance. So a cc to 

a letter does not a memo make. However I understand that 

perhaps the member opposite is confused. Also that particular 

Provincial Auditor . . . I’m looking forward to the next question, 

Mr. Speaker, so I can explain when he knew about the 

Provincial Auditor’s report and when we put that report into 

records. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again we see here today, 

that minister simply has no credibility on this file. That minister 

had members on the board from the very get-go. The Minister 

of Energy and Resources funded the very start-up of CVI 

[Climate Ventures Inc.] and that minister flowed money that 

she was responsible for and had people reporting directly back 

to them. Because they didn’t act . . . [inaudible] . . . I suspect we 

have a report that’s gone to the Minister of Finance and the 

minister of Advanced Education. 

 

Time after time, we see claims made by that minister that are 

refuted by the facts. We’ve heard that minister say there was a 

contract when there was none. We’ve heard that minister say 

there was value for money when clearly that wasn’t the case. 

And now the minister pretends that that government’s acted to 

protect taxpayers’ money when clearly that isn’t the case. Mr. 

Speaker, with so many misleading statements, baseless claims, 

and claims that have been proven wrong, how can the public 

trust that minister’s handling of its IPAC affair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the 

member opposite take a look at the Crown Investments 

Corporation committee Hansard from June 27th, 2012 and he 

will see that I read the Provincial Auditor’s recommendation 

into the record at that committee meeting. That is almost a year 

ago now, Mr. Speaker. And yet now he seems all surprised that 

the Provincial Auditor had actually audited the relationship 

between the U of R [University of Regina] and IPAC at the 

time that it was under management of the U of R. 

 

He has seen the forensic audit that was done, and yet he seems 

so surprised whenever we reference . . . This particular audit 

was done after the board were alerted to the issues with the CVI 

contract and had taken steps. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure why 

he, day after day, seems so surprised when he has access to all 

of this information. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The audit was never shared by that 

minister, and we’ve just recently received that and been able to 

have a look at that. So that’s new, Madam Minister. And as 

well, as it relates to the MNP report, that’s only a result of an 

investigation that was put into instead of a government being 

straightforward with Saskatchewan people. 

 

The report that was brought forward to the Minister of Finance 

highlighted that there was millions of taxpayers’ dollars that 

were at risk of being wasted. That went to the Minister of 

Finance and the minister of Advanced Education. The auditor 

highlighted alarming risks as well over a dispute over the 

ownership of assets. Remember the unneeded, unboxed 

computers that no one knew what they were for? The university 

claimed ownership of those IT [information technology] assets 

that had been purchased with taxpayers’ money from CVI. 

That’s, of course, the private company CVI, the private costly 

start-up of that very government that was claiming ownership, 

the one that was funded with an OC [order in council] signed by 

that Finance minister. 

 

My question isn’t to that minister, it’s to the Minister of 

Finance: upon receiving the auditor’s report that raised the 

dispute over millions of taxpayers’ dollars and ownership of IT 

assets, what did he do and when did he act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just need to 

remind the member opposite again just to, you know, reference 

Hansard on June 27th, 2012 where the recommendations by the 

Provincial Auditor was read into the record. I mean he can read, 

I’m sure. If not, we can help look up that Hansard for him if 

he’d like. It can be done. 

 

However in May of 2010, when the CEO [chief executive 

officer] was hired, a number of steps was taken by the board, 

Mr. Speaker. The funding was suspended at that time, the 

forensic audit was ordered, the relationship with CVI was 

severed at that time, and the assets were secured. They hired an 



3142 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

independent IT consultant to assess the services that was 

provided, and the funding control was moved from the 

university to the new entity of IPAC, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now again I want to repeat that that was initiated, started in 

May of 2010. And the Provincial Auditor’s report, this memo 

that’s truly a letter to the university, is dated August 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the problem was 

that as the board that she had members on was notified in 

November of 2009, the dollars continued to flow. The waste 

was still at play, Mr. Speaker, the waste that’s been alleged, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that was a question not for that minister, but for the 

Minister of Finance. That minister has proven herself 

irresponsible in being able to relay the facts on this file and 

quite simply has lost credibility in handling this government’s 

IPAC affair. 

 

Almost three years ago, that Minister of Finance received a 

report from the auditor raising alarming risks and disputes 

involving millions of taxpayers’ dollars. Mr. Speaker, to the 

Minister of Finance: how did he resolve the dispute over 

ownership of IT assets with his government’s costly start-up, 

CVI, the one he funded, and did it cost taxpayers more, more 

money after the point they had already purchased those assets in 

the first place, Mr. Speaker? Were more taxpayers’ dollars 

used? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

talks about incompetence. Honestly, Mr. Speaker, I have said 

the steps that were initiated in May. The report that he’s 

referencing didn’t come out till August, Mr. Speaker. He can 

count the months. I’m sure he can count the months. But May 

does come before August, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the board was already acting before the Provincial Auditor’s 

report was brought down. Also, you know what, if he’s so 

concerned, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, almost a year ago in 

committee I offered to tell him which personnel at the 

university were involved in getting involved with this contract, 

Mr. Speaker. He wanted to know so badly it took him nine 

months to then come to me and say, by the way, who are those 

people? I could have had a baby in that time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He’s talking about incompetence. He keeps raising these 

questions. He doesn’t want to hear the answers. He’s playing 

that he’s naive. We’ve given him timelines. We’ve given him 

reports. We have had so many audits on this file, of which we 

were only one-third funder of less than $1 million if you count 

all of the funding that went to this and divided it by three. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Education Funding 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

fallout of the province’s budget has trickled out across the 

province. And we know now that, even after the expensive 

billboard ads and the radio ads, that Sask Party government is 

not convincing boards across this province that their choices 

don’t have an impact. 

 

In The Battlefords, the Living Sky School Division, the school 

board has been forced to dip into its reserves to fund day-to-day 

operations. And they were built up for emergencies, not 

day-to-day operations. Mr. Speaker, why has the Sask Party 

government left school boards no options but to dip into their 

reserves to fund education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, our record 

on education funding is quite solid. This was not a status quo 

budget, Mr. Speaker, it was a 2.3 per cent increase, Mr. 

Speaker. And that increase took into account considerable 

monies for current enrolment. We made that promise, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The members opposite obviously are having a great deal of 

trouble with growth. They had trouble with growth for 16 years. 

In fact, there was no growth, Mr. Speaker. And our government 

is prepared to deal with the issues of growth. We promised 

current enrolment funding, Mr. Speaker; we gave that. We 

promised enrolment funding at the mid-year, Mr. Speaker; we 

fulfilled that promise, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

promised to address some of the infrastructure needs, Mr. 

Speaker. And to that degree this budget allows for the funding 

of up to 40 relocatables, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In The Battlefords 

paper, the school board Chair, Ken Arsenault, said, and I quote, 

“We have to speak to the minister. We have to let our 

displeasure be known, but there’s a reality here of our staff and 

our students that we have to support.” And board member 

Kowalchuk said of the plan to transition the school divisions to 

new funding formula, “So all this time we’ve been hearing 

about this transition, but obviously we cannot believe what they 

tell us, because it’s not there.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the local school board, just like others across the 

province, are bearing the brunt of the government’s lack of 

attention to real front-line education. Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister: why does the Sask Party have millions, $5.9 million 

for standardized testing instead of real front-line education? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

might attribute that to a bit of a rookie mistake. I haven’t 

experienced that process before, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I’ll make it up in the middle of my answer, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again our record speaks for itself. In fact there was 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3143 

transition funding expressed, explained in the budget, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that funding is in place for us to 

continue the good work that’s going on in our school divisions, 

Mr. Speaker. A 2.3 per cent increase in funding is not a status 

quo budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker, arising out 

of question period. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the Government House Leader’s 

point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe if 

you review Hansard, you’ll find that the member for Regina 

Rosemont accused the Minister of Crown Investments 

Corporation of making misleading statements to the House. I 

would call on the member to withdraw and apologize for those 

comments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you review the 

record because clearly as you know and as we’ve discussed, 

these types of words and usages depend on the context. So I 

would ask that the Speaker review the context. And that 

language in and of itself in Beauchesne’s on page 146 has not 

been listed as improper. So please review the context. I think it 

was appropriate in this circumstance. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Withdraw and apologize, if there was an 

intention to suggest that this minister has misled this House. 

There’s many misleading statements that have been made on 

this file. That was the point that was . . . 

 

The Speaker: — If the member is standing to withdraw and 

apologize, you simply have to say, I withdraw and apologize. 

You don’t have to repeat the potential offence. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 274 through 301. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 274 to 301 inclusive. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 91 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, today I rise to move second reading of a bill to 

amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 

 

Canada’s Finance ministers have been examining the country’s 

retirement income system for the past several years and have 

recognized the need for improved pension coverage among 

Canadian workers. In Saskatchewan, only 47 per cent of 

workers have access to a workplace pension plan. 

 

The retirement income system in Canada is considered to be 

one of the best in the world, consisting of a blend of public and 

private programs. Canada’s retirement income system is 

comprised of three elements often referred to as pillars by the 

federal government. 

 

The first pillar consists of publicly-funded support programs, 

namely Old Age Security, OAS, and the Guaranteed Income 

Supplement, GIS. These programs are intended to provide a 

minimum level of financial support to Canadian seniors. 

 

The second pillar consists of the Canada Pension Plan, CPP, 

which is funded through earnings-based contributions from 

employees and employers. Participation in the CPP is 

mandatory for all employed and self-employed Canadians. 

 

The third pillar consists of private retirement savings, including 

workplace pension plans and registered retirement savings 

plans, RRSPs. Participation in some occupational pension plans 

is a requirement of employment. Participation in other private 

savings plans is entirely voluntary. 

 

To address the gap in retirement savings for workers, ministers 

proposed a new pension savings arrangement, the pooled 

registered pension plan, PRPP, which is voluntary, less 

complex, and less costly for employers, and which allows the 

assets of employees from multiple employers to be pulled into 

large, cost-effective pension plans. In fact the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan was often described as a working model of this 

new arrangement during the development of the federal pooled 

registered pension plan legislation. 

 

The SPP [Saskatchewan Pension Plan] provides a unique 

retirement savings vehicle for individuals with little or no 

access to workplace pension plans or other retirement savings 

arrangements. It is the only plan of its kind in Canada, operating 

at arm’s length from government and offering members 

professional investment management at institutional costs. 

 

Since 1986 the Saskatchewan Pension Plan has grown to over 

32,000 members and $318 million under trusteeship. The plan 

is an integral part of the retirement savings plans of many 

Saskatchewan people. As well there have also been 1,088 new 

members that have joined the SPP in 2012; 83 per cent 

identified themselves as full-time, part-time, or self-employed. 

 

The SPP offers members important benefits such as 

affordability. You can be a member of the plan regardless of 



3144 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

your earnings. This is especially attractive for people with 

irregular or seasonal earnings such as students, part-time 

workers, or people who are self-employed. 

 

Simple. The SPP takes pride in making the plan easy to join and 

easy to understand. They keep the paperwork to a minimum. 

What’s more, they are always happy to answer any questions 

you may have and to assist you with any aspect of the plan. 

 

Consistent. The plan philosophy is to invest cautiously over the 

long term. That makes it a good choice for anyone’s portfolio, 

but especially for those with little or no investment experience. 

The plan is also voluntary. You are never obligated to 

contribute. 

 

Flexible. You can make a contribution at any time during the 

plan year. 

 

Portable. It is always your plan regardless of where you live or 

what you do. 

 

Professionally managed. Investments are handled by a 

professional investment firm. 

 

The SPP is the 28th largest defined contribution plan in Canada 

as measured by Benefits Canada in September of 2012. As a 

point of interest, the SPP targets overall administration fees of 1 

per cent in its balanced fund. 

 

The amendments being introduced today will lay the foundation 

to allow the Saskatchewan Pension Plan board of trustees to 

apply to become a licensed PRPP provider in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The proposed amendments will allow the board 

to create a non-profit corporation to administer the PRPP assets 

for the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. The creation of this 

corporation will allow these assets to be administered distinctly 

from the non-PRPP assets held by the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan trustees. 

 

Our government believes PRPPs and the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan can provide an important new choice to help Saskatchewan 

people save for retirement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act (No. 2). 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 91, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 

2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m quite honoured and pleased to stand up today on 

behalf of the official opposition to give, certainly, our initial 

comments on this particular bill. 

 

At the outset Bill 91, which really talks about improving the 

pension plan for workers, from our perspective as the official 

opposition, we look at this as being one particular tool that 

would be of significant value if we certainly do this right. I 

appreciate the comments made by . . . the many times that I’ve 

heard different levels of government speak about the need to 

protect workers and work with the private sector, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think one of the points that I would really want to 

emphasize is the point raised by the minister, in a sense that 

when he mentioned that 47 per cent of the workers don’t have 

the fourth pillar, if you will, and he spoke about the pillars of 

security as you age and the people that have made contributions 

over time in their lives, in their profession, that they do a lot of 

significant good for all their families and the people and the 

communities and the province as a whole. So at the end of their 

work years, at the end of their years of contribution, that we 

should look at every avenue of support that we can afford them, 

as a province and as a country, to ensure that when they retire 

and when they’re in their latter stage of their life, that they’re 

able to live comfortably and with a lot of dignity and security, 

Mr. Speaker. Those are some things that are really, really 

important. 

 

So as we look at Bill 91, at the outset, we think it is one tool 

that needs to certainly be supported and also needs to be 

vigorously investigated to ensure that the intent of what the 

minister is speaking of today is followed through and that 

people are intricately involved in how this plan is rolled out. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the minister spoke about the pillars, 

and certainly from the perspective of the support mechanisms 

that are out there, whether it’s old age security being one of the 

pillars and the Guaranteed Income Supplement, Mr. Speaker, I 

have a lot of folks in my particular community and in my 

particular constituency, many of the older people that never had 

the opportunity to really participate in additional benefits as 

they aged.  

 

So a lot of times in my particular work as an MLA, I will find 

that some of the senior citizens are living on very low incomes. 

And many times we helped them over the last number of years 

to ensure that they got the GIS because a lot of older people 

don’t realize that you have to apply for the GIS. A lot of older 

people don’t realize that you have to have your income tax all 

filled out for that year. And if they don’t fill it out in that year, 

then July what normally happens is many of the older people 

don’t get their GIS along with their old age security. And then 

all of a sudden the federal government certainly cuts them down 

from a 11 or $1,200 allowance down to a $550 allowance, 

which is the basic allowance under the Old Age Security Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the older people didn’t understand 

that. And we took, it took us a lot of time as the MLA, and 

certainly my staff were involved, to explain in our own 

language, whether it’s Cree or whether the people that work in 

the Dene communities for me, in that case being Dene, we 

needed to explain to them the importance of filing an income 

tax, the difference between the Old Age Security Act and the 

difference between a GIS. So on the first pillar, Mr. Speaker, I 

sincerely concur that it’s one important pillar, but there’s a lot 

more education necessary to encourage a lot of the older people 

to pay very close attention to the difference. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the second pillar that was made reference to, 

the CPP program, the Canada Pension Plan program, that is 

another important aspect that many, many workers are taking 

advantage of today. And again as they age, I think it’s really 

important to note that they make contributions and over time 

that some of those contributions on a national basis should be 

paid back to them. And I think a lot of people understand CPP, 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3145 

and a lot of people certainly benefit from CPP as well. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Now obviously the third pillar that was made reference to under 

the example of the RRSP, Mr. Speaker, there are many families 

out there that do take advantage of the RRSP option to 

complement the old age security, GIS program, to complement 

the CPP program. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s probably a heck of 

a lot more families and workers that don’t participate in the 

RRSP program. And we need to know some of those numbers 

as well, just so we’re able to really ascertain as to how that 

pillar is complementing the other pillars as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of questions about how the three 

pillars interact, the knowledge of how the pillars operate, and 

the continual education for the people that these pillars are built 

for in terms of how they maximize their benefits. And I would 

say so much, Mr. Speaker, that there needs to be more 

educational opportunities for new and young employees that 

come along to talk about the value of the CPP, to talk about the 

values of the RRSPs because we know many Canadians, Mr. 

Speaker, don’t plan well enough ahead.  

 

And this is an effort, I think, when we talk about pension plans 

and the availability of pension plans and the sustainability of 

pension plans, that we also have to vigorously educate as many 

people as we possibly can to ensure that they know the benefits 

of saving to an RRSP, or they know the benefits of continuing 

to work and maximize their contribution to the CPP program, so 

they’re able to prepare and plan out their latter years in life by 

complementing those incomes with an old age security plan and 

also understanding how the GIS interacts with their income. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of questions as to how much of 

these systems that the Canadian people understand. And there’s 

a variety of reasons for that, Mr. Speaker. And I make reference 

to when I was younger, I didn’t pay a lot of attention to CPP. I 

didn’t pay a lot of attention to the Old Age Security Act because 

I was young. And certainly from the RRSP perspective, Mr. 

Speaker, I didn’t pay a lot of attention to that as well. So what 

I’ll point out is that as a young person that has a family, my 

priority at the time was to ensure that I had an income so I was 

able to sustain my family. I wasn’t thinking 40, 50 years down 

the road; I was thinking more like 18, 20 years down the road, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that same situation that I was struggling with, Mr. Speaker, I 

know that there’s a lot of families out there, a lot of young 

workers, men and women, that are trying to figure that out as 

well. And there ought be something or there ought to be some 

effort, some mechanism, some initiative to explain how all 

these pillars interact with each other so that the people 

understand at a very young age the value of continuing to work, 

the value of continuing to save, and the value of preparedness 

for your old age. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, under this particular program . . . And the 

point I’m trying to make, if we look at all the pillars that are 

made reference to, Mr. Speaker, is this PRPP program that’s 

being introduced through Bill 91, it’s an important cog for yet 

another support mechanism for the people as they age. And I 

think from the official opposition, we are generally in 

agreement that this ought to be something that we support — 

not be something that we participate in — and that we 

understand fully. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll go back to my earlier point on the pillars 

and the interaction of the pillars. We need to make sure that 

people understand this thoroughly. We have to make sure that 

. . . There are many people out there that are aged, and they are 

part of an association. We want their advice on this bill. We 

want to see what they would . . . what kind of insight that they 

would offer us. We need to know if there’s any concerns they 

might have on this particular bill. 

 

So while we’re in general support, Mr. Speaker, as the official 

opposition, we want to make sure that we allow the time and the 

opportunity for people out there to study the bill, to participate 

with us or through the government, and give us ideas and means 

and ways that we can improve this, what I’ll consider a fourth 

pillar, in terms of trying to make sure that we have a good, 

sustainable future for our people that have worked and 

contributed and as they age, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the things I think with the PRPP in general, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we see the important aspects of being flexible. 

We think that that’s many times is really important to have that 

flexibility there. We see that it’s portable. We applaud that as 

well, Mr. Speaker, because you obviously have to have that 

particular aspect that’s part of any program to prepare us for the 

older years. And, Mr. Speaker, this plan being professionally 

managed, there’s no question in our minds that that is exactly 

what is necessary to make sure that it is professionally 

managed. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that we would 

also support. 

 

The problem we have, Mr. Speaker, is that this program is 

voluntary in nature. And we will need to see whether the 

voluntary versus that you have to absolutely do this, whether 

it’s mandatory or voluntary, we need to have that discussion, 

Mr. Speaker. Because obviously from our perspective, as we 

look at the business community, and under our smart growth 

vision, Mr. Speaker, as the New Democratic Party, under our 

smart growth vision, we have to understand that there are, as the 

minister alludes to, 47 per cent of Saskatchewan workers that 

don’t participate in a pension plan as of today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a high number. And we have to reach 

out. We have to reach out as a government and as an opposition 

to those 47 per cent and explain to them that, look, with the job 

you have now and with the employer you have now, we can sit 

down and develop a plan here to begin that process, to begin to 

educate you on the value of having a PRPP in your workplace. 

Yes, the PRPP is flexible. And yes, it’s professionally managed. 

And yes, it’s portable. But we need to have the discussion 

whether it’s voluntary or whether it’s mandatory. We need to 

have those discussions. We don’t have all the answers, Mr. 

Speaker, on the mandatory versus voluntary aspect of this 

particular bill. We need to find those answers, and the best way 

to do that is to have those deep discussions — and very deep 

discussions, Mr. Speaker — with the employers and the 

employees to see if there’s a better way of doing this. 

 

And that’s the whole point of us going through the bills bit by 

bit here in the Assembly, to talk to the people out there to say, 



3146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

is there anything better we can do on this particular bill to 

ensure that it meets its goals and objectives? And many times 

the government doesn’t have all the answers, and this is why 

it’s important to go out and outreach with those organizations 

that could give us some very solid advice, give us some very 

solid steps on how we can achieve some of the intent behind 

that advice, Mr. Speaker. So it’s important that we send a 

message to the people that under the PRPP program, the pooled 

registered pension plans, that we ought to have some very solid, 

thorough discussions with the employers and the employees. 

Because it’s one tool, if we do this right, it is one tool, Mr. 

Speaker, that could be very valuable for years to come. 

 

Now the important thing is when you look at the retirement 

perspective, as you begin to, as they say, age out, you want to 

make sure that you look at all the assets and all the income and 

all the challenges you have as you leave the workforce. 

 

Now obviously when we talk about the three pillars that was 

made mention of, you know, we need to know how those pillars 

interact and how this new program is going to impact it as well. 

While we see it as being generally positive, we need to make 

sure one important aspect when we talk about pension plans 

here in Saskatchewan. When people tell us, you need a 

sweeping review, a sweeping look at how all these pillars 

interact . . . Look at how the CPP operates, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s many organizations, many intelligent people, people 

that are far more intelligent than I, that have a lot of sage advice 

on how we can do this.  

 

And that’s the point that the opposition wants to make. We 

understand the pillars. We understand the added value of the 

PRPP, Mr. Speaker. But we need to have a look at how it 

interacts with the other pillars that was made mention of, of 

how we can educate the public and how we can engage the 

employers and the employees on this plan, and certainly how 

we can build it better. And that’s the point, Mr. Speaker, that 

many people that give us advice from outside — the people that 

have the information, the people that are part of a network, and 

the people that have a lot of the intelligence on this particular 

file — we need to reach out to them and ask them, what do you 

think of this particular bill? We think at the outset it’s positive, 

but we need to find out whether there are improvements that 

could be made. 

 

And the biggest argument that we would have today on this 

particular bill, Mr. Speaker, is that is it better to do it voluntary 

or is it better to do it mandatory? And I’m not sure if the 

minister took the time to go forward and ask these questions. 

I’m sure that there have been organizations that have given the 

minister advice. But many organizations that we deal with, they 

always talk about the issue of ensuring that they have their way 

or their input in this particular program and being engaged right 

from the start. That’s really important for a lot of people. 

 

And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that if you look at the whole 

notion of consultation, people have to know when the 

government say, we consulted with these groups, it doesn’t 

necessarily mean they have agreement from those groups, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the really key point that I’ll also make on this 

particular bill or any other bill that is out there. And that’s why 

as the official opposition on Bill 91, when we want to engage 

people’s consultation, engage their thoughts, and engage their 

advice, Mr. Speaker, we also want to get their agreement that 

some of these things are important to have in this particular bill. 

And if they agree, then the opposition will take those points 

forward, and we’ll certainly try and do our very best to amend 

the bill if it’s for the betterment of the people that we’re trying 

to serve. And hopefully the government of the day will realize 

that that’s what the intent behind some of our efforts are. So on 

that point, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of work that is necessary to 

ensure that we have this bill done properly, we have the bill 

done very properly. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that if you look at the 

Canada Pension Plan, we need to make sure that people out 

there don’t have the ability to change the benefits age from 65 

to 67 as the Harper government done in Ottawa. And that’s my 

point, Mr. Speaker, is that when you talk about the overarching 

need to interact with all the different pillars that was made 

reference to, you can’t have that political interference, and you 

can’t have somebody come along saying, we’re changing the 

rules on this plan or any other plan. And that’s why it’s 

important to have consultation and agreement by the parties 

impacted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I say again to the public of Saskatchewan that this bill is 

something that I think is genuinely positive. There’s a lot of 

aspects you like to talk about in this particular bill. We want to 

do a lot of outreach to the organizations that are impacted by 

this bill. We think it’s a first step in a long journey to make sure 

we have a sustainable social safety net for years to come for the 

people, for our people as they age. 

 

But the key thing here is that they have to communicate back 

with the opposition. They have to communicate back with the 

Leader of the Opposition, with the members of the opposition, 

and present their views because this whole package of how we 

prepare ourselves for retirement is too important to be partisan. 

So we ask them to come forward, give us the information, give 

us the advice, give us the points that you’d like to raise, and we 

will certainly do our job as the official opposition to challenge 

the government to make amendments where necessary but to 

also support the bill if it’s being proven valuable to the people 

that we intend to serve. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, a good first step for employers and 

employees. We hope that this work continues, and we still have 

a lot more work to do. So on that note, I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 91. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 91, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 92 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3147 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Pooled Registered 

Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act. Mr. Speaker, the purpose of 

this bill is to introduce a regulatory framework for pooled 

registered pension plans or PRPPs. PRPPs are a new kind of 

pension plan that will provide employees and the self-employed 

who do not have access to a workplace pension a low-cost 

retirement savings opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is widespread concern that Canadians are not 

saving enough for their retirement years. Statistics reflect this 

trend, and it’s unfortunately now commonplace for individuals 

to work later into life because they find themselves with 

insufficient savings once they reach retirement age. This trend 

is especially worrying in regards to modest- and middle-income 

families and employees of small and medium-sized businesses. 

Mr. Speaker, in fact the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business estimates that close to 80 per cent of employees of 

smaller businesses have no access to company retirement plans. 

 

With this in mind, Canada’s Finance ministers agreed on a 

framework regarding PRPPs in December of 2010. Following 

consultation with the public, stakeholders, and provincial and 

territorial governments, the federal government enacted PRPP 

legislation in December of 2012. While the federal PRPP 

legislation created a framework for all provinces to follow, it 

only makes PRPPs available to employees of federally 

regulated industries such as banking and telecommunications. 

 

[14:45] 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, pension regulation is primarily an 

area of provincial responsibility, so each provincial government 

must implement its own enabling legislation to make PRPPs 

available to all Canadians. Mr. Speaker, this bill ensures that 

Saskatchewan residents will have the opportunity to prepare 

adequately for a comfortable retirement by contributing to these 

new and innovative pension plans. 

 

Unlike most workplace pensions, Mr. Speaker, a PRPP is 

managed by an administrator, not the employer. Once licensed 

to offer a PRPP, administrators will be closely regulated and 

subject to a fiduciary standard of care to ensure that the funds 

are invested in the best interests of plan members. Assets in a 

PRPP will be pooled together for multiple participating 

employers which will result in lower management costs for plan 

members. Portability of pension funds is a key component of 

the PRPP framework and will facilitate an easy transfer 

between plans. The overall simple design of PRPPs is intended 

to encourage participation by employers that may not currently 

offer a pension plan to employees due to the cost or 

administrative complexity. 

 

While participating employers will not be required to 

contribute, they will be permitted to make direct contributions 

to a PRPP on an employee’s behalf. Under the changes to the 

federal Income Tax Act, these direct contributions to a PRPP 

will be excluded from salary compensation and thus not subject 

to Canada Pension Plan contributions and employment 

insurance premiums. This feature will make PRPPs more 

attractive to employers than existing group RRSPs. 

 

When an employer chooses to adopt a PRPP, employees will be 

automatically enrolled but given the opportunity to 

subsequently opt out. While automatic enrolment for employees 

of participating employers encourages savings for retirement by 

those who may not have proactively saved on their own, 

providing employees with the ability to opt out ensures they 

retain the freedom to set their individual financial priorities. 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, self-employed individuals or 

individuals whose employer chooses not to participate can open 

a PRPP account by approaching a PRPP administrator directly. 

 

On retirement employees will have the same options for 

withdrawing assets for a PRPP as are currently available from a 

defined contribution pension plan in Saskatchewan. In 

particular the options on retirement are a registered retirement 

income fund, a variable pension benefit, or a life annuity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government continues to encourage all 

Saskatchewan workers to plan for the future, recognizing that in 

order to provide an adequate level of income in retirement, 

individuals need to set aside sufficient savings over their 

working lives. The introduction of this legislation will provide 

more Saskatchewan workers with a simple, low-cost option to 

support their retirement savings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 92, The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member 

for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to give our first . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Highways 

and Infrastructure. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the 

Assembly, it’s a great pleasure to introduce the Hon. Steven 

Fletcher who is Canada’s Minister of State for Transport. 

 

I don’t think Minister Fletcher needs a whole lot of introduction 

for anybody that follows politics at all. Steven was elected in 

2004 and was on the two-year plan. He was elected and then 

re-elected in 2006 and 2008 — much to the chagrin I think of 

all those people that were campaigning every two years — and 

then again re-elected in 2011. 

 



3148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

Steven is definitely an inspiration to all of us that aspire in the 

political game, Mr. Speaker, or have political aspirations. 

Steven has certainly been an inspiration. I am very fortunate to 

work with him through the federal government, and the work 

that they, the federal government is doing. I look forward to 

meeting with him, just after this introduction certainly, to talk 

about the second iteration of the Building Canada Fund, Mr. 

Speaker. The federal government has committed to carrying on 

that fund. We’re looking at how that impacts, how it will have 

impact here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’d ask all members of this Assembly to welcome Steven to 

our Assembly — as he’s from Manitoba, I guess I can’t say it’s 

his Assembly — but we welcome him to our Assembly, and I 

ask all members to join me. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to join in the 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave for introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure in 

welcoming Minister Fletcher to the legislature. Steven and I, 

he’s a good friend of mine. We were elected in 2004 and were 

rookie MPs [Member of Parliament] together. And it’s great to 

see you, Steven. And he’s doing a great job as a minister, and 

it’s great to have him here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too, on 

behalf of the official opposition, want to welcome the Hon. 

Steven Fletcher here. I think it’s absolutely great to have you 

here. Welcome, sir, and we hope that your visit to 

Saskatchewan is absolutely productive and fabulous. And 

certainly it’s always an honour to recognize MPs. So thanks for 

joining us and once again welcome to our Assembly. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 92 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I think on Bill 93, what 

this is, certainly from our perspective, is a complementary effort 

from a legal point to ensure that the PRPP process is under way. 

We certainly spoke at great lengths about the value of the PRPP 

and some of the challenges we may have with it. I’m not 

indicating that there is a lot of challenge to the whole process. 

As I explained earlier, there’s a lot of discussion behind the 

PRPPs and their value and how the PRPP program interacts 

with the three other pillars that was made mention of. 

 

And I think it’s important to point out that from our perspective 

we understand that this particular bill is a complementary bill 

that’s necessary to ensure that the PRPP program moves 

forward. Because obviously in a bill you certainly have the 

intent of the bill and then you also have the legal framework in 

which the bill has to process its way through. So obviously 

from this perspective we don’t have a lot of comments on this 

particular bill. We look at it as a complementary effort to ensure 

that the PRPP program does exist and operate within 

Saskatchewan. And certainly from our perspective we look at 

this bill as part of the bigger package to bring forward the PRPP 

program to the benefits of many of our employees and certainly 

with the cooperation of the employers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more we want to say in general 

about the PRPP program. We see Bill 93 as a legal, 

complementary bill which is very necessary to ensure this thing 

moves forward properly. And on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move 

that we adjourn debate on 93.  

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 92, The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act . Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 93 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 

2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Pooled Registered 

Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key purpose of this bilingual bill is to 

introduce amendments to The Enforcement Of Maintenance 

Orders Act, 1997 that are required on account of the 

introduction of The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act. 

 

The Enforcement Of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997 authorized 

the maintenance enforcement office to register support orders 

and agreements, record and monitor support payments, and take 

enforcement action when the required payments are missed or 

late. One particular type of enforcement action that the director 

of the maintenance enforcement office may undertake is to 

attach the pension funds of an individual who is in arrears on 

maintenance payments. 

 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997 currently 

authorizes this enforcement activity with regard to pension 

plans regulated under The Pension Benefits Act, 1992 where a 

payer is more than three months in arrears and all other 

reasonable steps have been taken to enforce the maintenance 

order. 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3149 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will ensure the pension funds 

in a pooled registered pension plan account will also be subject 

to these important enforcement activities. So, Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to move second reading of The Pooled Registered 

Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 93, The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and again I just wanted to make reference that the adjournment 

of debate that I made earlier was on actually Bill 92, it 

should’ve been not 93, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But certainly from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, I want to point 

out that again with the pooled plan here that we have in place, I 

think that it is certainly a noble effort that we undertake as 

MLAs, on both sides of the Assembly, to find ways and means 

in which we could strengthen the overall safety nets that many 

workers anticipate as they age. And, Mr. Speaker, certainly 

again as I pointed out, it’s important to get advice and good 

sage advice from as many organizations and people as you can 

when we talk about how we plan the future for many of our 

workers. And certainly as they begin to age, you know, they’ll 

need to be able to live comfortably. 

 

So I think with the Bill 93, in general when we’re talking about 

the legal framework and the work that is necessary to ensure 

that this PRPP program moves forward, it’s one valuable tool. 

I’ll say it again that there’s probably many, many other tools 

out there that we could probably develop over time. And from 

our perspective as the opposition, as an opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, we want to ensure that when we talk about smart 

growth overall, as a party and certainly as the official 

opposition, smart growth to us means really anticipating what 

Saskatchewan’s going to look like 20, 30, 40 years from now. 

 

And part of the smart growth strategy, we talk about pillars as 

well, Mr. Speaker, importance of engaging the private sector, 

Mr. Speaker. The importance of making sure that the 

environment is not, is not compromised, Mr. Speaker. But the 

most important thing I think overall is to make sure that the 

workers are well cared for. Because obviously, Mr. Speaker, 

without the workers, then no economy in this whole world can 

survive without the workers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important that we point out to the people of 

Saskatchewan, under the NDP smart growth strategy, we have a 

long-term vision that has three or four key pillars to ensure that 

we continue building our province for years to come. And one 

of those pillars is to make sure that we protect the working 

people. And this particular effort, under the PRPP program, to 

encourage the employers that are out there to work with their 

employees to make sure that they’re able to pool a registered 

retirement savings plan and put that into place so that they’re 

able to benefit from this as they get older and certainly when 

it’s time for them to stop working and enjoy the fruits of their 

labour. 

 

Now that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, to point out that 

while we talk about the workers enjoying the fruits of their 

labour, Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan know right now 

that overall as a society we are benefiting tremendously from 

the fruits of our labour force right now. The many men and 

women and young people that are working — whether you’re 

an EMT [emergency medical technician], or whether you’re a 

highways worker, or whether you’re a firefighter, or whether 

you’re a nurse, a doctor, a lawyer, Mr. Speaker — we’re seeing 

that a lot of these working people are contributing to the 

common good of Saskatchewan people. And that’s exactly the 

values and principles that we hold. 

 

Now what happens is we can hold those principles, Mr. 

Speaker, and those values, but we have to make sure we put the 

proper tools and the proper mechanisms in place to ensure we 

do one thing: after all the contributors have contributed all they 

can, Mr. Speaker, that we make an effort to take care of them 

when they’re no longer able to contribute. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have many people in our province today 

that we look at as elderly people. And many, many times, we 

thank them for their strength. We thank them for their service. 

And I can tell you today that we hope and pray, we hope and 

pray that we’re able to make the latter years in many of our 

workers’ lives today a lot better than some of our people that 

are experiencing now because many of the older people in our 

province are struggling. They are struggling and we need to 

recognize that. 

 

So from our perspective as a party, as an official opposition, 

part of the smart growth strategy that we’re looking at and 

we’re developing has many moving parts. It’s highly 

interactive, but the principles are the same: that you must look 

after your working men and women now because for the private 

sector, for the government, and for many of the organizations 

out there, without the solid strong labour force, Mr. Speaker, 

nothing moves forward. And we have to recognize that vital 

point. 

 

And that’s why it’s important that we watch bills of this sort 

and we do all we can as an official opposition to support any 

mechanism, any mechanism to enhance the protection of 

workers and certainly look at the long-term benefits and health 

of those workers. 

 

So I point out, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this 

file. I’ve said a lot on all three of the bills. All these bills are 

part of a bigger package, and they’re all working their way 

towards a PRPP plan. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And I think it’s important that we say at the outset, and we say 

again as I close my comments here, that in general the official 

opposition looks at this step as a small step, a much necessary 

step. We have a lot more comments that we want to make on 

this particular file. But clearly, Mr. Speaker, it is a step in the 

right direction. And anything we can do to strengthen the hands 



3150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

of the 47 per cent of the people that are working now that don’t 

have any kind of a plan above and beyond the CPP, above and 

beyond the old age security plan, that if we’re able to work with 

them and the employers to strengthen their financial position 

many, many years from now, I think that would indeed be a 

great service. 

 

However we in the opposition are constantly calling for a huge 

look at how all the pillars — old age security, Guaranteed 

Income Supplement, the RRSP, the CPP, and now this plan — 

how it all interacts. And we need to see where we’re at as a 

country to make sure we fundamentally take care of one 

problem 30 or 40 years from now, that people that begin to 

retire and dip into their pensions, that they have enough money 

and that they’re able to live comfortably and secure after their 

many, many years of toil and labour. 

 

That is the premise of what we’re trying to do here, and this is 

the reason why we encourage people that have any comments 

out there to participate, give us advice, give us direction. And as 

the official opposition, we’ll certainly fight that fight for you. 

And we’ll continue pushing forward, if amendments are 

necessary, to make sure that this government follows through 

with what we think is important. And that is to do a first step 

with this program but look at how all the other pillars interact 

so that we’re able to really, really put our minds to work to fix 

the problem for many, many years and fix the problem that 

people are asking us when it comes to the overarching safety 

net programs that are out there. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 93. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 93, The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 89 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 89 — The 

Creative Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a 

great deal of interest that I rise to participate in the second 

reading debate on Bill No. 89, The Creative Saskatchewan Act. 

And in this bill, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got a pretty good 

metaphor for the way that this government does its business. 

Are there some good things that are attached to this piece of 

legislation in terms of monies that have been earmarked for 

supporting the creative industries? Well yes there are. Does it 

come forward in a time when this government is still presiding 

over the utter destruction of one part of that vital, creative sector 

in this province, the film industry, and the way that that industry 

and the people that have earned a living and told Saskatchewan 

stories, the way that they’re still coping with the decision that 

was made in last year’s budget? Well yes it does as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I guess the way that we see this piece of legislation coming 

forward, again, in terms of offering up support for 

commercializing and getting to market the tremendous creative 

content and experience that is out there in terms of music or 

publishing or crafts or visual arts, digital media, theatre, dance, 

again, Mr. Speaker, great. We’re glad to see this come forward. 

 

It’s interesting in the second reading speech of the minister in 

introducing this legislation, he talks about the other jurisdictions 

that have brought forward similar vehicles for their jurisdictions 

to help do the similar activity in their province. And again it’s 

great that Saskatchewan is trying to keep up with what is in one 

regard a best practice vehicle in terms of supporting the creative 

industries. 

 

But again it begs the fact that for whatever good is being done 

on this side of the ledger, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got the 

destruction that is not repaired, that is not made whole, that is 

not corrected in terms of the way that this government made a 

decision and dropped an anvil on the head of an entire industry 

in this province with last year’s budget. And the way that we 

now hear and we continue to hear stories about the way that that 

decision is causing an exodus of people that made a good living 

in Saskatchewan, that diversified the Saskatchewan economy, 

that told the Saskatchewan story with a lot of pride, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I have the great fortune of coming from a constituency 

where the creative sector is such a vibrant part of the 

constituency. Many people that earn their living through work 

in the creative industries — and certainly there were a lot of 

people that made a good living — added not just to the 

economic bottom line of this province through the film industry 

but added more to that cultural, that richness of, that quality of 

life that we should value as a people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I think of the people that have . . . They’ve had to 

find other means of employment or other provinces to move to, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think about the people that were attached to 

that, and I think about the companies that have left not just the 

province but left physically their previous offices in places like 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

And so in terms of that backdrop, Mr. Speaker, for something 

like this to come forward, it’s again hard to take this 

government seriously. And it’s hard to take them, even the good 

things that are contained in this legislation, at face value. You 

know, it wasn’t a few years ago that this government was 

tabling the cultural policy paper in this Assembly and the way 

that that upheld and embraced certain things like the film 

industry and the success that was being had and the support that 

was there by that government for the film industry — until it 

wasn’t, with last year’s budget. And the way that that indicates 

the way this government makes decisions is frankly alarming, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s also cautionary in terms of the 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3151 

amount of stock or the amount of reliance or trust that you can 

put in the actions of this government in terms of saying that 

something is important. 

 

So even the things that are said to be important by this piece of 

legislation, even the efforts that seem to have dollars attached to 

them, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be waiting and watching to see how 

those dollars actually flow and whether or not any of the hyped 

benefit is realized in terms of the piece of legislation under 

consideration here. 

 

And again one of the interesting features of this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is the very hands-on legislative 

authority that is granted to the minister in terms of directing the 

activities of Creative Saskatchewan. And again if that’s 

operating under a number of the normal sort of safeguards and 

evidence-based decision making and making sure you’ve got 

appropriate process, that would be one thing. 

 

But what we’ve seen from this government is the way that they 

didn’t go out and do the economic analysis of the decision to 

kill the film employment tax credit until after the decision had 

been made. And then it was more about an exercise in damage 

control and crafting the narrative to repair some of the damage 

that they’d done in a communications sense. But of course the 

economic analysis and the hard numbers upon which decisions 

of that importance should be made, they didn’t have them 

apparently before the decision was made. They went out and 

got them after. 

 

And it’s too bad that they didn’t get out and get them before 

because what the analysis came back and said was that the 

independent study that’s ultimately came to the light of day that 

was done by the chamber of commerce was that this was a 

valuable institution for the province, that it was an important 

support for an industry that added value to our economy, that 

added an enrichment to our cultural life in this province. It 

added vibrancy to the way that the Saskatchewan story got told. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we saw them do that not once but twice, you 

know, in terms of going out and shopping around for a report 

to, you know, try and massage the decision and to communicate 

the decision after it had been made. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, this government has shown itself to be 

interested in what a friend of mine likes to call opinion-based 

evidence making and that they come in after the decision is 

made. That they are that cavalier with the livelihoods of a lot of 

great Saskatchewan people, that they were that cavalier with the 

industry, and the damage that we’ve seen as a result is alarming, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again in terms of how this legislation plays out for the good 

or the bad or whatever, we’ll wait and see, but past is prologue, 

Mr. Speaker. And as we’ve seen this government approach the 

cultural sector before and seen them come with what seemed to 

be on the face of them good initiatives, and to see how they 

play out on the ground, and then to see the kind of wanton 

disregard or the hostility that was on display with the decision 

that was made around ending the film employment tax credit, 

it’s kind of hard to take anything else they do other than with a 

massive grain of salt, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And then again in terms of . . . Not content to have a bogus 

decision-making process such as that that kicked up the end of 

the film employment tax credit, this legislation enshrines the 

powers of the minister to direct the actions and activities of this 

entity being created under Bill 89. And you know, this is a 

minister who came to the file after the decision had been made 

but again carried the can for the decision and hasn’t displayed a 

whole lot in demonstrating that there have been lessons learned 

from how this happened and the damage that it caused to a lot 

of different people’s lives. 

 

And what we see instead, Mr. Speaker, is a continuation of this. 

You know, their opinions matter more than the evidence, 

ramming ahead and trying to curry favour with a select few 

instead of genuinely consulting and coming up with a paper that 

bears resemblance to what’s happening on the ground 

throughout the sector or with other industries. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, we saw how this happened a few years ago with the 

cultural policy paper and I think, you know, how that had one 

set of things that it stated and how we now see something else 

being practised. 

 

So as we look at the potential of this piece of legislation, the 

positive benefit that could be there in this legislation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, again we judge that against the actions of this 

government in the way that it has said one thing when it was on 

the hustings and looking for support and practised something 

very different when it came to the time to put the budget across. 

 

So does one potential good outweigh the demonstrable damage 

that this government has done to the cultural industries, Mr. 

Speaker? Well I don’t think so. And do people in the creative 

sector see these kind of efforts for what they are? Well I think a 

lot of folks do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, you know, are there some actual benefits in this, potential 

or otherwise? You know, that’s the hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

But it’s hard to keep that hope alive when you see, you know, 

time and time again — and particularly as relates to what 

happens in the cultural policy actions of this government, 

cultural policy choices of this government — see the way that 

the words and the hype never equal the action that is actually 

taken. So we’ll be looking very closely to see how this plays 

out, Mr. Speaker, but again in terms of it’s not just the tool or 

the vehicle; it’s the people operating it. 

 

And certainly this government has shown themselves to have 

some pretty interesting ideas when it comes to maintaining the 

well-being of the industry. So we’ll see if they . . . You know, 

I’m sure they’ll be rolling around the Junos and it’ll be 

reminiscent of how certain members of that government liked to 

roll around different film sets once upon a time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as people continue to leave this province, forced out by a 

decision of this government, as we continue to see the hype not 

being measured up to in terms of the action put forward by this 

government, again the minister can give all the fine speeches he 

wants. They can earmark the different resources that they want. 

But if it doesn’t translate into real action, if it doesn’t resonate 

with the way things are happening on the ground, then, Mr. 

Speaker, I think people will judge that for what it is. 

 

[15:15] 



3152 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

And I guess my hope, Mr. Speaker, is that some day the people 

that we have lost . . . And I’m speaking in this sense 

particularly: I think of families that have been affected by this 

in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, by companies that have been 

affected by this in Regina Elphinstone-Centre. The kind of 

damage that this has inflicted is very hard to repair, Mr. 

Speaker. And people, once they’ve been driven out, are hard to 

bring back. So it is my hope that some day we can repair the 

damage of this. But it’s not, lined up against the record of this 

government, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a very fervent hope. But I do 

hope that some day the creative sector will have people that are 

in government that genuinely listen, that work in that 

partnership. 

 

It’s interesting. Another measure in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 

was the Saskatchewan Arts Board. And again we just celebrated 

the 65th anniversary of the Saskatchewan Arts Board, one of 

the first of its kind in North America. And of course that was 

brought in in the late 1940s. It was brought in by the then 

Tommy Douglas Co-operative Commonwealth Federation 

government that I know certain members over there like to rail 

on against the perils of. But you didn’t hear any of that at the 

65th birthday party for the Saskatchewan Arts Board. 

 

And indeed that model has stood the test of time in the way that 

a government can work in partnership with artists and the arts 

industry to make for a better quality of life for artists and to 

make for that better quality of life for the rest of us in terms of 

making sure that that wonderful contribution that is made by 

artists is not equal to life in poverty. 

 

And so if we see . . . You know it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

there was an increase for the Arts Board in the budget, and 

again we’re glad to see that take place. But again it’s pretty 

plain that it happened against this backdrop of the destruction of 

the film industry in Saskatchewan and the way that entire 

industry and hundreds of people and millions of dollars of 

economic activity were sucker-punched by this government and 

the way that, you know, it’s hard to not connect the action of 

the one and the other and this being some kind of compensation 

and not support for these efforts in their own right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the . . . again, it’s that the minister 

would point to Ontario, with the Ontario Media Development 

Corporation a number of years ago, Manitoba having a similar 

corporation, British Columbia last fall expanding the mandate 

of the BC Film Commission, the province of Nova Scotia 

introducing legislation to form a similar agency. You know, 

again, these are great things and they’re best practised. 

 

But it begs the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of how 

does it come forward now and how is it able to take place in all 

these other provinces, Mr. Speaker, and they didn’t have to kill 

their film industry into the bargain? 

 

So again, if they want to point out the examples of other 

provinces, and if they want to claim some sort of relationship to 

best practice around supporting the creative industries, Mr. 

Speaker, maybe what they could do is tell the whole story in 

terms of what’s happening in those other jurisdictions instead of 

selectively picking and choosing things that support their 

narrative, which again, Mr. Speaker, tends to make you kind of 

suspect in terms of things that are hyped as good by this 

government only to see them play out as something other than 

down the line. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting piece of legislation 

and, as I say, we’ll be watching it very closely in terms of how 

it actually produces or plays out down the line and whether or 

not it lives up to whatever potential there is in this legislation, 

or whether or not it’s yet another misadventure by this 

government, damaging misadventure. You know, in some cases 

it is destructive misadventures that this government is engaged 

in when it comes to the approach they have to the cultural 

industry in this province. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 89, The Creative Saskatchewan Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 89, The 

Creative Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 75 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 75 — The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise and engage in yet another of the same, as I 

was saying yesterday, one of the tools in the tool kit that the 

ministry responsible for municipal relations . . . Government 

Relations, but Municipal Affairs has put it forward. And it is an 

interesting piece of legislation. And I’ve reviewed his 

comments, and I will take some time to talk about what his 

comments were. 

 

But I do want to make sure that I’ve also reviewed what our 

member from Athabasca was saying in response. And very 

thoughtful comments, because when we talk about the North, 

obviously there’s unique challenges and specific concerns that 

they have that, by distance, often we don’t appreciate. And I 

sure appreciate the comments that the member from Athabasca 

made because I think he was right on. He was spot-on in terms 

of the concerns. And I think these are the kind of things, when 

we talk about a growth strategy that this government is putting 

forward, was what does it mean for the residents, the residents 

of the North? Clearly the North is so important for our province 

and our provincial economy, particularly when it comes to 

forestry and to mining. 

 

But the folks in the North, we have to think about their own 

local economy and how they connect. And whether it’s through 

trapping or fishing, they have their special contributions that 

drive their local economy, but also drive and make significant 

contributions to our provincial economy. Not only . . . And I 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3153 

think about fishing was not only something for our province, 

but also for Canada. And the freshwater fish co-operation . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Best walleye in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes, best walleye in Saskatchewan. And so I 

think that this is an important, important area that we focus on. 

And I know when this goes forward to committee, there will be 

lots of questions from our colleagues in the North in terms of 

what it means. 

 

But you know, it is very interesting, it is very interesting how 

out of touch a government can be. And as I go through this it 

will become apparent. And I think this is interesting. And when 

we talk about in light of the other tools that the government is 

talking about, whether it’s growth around our cities, growth in 

specific RMs [rural municipality] and then what they talk about 

in the North . . . And he doesn’t really talk about the same sort 

of things happening in the North, which I find a little alarming. 

I find it’s unfortunate, because I think the North can be a strong 

contributor to our economy, and unfortunate this government 

hasn’t done the kind of things that it said it would when there 

were promises made particularly around highways, and they 

haven’t lived up to those promises. 

 

And clearly in other important . . . the responsibilities of 

government, I think about housing. The housing in the North. I 

know our member from La Ronge has raised this continually. 

The member from Athabasca has raised this continually as a 

significant trouble spot for northerners where they see in many 

ways the Minister of Social Services, through Sask Housing, in 

many ways just abandoning or walking away from their 

responsibilities. And I think that’s really alarming and we see 

that. 

 

For example, when the minister speaks and he talks about the 

purposes of the amendments, first they’ll support the 

government’s competitive and growth strategy, and you know, 

talking about business licence, the overweight vehicle . . . 

[inaudible] . . . boundary alteration, municipal procurement, and 

that’s a common theme through the whole set of pieces of 

legislation they have. 

 

But what they talk about second, they provide northern councils 

with great ability to deal with inactive municipal development 

corporations, clarify provisions regarding northern hamlet 

incorporation, and northern settlement dissolution. And this is 

the one that really set my colleague off when he was talking 

about, what does it mean in terms of northern settlement 

dissolution and what’s going to be happening there? 

 

We see a concern that this government is taking a much 

stronger aggressive role when it comes to municipalities, and 

while they talk a line about co-operation, we are concerned that, 

what does this mean? And quite often we see in the North, their 

settlements may be, may be small. It’s not something that 

necessarily is common in the South, but we have small 

communities and hamlets in our countryside here and we see 

that. It’s the matter of a fact and it has worked well. There are 

challenges though. Clearly there are challenges, but particularly 

when it comes to providing services that we have come to 

expect, particularly around waste water and water, making sure 

we have adequate safe drinking water. 

So there are challenges, but we find it interesting here that the 

government is focusing in on this. And I share with my 

colleague from Athabasca the concerns that he raises about how 

do we support northern growth, how do we support the 

development in the North in a smart, sustainable way that meets 

the needs of northerners, that has people coming back to live in 

the North or stay in the North. To stay in the North, I think this 

is an important challenge we have. 

 

And so we’re not seeing the kind of attention to that. And I 

think what’s happening is that, as my colleague talked about, 

there are many, many concerns. He’s been raising daily the 

issue around cellphone coverage in the North, how important 

that is, and that doesn’t seem to take any traction on the 

government side. They’re not paying any attention to that, and 

yet it’s so critical. It is absolutely critical that we have 

cellphone coverage in the North in areas that the member has 

been identifying. I think that’s important. 

 

Highways, highways are critical. Critical. Good, safe roads. 

You know, yesterday we heard unfortunately of about five 

young people who died in motor vehicle accidents at work . . . 

in fact actually there were 10, I understand. Five of the others 

would not be in the youth category. But this is significant. We 

have too many fatalities on our roads and way too many in the 

North. And it’s way too many right across the province but 

particularly in northern Saskatchewan. So when my colleague 

stands and talks about this, this is a critical, critical issue. 

 

And he talks about housing. I will keep coming back to that 

because that’s very important. So . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave 

for an introduction. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Greystone has asked for leave for an introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 

 

[15:30] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to point out an 

individual in your gallery. Waneek Horn-Miller is here. She’s a 

very, very accomplished Canadian. She was in 2000 the 

co-captain for the Canadian Olympic water polo team. She’s the 

sports ambassador for the Assembly of First Nations of Canada 

and has most recently been involved in a number of Me to We 

activities of the Kielburger family’s efforts to help make sure 

that we’re focusing on very positive and creative ways to 

engage our youth across the country. She took time out of her 

schedule during those events to engage a number of First 

Nations and Métis youth here within Saskatchewan. 

 

We’re delighted to have her back and we hope maybe for more 



3154 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

than a visit. Her husband, Keith, is just completing his work as 

a doctor. He’s looking for residency opportunities and one of 

the options that they’re exploring is right here through the 

University of Saskatchewan. And so to Waneek and to her 

family, I’ll ask all members to join me in welcoming this 

esteemed Canadian and someone we hope we can soon 

recognize as being present in her legislature. Thanks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, to join with the member opposite, it’s my honour 

to welcome Waneek Horn-Miller to her Legislative Assembly. 

And certainly she is an inspiration to so many Canadians, and 

certainly to so many Saskatchewan people and young people for 

whom she’s taken some time to be here today. I looked up in 

the benches there, looking up into your Chamber, and I thought 

that was maybe who that was. And it was nice to see the 

member opposite recognize this inspirational leader to so many. 

 

And now learning that her husband is looking for a residency, I 

do hope that Saskatchewan is lucky to have the two of them 

build their lives here. And we’ll recognize that certainly down 

here in Regina is where we certainly can utilize some doctors’ 

services. And all I’d like to say is, on behalf of the Legislative 

Assembly, welcome to your Assembly. Thank you so much for 

the leadership you provide to many. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

too would join in welcoming Ms. Miller here to the legislature. 

Always great to have guests and visitors to our House. 

 

But as I was saying, that as we look through this northern 

municipalities amendment Act and the idea, the intention of this 

is to prepare municipalities for growth. And we’ve seen one for 

the municipalities; we’ve seen a tool, the legislation for the 

cities. So we have a lot of questions about this one in terms of 

what does it mean for northern Saskatchewan in terms of 

meeting their needs. 

 

And as I’ve said earlier, the member from Athabasca 

highlighted several concerns, whether they be roads or cell 

coverage or whether it be housing, and we can go on, whether 

health care and even recreation and that type of thing that we 

would see and the ability to do work that is indigenous to their 

communities. And we’ve seen a lack of support around fishing, 

commercial fishing or trapping and that type of thing. And so 

we have some real concerns about the backstory to this actually, 

and we have to talk more about that. 

 

And so it talks about that whole issue, about dissolution and 

that type of thing, and then also about wording and 

administrative matters, and that’s straightforward. But the other 

part that . . . And this is one that again we sure do rely heavily 

and we appreciate the guidance of our northern members. But 

when we talk about intermunicipal agreements and 

arrangements, and whether that be the New West Partnership or 

Agreement on Internal Trade, and what does this mean in terms 

of northern communities? And I think that, as he was saying, 

what is the impact on having to, when you have smaller 

municipalities with smaller budgets, what’s the impact of 

having to do these kind of procurement arrangements, where 

you have to offer either a Canadian or a Western Canadian 

tender, where you might just be able to be more effective to be 

doing it locally or in Prince Albert or Saskatoon? 

 

And so there are some real concerns, real concerns about what 

does this really mean. And so I think that this is one that — as I 

said, we’ll have lots of questions in committee — but it is one 

that we just have to make sure that we do the right thing here. 

And of course in all of these we have to do the right thing 

because clearly there are unique challenges, unique needs as we 

go through this growth process. And this is a good thing, good 

to be growing. We’re all on board with that. But we’ve got to 

do it in an intelligent way. We have to have smart growth, 

sustainable growth, and particularly when we see in the North 

the challenges to uncontrolled growth if it’s not done well. 

 

There are challenges in the North that we have to make sure our 

regulations stay strong or even stronger. And I’m talking about 

in terms of forestry. Forestry in the North is incredible. We 

have the wonderful lakes, and we see the challenges in terms of 

new industry, particularly on the Alberta side. What’s the 

impact on the Saskatchewan side? We have to be strong on that. 

And what do these agreements mean for that? What do the 

agreements mean for that? And so these are the kind of 

challenges. And I just think that when we have the opportunity 

to do the right thing, this is one of those things that actually I 

think do cross party lines. And I hope the government does rely 

on all advice and think about the implications and the 

unintended consequences if we don’t think this all the way 

through and think about the long-term needs of our northern 

Saskatchewan residents and make sure that they’re supported. 

 

Resources are a challenge. Financial resources are a challenge 

because there is a bit of a line that you hit where it just costs the 

same. And so if you’re going to involve auditors, if you’re 

going to involve certain consultants, then it’s a significant cost. 

So we have to make sure we do what we can to support 

northern communities. And we also have to appreciate the 

distance issues that they face, and make sure that when this 

province grows that everyone feels the benefit and everyone’s 

coming along, and whether you’re a child in a school in 

southern Saskatchewan or a child in a school in northern 

Saskatchewan, you are supported, that you are supported. And 

your unique challenges that you have are brought into 

consideration and your own special background. This is 

something that is very important. 

 

And so I think that we need to think this through. This is very, 

very, important. I know that these members on our side will be 

watching this very closely, particularly the northern members 

from Cumberland and from Athabasca. And it’s interesting 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3155 

because their ridings are so huge, and we know that in rural 

Saskatchewan ridings are huge. And as I have remarked in this 

House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I fortunately come from one of 

the, I think maybe the smallest riding in the province. I have a 

lot of appreciation for the folks who work in rural 

Saskatchewan, but particularly the North. When we think about 

the member from Athabasca and the time he takes to come 

down to Regina every week, it is a significant, significant drive. 

But it is for many people in this House. But I have to say I think 

that he gets to ride over more highway miles than anyone in this 

riding. So when he talks about good highways, he certainly has 

some experience and he knows exactly what’s going on. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that when we talk about the 

growth, and we have . . . And I have interestingly over the last 

two or three days I think I’ve spoken on every one of bills that 

the Minister of Government Relations is bringing forward. And 

he has talked about the unique challenges. But perhaps this one 

is more important than the others only because there is more 

vulnerability in doing something not quite right and the fact that 

there is such a distance and the fact that some of these villages 

and hamlets and settlements are so small that we don’t hear 

their voice. And they don’t have the opportunity to come down 

and make a presentation or present a petition, that they do feel 

isolated. 

 

And I think of the folks from Wollaston Lake who actually 

made the trip down here and made their case about their roads. 

That was not an easy thing. They’re not driving in from Moose 

Jaw, or they’re not driving in from Saskatoon. Clearly, clearly 

it’s an issue and one if they could make that kind of 

commitment to bring their concerns to this House, then it’s 

important. And I know that the member from Athabasca, when 

we do have delegations from the North, he makes a point of 

welcoming them in their own language but also saying, be 

clear, this is their House. This is their place. And while they 

may lack the finesse of others who come here so often to do 

lobbying, we need to hear their voices. 

 

And so again in summary, that I want to reflect on what the 

member has said, that we think in a positive way towards the 

North, that we think about them in terms of growth and maybe a 

different type of growth. It may not be the kind of explosive 

residential growth that we see on the edge of our cities. But we 

need to plan for the kind of growth that’s environmentally 

sustainable because they live in a place that really wears a lot of 

our environmental degradation, and it’s in places that we don’t 

get to see but they get to feel every day. And this is huge. 

 

But they want to be part of that. They want to be part of the 

mining that’s going on in the North. They want to be part of the 

forestry. They want to be part of the fishing, the trapping, the 

health care, the education, all of that. And they just want decent 

housing and they just want decent roads. They want decent 

schools, like we all want decent things. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I’m ready. I think I’m ready 

to move on to the next step. And I’m waiting for . . . I think I’m 

ready for the next step, and so I’m waiting to move this to 

adjournment. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I believe I heard the member from 

Saskatoon Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 75, 

The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 90 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 90 — The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 90, An Act to amend The 

Planning and Development Act, 2007. And, Mr. Speaker, as 

I’ve commented on a number of bills this session, there’s 

usually a fair bit of politics involved in the naming of the 

legislation. And this one looks like it doesn’t have politics 

involved, but I think it actually has lots of politics involved 

because I think the real name for this piece of legislation is an 

Act to amend the planning and development Act, 2007 to allow 

for rural amalgamation to implement the government’s growth 

plan. 

 

Because when we look very carefully at what the minister said 

when he introduced this legislation, he said that there is a 

concern by members in the government that there’s not 

necessarily total agreement between RMs and cities or RMs and 

towns as they make plans for economic development in their 

region. And what this legislation does, it allows for the minister 

to override the city government and the rural municipality 

government to establish a regional planning authority to deal 

with specific issues. 

 

Now the reason I bring this up right at the beginning of my 

remarks is that we don’t see in the remarks from the minister or 

from the information that has been provided around the 

introduction of this bill that there has been any consultation or 

even a little consultation with the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities or with the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association. Because I think that there’s a 

concern by both of those groups in various ways around what is 

actually intended with this legislation. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the powers that are given in this 

legislation do allow for a total planning structure or regional 

structure for the province but for it to be done in a sort of 

piecemeal or a I suppose like a crazy quilt kind of pattern where 

they do different things in different areas. So that’s what’s in 

here. And I say that because when you look at different sections 

in the legislation, it’s very clear that the minister is given the 

power to take over local government. And I think that obviously 

there would be a fair bit of reaction to that but here in the 

legislation, that power is there. 

 

Now let’s compare what’s happened in Alberta. Alberta went 



3156 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

ahead with a plan like this for the whole province which 

allowed for regional planning and development and setting out 

rules, and clearly it caused quite a political discussion in 

Alberta. But at least it was a plan that covered all corners of the 

province, and it did it in a way that there would be public 

discussion about that. 

 

But here in Saskatchewan, we have something which has 

arrived as Bill No. 90 in this legislature — it’s pretty late in the 

session — and it doesn’t appear that there’s been consultation 

around its development. So it raises the question, why is this 

bill here? Well it could be that this relates to the Minister of the 

Economy and his frustration around some of the events that 

happened between the Global Transportation Hub, the RM of 

Sherwood, and the city of Regina. It could be that some of the 

confusion that arose there related to the Kal Tire proposal 

forced the Minister of the Economy, but also other ministers 

that were involved in that particular issue, to look at what kind 

of powers the province actually has or more importantly doesn’t 

have right now to step in and impose their perspective on what 

was going to happen. 

 

And so I’m not totally certain whether that’s the main trigger, 

but I think there also have been disputes around many of the 

cities of Saskatchewan that relate to the growth of the 

community. 

 

And so the question becomes, how do you plan for that growth? 

How do you do it in a way that includes everybody rather than 

having an imposed solution that probably . . . Well we don’t 

actually know where it comes from other than it comes from the 

minister. So when you look at the minister’s remarks in his 

second reading speech as he introduced this legislation, it’s 

clear that there’s concern about the issues that have arisen. 

 

So maybe the trigger was some of the issues around the city of 

Yorkton. We know that there’ve been some tensions there. 

There’s been tensions around I think both Estevan and Weyburn 

as the development is there. There’s clearly tensions around 

Saskatoon. I know that when we’ve looked at other legislation 

that’s proceeding in this session, and primarily I think it relates 

to The Municipalities Act and the rural municipalities Act, there 

are similar kinds of adjustments that are being made. But 

clearly what was introduced there didn’t go far enough for the 

minister or for the Premier and the government, and so they’ve 

brought forward this Bill No. 90 which adds that little last 

draconian touch that says, well we’d like an agreement in your 

neighbourhood on how to put together an economic plan, a 

regional plan, but if you can’t get it together in the short 

timelines that we have for you, we have a solution here. We’ll 

just deliver it, and it will do it under this new legislation. 

 

So it’s an interesting way to govern. It’s not necessarily the way 

that we’ve traditionally developed local government legislation 

in Saskatchewan. It’s one that we’ve already been receiving 

calls over the last couple of days about because nobody really 

knows what its intended purpose is. And so I think that when 

we look at the legislation, we need to be very careful about 

what is actually being proposed. 

 

And so what we have is a creation of a regional planning 

authority which effectively takes over the power of the region 

that’s designated and effectively gives that power to a new 

authority where the members of the authority are appointed by 

the minister. And it also then basically gives the minister the 

ability to create a budget for this regional planning authority, 

put in half the money, and force all the local municipalities — 

the urban municipalities or rural municipalities — to pay the 

other half of whatever budget they set up. 

 

And you know, it’s an interesting perspective. It’s an interesting 

way to deal with particular issues, but it’s not one that’s built on 

a consensus or consultation or on a discussion with a whole 

number of the participants that are there. And so I think, you 

know, we will need to ask some more questions about this. 

We’ll need to talk to various groups that are affected by this 

legislation. We’ll need to understand whose idea this legislation 

is or was and get a sense of what the purpose of the legislation 

is going to be. 

 

I think that one of the clear factors or one of the clear issues . . . 

Well there’s two or three clear issues that need to be resolved 

before the legislation proceeds. One of them relates to the 

environmental issues that might affect an area — in other 

words, some of the protections that are there and how that will 

be developed. Another relates to taxation and how revenues 

might be shared or not shared. Or what’s the plan in that area? 

And clearly who pays for the infrastructure that may be needed 

when it is basically going through a whole number of urban and 

rural municipalities? 

 

And so I think there are words here that try to describe some of 

those things, but how this will actually work appears to be that 

there will be a ministerial fiat or a Premier’s order in council 

kind of fiat that says, this is what we’re going to do, and then 

everybody else will have to contribute to that. That’s not 

normally the way we work in this type of legislation, and so I 

think it raises a number of flags for people right across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are concerns here about this rural 

amalgamation legislation that has much broader implications 

than has been identified by the minister or by any of the 

accompanying information to this legislation. It’s come into this 

legislature quite late in the session, and it appears there’s some 

urgency to get this one moving along. That raises red flags for 

all of us on this side of the House. I’m sure it probably raises 

red flags for many of the caucus members on the government 

side because usually there should be a longer process when 

you’re making this big a change to what happens in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I know a number of my colleagues want to comment on 

this, and we’re receiving communications from various people 

across the province, which we will want to place into the 

discussion. And so with that, I will move to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 90, The Planning and 

Development Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3157 

Bill No. 76 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 76 — The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into debate as it relates to Bill No. 76, The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012. I’ll review some of the 

statements that have been made by the minister as it relates to 

the intentions of this bill, make some comments as it relates to 

those statements of the minister and as it relates to this bill. 

 

Certainly we’ll be seeking further consultation with sector 

stakeholders to ensure that they’ve been fully consulted in this 

process and to ensure that their views are included in this 

discussion and make sure that we as the opposition, along with 

government, fully understand all of the impact, all the 

consequences, intended or unintended, on the sector and on 

partners. 

 

This bill in general sets out a change process for the boundary 

alteration process or annexation processes. Any change of this 

nature we’re going to evaluate through a lens of ensuring 

fairness and effectiveness of those processes. 

 

Of course the vast majority of these processes are resolved 

between the parties without any other body entering into those 

discussions. But at times there is another body that enters into 

those discussions to assist with that process, that being the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board, and certainly recognizing that 

these, at times, stalemated discussions or processes are sensitive 

matters, and there’s a lot of care, a lot of concern. You’re 

dealing with land that in many cases is long-standing and has 

played a significant role to rural municipalities. And as well we 

have the circumstance of growing urban centres that we need to 

make sure that are able to grow in a responsible way, and in a 

responsible way though that’s transparent and respectful of their 

rural partners. 

 

So as we go through the consultation on this piece of 

legislation, we’ll be doing full consultation and inviting 

comments and analysis and perspectives from both the urban 

municipalities through SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] but as well our rural municipalities 

through SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities].  

 

As well we’ll be understanding the impact on the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board. Certainly the Municipal Board plays an 

important role in our province in providing a role where it can 

adjudicate circumstances. It plays a role where it can review 

and can make decisions of a judicial nature. And that certainly 

is important to all communities, all partners, to make sure we’re 

supporting that Municipal Board, to make sure they can be as 

strong and effective as they can be. 

 

I’d certainly at this point in time provide thanks to the members 

of that board and those that have served previously for the 

service they provide to our province. And I know they 

recognize the sensitivity to the disputes that they are sometimes 

asked to enter into, and I know that they understand the 

importance of fair processes for all parties. And certainly that 

needs to be the case when we’re dealing with our 

municipalities. 

 

When I look at some of the changes that are brought forward 

here, I see a few different areas. I see some changes just to the 

Municipal Board itself, where there’s changed provisions to 

allow membership of that board to be larger I guess, Mr. 

Speaker. And I believe this speaks to, as the minister said, a 

need to have a level of flexibility to that board to deal with 

cases where there may be . . . where a member may be a party 

to the affected party in that application or where that member’s 

municipality might be impacted. So certainly if that is a 

successful way of ensuring no concern over conflicts of interest, 

that’s something we would be supportive of. 

 

[16:00] 

 

As well this brings around some accommodations as it relates to 

the ability for members of the Municipal Board to do so I 

believe in a more casual or part-time nature, enabling them to 

serve the board. What we’ll be seeking from the minister in the 

days and weeks ahead, and certainly from the sector, is just to 

ensure that those members are of the same qualifications of the 

full-time members of that board. Certainly that’s important. In 

many cases these are very experienced, very senior individuals 

with a high level of expertise and a high level of integrity in 

their service to the province of Saskatchewan. We want to 

ensure that the changes that are being made here certainly don’t 

hinder or reduce those qualifications that have I believe served 

this board well and the people of Saskatchewan well. 

 

We also recognize there’s been some changes as it relates to the 

pension plans to make sure I believe that if an individual is 

recruited to serve within that board, that there’s better 

portability of pensions, better continuance of pension benefits, 

and ensuring that in the demanding role that it is to serve on the 

Municipal Board and to fulfill service for the Municipal Board, 

that they’re able to recruit and retain individuals with the skill 

sets and education and experience that’s required to do so. And 

I believe what I’ve read here, that this is a tool to allow 

individuals who have possibly long histories in local 

governments to be able to effectively take on that role with the 

Municipal Board and not be penalized by way of their pension 

circumstances, their income security. And certainly I’ll be 

following up with the minister to ensure clarity as to what those 

specific changes are and what those impacts are. 

 

I look at a few of the other changes that are being put forward. 

This changes some of the process around the SMB, the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board’s processes and abilities as it 

relates to the municipal boundary alterations, and this is 

particularly important for those circumstances. And like I say, 

they’re rather rare circumstances but they do occur, where 

communities, rural municipalities and their neighbouring urban 

municipality, can’t reach an agreement — or any municipalities 

that are dealing with the circumstance of boundaries and 

annexation. 

 

So this allows some changes as it relates to making sure I guess 



3158 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

that that process is as effective as it can be. We’ll be analyzing 

to ensure that’s just the case. But we’ll be really analyzing this 

to make sure that it’s a fair process, to make sure that this isn’t a 

heavy hammer of government, that it’s a fair process for both 

parties, that it’s not tilted in favour of one type of municipality 

or another. And those will be the kinds of considerations we’ll 

be taking as we move forward. 

 

I believe this bill also, as I say, makes some changes to allow 

. . . to pension plans and for part-time members to ensure that 

the Municipal Board has the capacity that it requires to fulfill 

the duties that it needs to to the people of the province. And it 

also brings around some clarity around wording, some, if you’ll 

say, modernization, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the minister suggested that it’s been broad-based 

consultation on this front with municipalities and with the 

Municipal Board. That’s important. We’ll certainly be ensuring 

that that’s the case. We’ve unfortunately heard that before from 

this government, Mr. Speaker, where they’ve suggested that 

they’ve consulted, and we’ve realized afterwards through 

consultation or from parties stepping forward or stakeholders 

stepping forward that that hasn’t been the case. 

 

But it’s essential to make sure that those that are impacted, in 

this case the rural municipalities, the urban municipalities, have 

been very thoughtfully consulted on this process to make sure 

that their perspectives, their understandings of the impacts are 

well understood and reflected back into the changes by way of 

this legislation because, as I say, when these matters do become 

a dispute, and a dispute that needs to be dealt with by the 

Municipal Board, at that point in time these are very sensitive 

matters and require the most thoughtful and fair process that we 

can avail to these communities. 

 

I also recognize that this bill I guess brings different changes to 

allow the Municipal Board’s secretary to ensure by way of that 

process that they’re reviewing the applications of the 

municipalities for completeness before they come before the 

process of the Municipal Board. And the minister suggests that 

this will allow effective and timely consideration of the 

applications, and that seems to make sense, Mr. Speaker. I 

suspect that the change is coming because there may have been 

incomplete packages that were coming before board processes, 

and then the members of the board were there to be engaged 

and those resources were availed. And likely at that point if 

those applications weren’t complete, that process maybe was 

then delayed to a later time. And certainly that doesn’t seem to 

be the most efficient or effective use of the resources of the 

Municipal Board or that of the municipalities, the parties that 

are involved in the dispute. 

 

So as the minister has referenced that this should speed up the 

process, we’re all for speeding up that process, as long as it’s 

ensuring the preservation of fairness through that process and 

levers for municipalities and parties that are impacted to make 

sure that their voice, their case, their concerns, their analysis, 

their perspective can be heard. 

 

Another aspect of this bill is to urge . . . I guess even more than 

urging, to require, if I’m reading the minister’s statements 

correctly, require mediation to settle the dispute prior to 

engagement with the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. And that 

seems to be . . . And I’m just trying to make sure I understand 

whether this is voluntary by way of mediation or whether this is 

simply recommended. It seems to me that that’s now a firm part 

of the process put forward by the changes to the Act, that 

mediation must be engaged in prior to entering into processes 

with the Municipal Board. I suspect the government’s hopeful 

that a voluntary settlement can be achieved through a mediator 

as opposed to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board in the end 

making a decision and possibly imposing a decision on parties. 

And at first blush that seems to make some sense. 

 

That being said, the way to know that best is by listening to 

those parties that are impacted, those that are on the ground in 

the communities across Saskatchewan that are dealing with 

annexation, that have gone through these processes, and making 

sure that there’s not any unintended consequences to the 

changes that have been put forward here today. But certainly 

the prospect of voluntary settlement and through a mediation 

process seems to be preferable to that of one being imposed by 

the Municipal Board or any other authority, for that matter. 

 

I also understand that this bill brings forward changes that allow 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board to break apart some of the 

disputes and the applications and to piece those apart and to 

make decisions and adjudicate on specific pieces, which is 

suggested by the minister to allow this then, these decisions to 

not simply be an all-or-nothing decision, but to allow some 

agreement to be formed or some statements to be made as it 

relates to parts of the dispute or parts of the applications, which 

then may aid the settlement and possible voluntary settlement, I 

would suspect then, of other aspects of those processes. It may 

allow a better circumstance for compromise. And certainly 

again this seems to make sense, but we need to make sure that 

those that are impacted, our rural municipalities that provide 

such a great service all across our province or urban 

municipalities that provide such a valuable role to the people of 

this province, that they’ve been consulted, that they’ve been 

listened to, and that their voices have been built into this 

legislation. 

 

Far too often we have legislation show up in this Assembly by 

that government, legislation that’s come without listening to the 

public, or they’ve listened to only some sometimes, Mr. 

Speaker, those that may have a close relationship to that 

government as opposed to everyone. And certainly we’ll be 

looking at this from a very even-handed perspective and making 

sure that this is fair to all stakeholders and that a fair process is 

availed to those parties. 

 

And I’ve highlighted some of the other changes as it relates to 

membership and those that are able to serve the Municipal 

Board. Again those individuals fulfill a very important role to 

the people of Saskatchewan. They’re dealing with very delicate, 

sensitive matters, issues that can sometimes be, that can 

heighten . . . The debate can be heightened at times and the 

stress level can be high, and we really do need to make sure that 

we’re supporting the capacity of that Municipal Board to be as 

strong and as effective as it can be. And if some of the changes 

that are put forward here allow that Municipal Board to be 

supported, for that capacity to be in place, then that’s certainly a 

good thing. 

 

Looking at one of the changes that certainly we’ll be seeking 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3159 

clarity from the minister, it’s just a statement here as it relates to 

the Gazette, of course being a publication and a requirement of 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. There’s changes that are 

being made. They’re changing that that Gazette need only be 

published once a year as opposed to twice a year as has been 

historical practice. The minister is suggesting that this is 

consistent with other Acts, and that may be true. We’ll certainly 

ensure we understand the nature of this change, the impact of 

the change. 

 

But it also changes and removes references to repealed 

legislation as well as discontinued board functions. And I would 

ask the minister opposite who hasn’t clarified this at all in his 

statements, why he’s making those changes and what’s caused 

the decision to repeal that sharing of information with 

Saskatchewan people as it relates to repealed legislation or 

discontinued board functions. And I’ll make sure as well that 

we understand what the potential impacts are on the partners 

within the sector, the municipalities across our rural and urban 

communities, making sure that we’re not depriving valuable 

information that’s being utilized to those municipalities. So I 

have more questions than answers as it relates to the removal of 

references to repealed legislation and discontinued board 

functions. I will be seeking answers from the minister in the 

course of processes ahead such as committee. 

 

The minister goes on to close his statements with some 

discussion around consultation. As I say, that’s essentially so 

important here. We’ll be ensuring that that has occurred and 

that the voices, the analysis, the perspective of those on the 

ground that are dealing with these realities has been listened to, 

has been heard, and is built in and reflected in this legislation. 

 

Far too often that government has selective hearing, only hears 

from one side of the debate, Mr. Speaker, often those that are 

just closest to this government. That’s not how good 

government should work. The government of course should be 

listening to all parties, making decisions in the best interests of 

all, Mr. Speaker. And certainly we’ll be making sure that this 

legislation reflects that sort of process. And it’s certainly my 

express hope that that’s the case. 

 

We have certainly more questions as we move forward. I know 

some of the changes to the municipal board have been 

suggested to provide flexibility and expediency. That’s good 

but not to forsake any level of fairness and effectiveness of 

those processes for those hard-working councils of our rural 

municipalities or urban municipalities across Saskatchewan. 

 

Recognizing the importance of the Municipal Board, we’ll 

certainly be making sure we’re ensuring that this does in fact 

strengthen the capacity and ensure that level of fairness back to 

our municipalities, and that we’re strengthening both the 

capacity of the Municipal Board but also the effectiveness of 

processes for annexation. And of course in a growing province, 

annexation and boundary alteration processes are a reality that 

many communities are facing. And we need to make sure that 

as those communities enter into those processes, that those 

processes are processes they can trust and that they can enter 

into with good faith, recognizing, as I say, the sensitivity to 

these decisions, and recognizing the fact that I think is very 

important is that the vast majority of these processes are 

resolved in a co-operative fashion between the parties. But for 

those circumstances where they’re not — I believe the minister 

stated that about 12 per cent aren’t resolved in that co-operative 

fashion and were requiring a decision and an engagement with 

the Municipal Board — we want to make sure that that process 

is as respectful and fair as it can be to all parties. 

 

Those will be our interests, making sure that we’re building 

legislation that serves today and serves the next generation here 

in our province, Mr. Speaker. But at this point in time, I’ve 

certainly exhausted the comments I’ll place on the floor of this 

Assembly. I certainly do have more questions for committee as 

it relates to Bill No. 76, The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 

2012. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 76 . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Oh, committee? Oh, sorry. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 

76, The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I designate that this bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 77 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 

Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it’s certainly my honour to rise today to join in the debate 

on Bill No. 77, which is The Horse Racing Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012. And for such a tiny bill, it’s really 

interesting to see the impact that this has had on some of the 

people in Saskatchewan who’ve been engaged in the horse 

racing industry for over 100 years now. 



3160 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

And I think it’s a bit of a mystery actually why the government 

is proceeding in the fashion it has chosen in this particular 

instance because its decisions have effectively destroyed the 

harness racing industry here in Saskatchewan. It’s finished. And 

I’ll explain why that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the next few 

minutes as I enter into the debate on this bill. 

 

Just in terms of the nuts and bolts of the legislation itself, The 

Horse Racing Regulation Act is a very short bill. It was six 

sections long. And basically it had restrictions on how often 

races could be held and that is in consultation with the 

government, and that one track is allowed in a municipality, 

which is an interesting provision from days past, I believe. But 

section 3 of the existing Act says: 

 

In any city, town, village or rural municipality, horse-race 

meetings or horse-racing may be held at one but not more 

than one race-course or track in each calendar year. 

 

So that’s interesting that a municipality has been limited to 

having only one racetrack, and who knows what the impetus for 

that was? But in reality there’s only about four active racetracks 

in Saskatchewan entirely in the province so obviously that 

hasn’t been an issue and that may be something that’s revisited 

in the future. 

 

The fourth clause sets out the intervals between meetings so it 

tells how often races can be held, and it says that: 

 

. . . no horse-race meeting shall be opened or conducted 

upon a race-course or track within ten days of the 

conclusion of another horse-race meeting or horse-racing 

upon that race-course or track. 

 

So there has to be at least 10 days in between these sessions and 

the Liquor and Gaming Authority is responsible under The 

Alcohol and Gaming Act to set the dates for those meets or 

horse races. 

 

And then finally there’s a penalty clause in section 5, and 

section 6 is the one of most importance in terms of the 

amendments that are being presented in Bill 77. And section 6 

sets out the tax that’s being currently levied upon the 

parimutuel bets. So these are for every bet that’s laid on the 

horse race, there is a tax currently that’s collected. And the 

entire purpose of this bill is to repeal that portion of the Act. So 

I’ll just get into that a little bit now. 

 

The Bill 77 again is also quite a short bill, as I indicated earlier, 

and the changes that are being made is the first substantial and 

the main substantive clause is to repeal the section 6 of The 

Horse Racing Regulation Act which is the parimutuel section, 

the tax on parimutuel betting that I referred to a minute ago. 

 

There is a couple of other consequential amendments that are 

required in order to make the repeal of section 6 valid and that 

deals with some sections of The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act which outlines all the taxes that are in the 

province. So in section 47(1) of that Act there’s a reference to 

the tax on parimutuel betting. That’s repealed and there’s also 

part V of The Revenue Collection Administration Regulations. 

So these are the regulations under that Act which dealt 

specifically with the parimutuel betting, and that whole section 

is being repealed as well. 

 

So it seems pretty simple, doesn’t it? Change, repeal one 

section of an Act. No more taxes on parimutuel betting. Well 

the story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, goes much, much farther than 

that. 

 

In terms of the balance for the horse racing industry in 

Saskatchewan, what has been happening by agreement with the 

government is that the tax, the parimutuel tax, was then 

returned to the industry. The government collected the tax 

through the operators. They collect the tax, remit it to the 

government, and then that money was being refunded back to 

the industry as a whole in the form of a grant. 

 

So what this has essentially done is it’s kind of an in-and-out 

and so it basically nets itself out. That makes sense and 

certainly the minister in her comments when she introduced the 

bill alluded to that. Because she said that this announcement 

was made in October of 2012, and so on November 26 she 

introduced the bill and they announced they would eliminate the 

parimutuel tax that was being collected for horse race betting. 

And what she indicated was that the 10 per cent tax was applied 

to wagers both on live horse racing and in teletheatres outside 

of the province. And then the operators had to collect and remit 

the tax and then it was returned to the industry in the form of 

grants, as I indicated. And she indicated the total in 2011 in tax 

was about $850,000 which was returned to the industry. So that 

makes sense. 

 

Then the minister indicated she was approached by the industry 

itself and asked to have the parimutuel tax repealed. The 

government considered the arguments and now acted on that 

consultation. So she described it as a win-win for both the 

government and the horse racing industry. By eliminating the 

tax it allows the industry to determine how to use those funds 

themselves rather than coming from the government in the form 

of a grant. 

 

I think the good news actually stops there though, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And if you look at the impact of the policy decisions 

around this you will see that there is another piece to the puzzle 

which is important, and particularly to harness racing or the 

standardbred racing here in Saskatchewan. And there was a 

presentation that the association put together which I am able to 

refer to today and what they indicate is that the 100 years 

history of the Standardbred Horsemen’s Association is in 

jeopardy. And in fact, this is bearing out to be true. These 

concerns were very, very strong at the time that the minister 

introduced the bill because there’s certain policy pieces that 

have to go along with the bill in order for this industry to 

survive. 

 

So it’s important to understand that in the horse racing industry 

in Saskatchewan, there’s two types. There is the thoroughbred 

racing which generally takes place at Marquis Downs in 

Saskatoon. And I actually spent a couple of summers working 

in there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and certainly know the 

excitement and fun of the racetrack and the thoroughbreds and 

when you hear the announcer say, and they’re off. And the 

excitement raises, and then the race is over and people have 

something to drink and some popcorn, and a nice sunny 

summer night. It’s a great way to spend an evening with friends. 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3161 

Standardbred racing of course is more the . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes there’s West Meadows in Regina and 

there’s one in Yorkton, I believe, and one other area that I’m 

forgetting right now. I think Davidson has some. And this is the 

harness racing, which is a completely different form of racing, 

but it’s still exciting and a whole lot of fun. And the industry is 

saying, let’s keep both of these going. Let’s keep both the 

thoroughbred going and the standardbred going. 

 

So we know in 2012 the government announced that the 

funding was going to end; the grant money was going to end. 

And that would have been the end for harness racing. But then 

the parimutuel tax was eliminated, announced in October. Now 

as the industry points out, this is only good for the thoroughbred 

industry at Prairieland Park. 

 

You can ask yourself, well why is it only good for 

thoroughbreds? What’s the difference? The key, Mr. Speaker, 

to this legislation is the notion of something called home market 

areas. So HMA is a home market area. And what that does is it 

gives the ability for . . . This is established by the Canadian 

Pari-Mutuel Agency and what the home market area does is 

protects the area, the home market area where the racetrack is 

funding live racing. 

 

So in Saskatchewan you would think, well we would have a 

home market area for each one of our tracks where there’s live 

horse racing. Curiously, the only home market area that exists 

right now is for the thoroughbred racing at Prairieland Park in 

Saskatoon. Their home market area happens to be the entire 

province of Saskatchewan. So that’s the key to the problems 

facing the standardbred racing industry right now here in 

Saskatchewan, is this home market area is extended to the entire 

province for the thoroughbred portion or the thoroughbred 

portion of the industry. 

 

So it’s going to have a serious, serious impact on all the other 

raceways, including West Meadows here in Regina. And 

certainly I think if you’ve had the opportunity to speak to any 

standardbred racers, it’s going to have a really serious impact 

on that industry. 

 

What the industry proposed when the minister made the 

announcement was that you just draw a line at Davidson and 

you give the home market area for thoroughbred racing to the 

northern part of the province and the standardbred racing could 

have the home market area licence on the southern part of the 

province. So that was the plea, the urgent plea that was made to 

the minister by the standardbred racing association. 

 

So let’s fast-forward a little bit here. The bill was introduced in 

November. And then the folks from the standardbred racing 

started . . . Standardbred Horsemen’s Association started to 

lobby the government for this distinction in the home market 

area. 

 

We have a report here from last year. It’s an article by a fellow 

named Calvin Daniels who’s the assistant editor with Yorkton 

This Week, and he has some very serious concerns about this 

government’s decision. And I’m just going to quote from one of 

the articles that I found on the Internet. He said he wanted to 

see a more united front in the lobby to save horse racing. And 

he said: 

When you think about what racing means locally, it was 

[really] encouraging to see fans [from Yorkton] rally with 

a good crowd at the final day of racing . . . at Cornerstone 

Raceway in Yorkton [for the season]. The Yorkton 

Exhibition Association had been calling for a big crowd 

as a way to send a message to Wall and company [that’s 

Premier Wall] that people here want racing to continue. 

 

Unfortunately, some key local people who should have 

been out on the last day of racing to show their public 

support were not there. 

 

The list included the mayor and council. The city owns 

the barns and grandstand utilized by the racers, and as a 

group, council should see the positives that racing brings 

to Yorkton. 

 

Ditto the Yorkton Chamber of Commerce that should 

understand the flow of money through local restaurants, 

hotels, gas stations and other businesses. But the president 

was not present, nor . . . any visible representation . . . 

 

He goes on to indicate that Tourism Yorkton wasn’t there 

either. And he goes on say if people don’t put together a united 

front for lobbying, horse racing as they know it will be gone. 

And here’s another quote from him: 

 

If they do not [lobby], and racing is dead, it will be a sad 

day in the province. Horse racing has been part of 

summers in Saskatchewan for decades and that heritage 

would be missed. 

 

I, for one, would find empty barns at the Yorkton 

exhibition grounds a sad reminder of what the Wall 

government did in an attempt to save such a small amount 

of money, it won’t make a ripple in the overall provincial 

budget. 

 

So that’s one journalist’s commentary on the impact of this 

decision not to create a home market area for the standardbreds. 

 

January 29th there was a post published in Standardbred 

Canada, and what they said is that they’ve got good news. The 

good news was that they would be allowed to have 10 days of 

harness racing in 2013. And President Glenn LeDrew said, 

“This is great news for our industry.” And he went on to say, 

“Both tracks have dedicated tremendous effort to promote 

harness racing, and now they’ve been recognized for those 

efforts with live race date licenses issued by SLGA for 2013.” 

 

Here’s the key quote. He goes on to say, “We are hoping our 

government also supports the industry by issuing home market 

area licenses for both tracks, so that harness racing continues to 

have a great future here.” So that was January 29th of this year. 

 

February 13th we got a letter here in our offices at the official 

opposition from the same president of the Saskatchewan 

Standardbred Horsemen’s Association and he said, the 

amendments of the Bill No. 77 are fine as long as those, if you 

have a home market area where most of the taxable revenue 

comes from. So he says it’s important to have a home market 

area; otherwise it would be meaningless. He says, “In reality the 

change in the Act will only benefit those tracks or industries 



3162 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

who have a home market area issued by SLGA.”  

 

[16:30] 

 

So that was on February 13th. Now fast-forward a week later, 

February 20th, and apparently there had been a meeting and 

there was an email that was sent from Mr. LeDrew indicating 

that Donna, the SLGA minister, will not be assigning a home 

market area to either of the standardbred tracks, Yorkton or 

West Meadows Raceway in Regina, effectively ending the 

100-year history of harness racing here in Saskatchewan. And 

that’s the end of the story and that’s the end of the harness 

racing industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, an innocent enough 

looking bill, one section being removed from The Horse Racing 

Regulation Act eliminating a tax, and this government is 

showing this to be a good thing. We’re eliminating a tax but 

without creating a home market area for the entire, or splitting 

the home market area to ensure that the standardbred tracks 

have that ability to derive revenue, it effectively kills the entire 

industry and I think that’s a shame and that’s something that 

this government needs to act upon now to change. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I will have further comments as I am 

the new critic for this area, and we’ll be questioning the 

minister more directly in committee so at that point that’s the 

extent of my comments on this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Crown Investments that Bill No. 77, The 

Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read 

the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Committee of 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 78 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 78 — The Social 

Workers Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to rise this afternoon and enter into the debate on Bill 

No. 78, An Act to amend the Social Workers Act. And it’s a 

relatively short one, and I understand that there’s a few areas of 

importance that they just wanted to add in, and I’ll reflect on the 

minister’s remarks in a few minutes. And so it’s important 

though and I just want to take a moment and acknowledge the 

good work that social workers do. It’s important that we have 

professional social workers in our area, in our province, do 

work. 

 

It’s interesting though that I found out that many of them 

actually work in the Ministry of Health. And actually people are 

surprised when they find out that it’s not in Social Services, but 

Health that most of our social workers . . . And because you 

have to be a part of the professional body, and you have to . . . 

and that’s an important criteria, and that’s not something that 

our Social Services department does as much as it should. And 

I’ve always called on them to really reflect on the fact we 

should have professional social workers working in Social 

Services much more. They provide important services, and I 

think this is something that we should strive for. 

 

But having said that, the debate before us today is about 

allowing qualified clinical social workers to diagnose mental 

health disorders. And prior to 2002 they were allowed to do 

that. But because of the new Act in 2002, The Psychologists 

Act, that restricted diagnosis. Again, that fits the pattern though 

that most of our social workers, professional registered social 

workers, actually work in the area of health. And so that’s the 

situation. 

 

But I think it is important that we can do all that we can to help 

people get resources to meet their needs if they are having 

mental health disorders. And so this would be something we 

should look at. And I know that there will be questions. This is 

not a straightforward one that we might consider it to be. There 

are different opinions about that and I will get to that in a 

minute. 

 

The minister reflects on our capacity to do assessments and 

diagnosis, and mentions that there are only 78 psychologists 

and 36 psychiatrists working in Saskatchewan mental health 

outpatient services, and then there might be actually 50 social 

workers who would qualify to perform the diagnosis. And that 

would be interesting to know if they are working in . . . I would 

assume they are working in mental health outpatient services. It 

would be interesting to know the kind of area that they are 

working in. Apparently Alberta and British Columbia allows 

this to happen and it works very well — Ontario. And this is 

according to the minister’s comments themselves. 

 

So the minister reflects on the fact “The Minister of Health has 

informed me that the wait times to see a psychiatrist in one of 

the regional health authorities can be as high as three to six 

months.” Now we’re not sure if that’s all the health regions or 

she’s highlighting one. We have to work on that for more 

information. She says, “This initiative is another example of . . . 

[the government’s] commitment to lowering the amount of time 

citizens have to wait for very important services.” 

 

Now we do, as part of our commitment to do our work in 

opposition, we do consult with other organizations who may 

have some thoughts on this. And it is interesting that we did 

receive a letter from the Registered Psychiatric Nurses 

Association, and it’s dated February 27th, 2013 — not that long 

ago actually, just over a month. And the RPNAS [Registered 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3163 

Psychiatric Nurses Association] has reviewed the proposed 

changes and has concerns. And what they say, the process used 

to decide upon the changes was not comprehensive and that the 

registered psychiatric nurses are the largest group of service 

providers in mental health in providing these services daily 

across the province. 

 

And the minister hadn’t referred to the RPNs [registered 

psychiatric nurse] in listing how many people there are to 

provide these services, and that they say they are aware of the 

issues regarding lack of access to services in a fragmented 

system. However they say, and I quote, “However, band-aiding 

with a profession which does not have the education is a 

dangerous precedent.” 

 

And for example, they don’t have the diagnostic, medical, or 

pharmacological background. 

 

And they go on to say, “Social workers diagnosing clients will 

not change the problems with access and lack of services.” 

 

And they would call . . . “And this is what we would call for, 

changes should be made as part of a comprehensive mental 

health strategy for the province involving all of those providing 

the services.” 

 

So clearly this is the cornerstone. This is the thing that we 

should be looking for — a comprehensive mental health 

strategy, and not band-aid solutions. And this is, I think, another 

example of this government with its faulty consultation 

processes. And really we need to talk about a comprehensive 

mental health strategy for the province. So I would say that I 

would agree with the RPNAS [Registered Psychiatric Nurses 

Association of Saskatchewan] when they call for this. 

 

They also go on and talk about:  

 

Diagnosing is a step towards prescribing medications and 

treatment, which requires that fundamental educational 

competencies exist in the area of medical education 

programs. We understand they would look at developing 

this education. 

 

For psychiatric nurses, the educational competencies in 

medical education do not come with brief education 

training, but a comprehensive model which covers a time 

span of over two years with on-site experience in all 

medications, diagnostic formulations, and all the 

interactions that could occur. As well many psychiatric 

diagnosis have combination causative factors which we 

understand is not currently a requirement for social worker 

education. 

 

“The SASW have indicated that they want to pursue 

prescribing as a function as well.” And they note that 

“Proposed changes to the physician’s legislation reference 

education and competency.” And they go on to: “And to our 

knowledge up to this point, social workers are not officially 

considered health professionals in Saskatchewan.” 

 

So I think that’s a powerful letter from one of the stakeholders 

that should’ve been consulted and were not. And we would 

have questions about why was the RPNAS not consulted about 

this. And clearly they have a point of view, and the minister 

failed to acknowledge that in her comments. And while the 

goals are very worthwhile, that in fact we do want to see people 

get access to mental health services as quickly as possible, and 

that we understand there are challenges in this province, 

whether you’re in a smaller, a smaller community, or rural and 

northern areas, that this provides challenges. 

 

But we don’t know where these 50 social workers live. Do they 

live in Saskatoon and Regina? One may be right over there who 

can actually do this work. Can you actually do this work? . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Ready to go. But he’s in Regina. 

Now we would be very happy to see him move to a rural or 

northern area. That would be a, that would not be a bad 

situation from our point of view. 

 

But I don’t know if it tips the balances of what we’re really 

talking about here today, Mr. Speaker. We do have some 

concerns, and when the area of consultation comes up, that we 

do agree with the RAPNs, that really we do need a mental 

health, a comprehensive mental health strategy here in our 

province, and all stakeholders need to be consulted on that. 

 

And we do think that, while there may be some historical trends 

prior to 2002 and the reaching back into the past for some 

solutions, we have concerns. And we do think that while there 

may be those who are able and eligible to qualify for this, 

clearly their concerns are pointed out that it’s not only being 

diagnosed, it’s also the follow-up. 

 

And really we want to make sure that when we do the diagnosis 

that it is as strong as possible because we do know that people 

who have mental health disorders are reluctant. And it is totally 

understandable that whenever a physical health, a mental health 

disorder is diagnosed, you want to make sure it’s spot-on, that 

it’s right on because these things can be something that is here 

for life. And it can be most beneficial, but people have anxiety 

about stereotypes that go along with those kind of diagnosis. 

And while we have come a long way in terms of recognizing 

the positive benefits of diagnosis, we want to make sure, we 

absolutely do want to make sure that there is not unintended 

consequences of diagnosis, there is not unintended 

consequences of this kind of legislation. 

 

And I think that we would go a long way, a long way towards 

helping people out if we had a comprehensive mental health 

strategy. And I think it’s a common sense solution. Let’s do that 

before we start applying band-aids to a circumstance. And 

many of us, absolutely many of us have the experience where 

we can see the benefits of appropriate diagnosis and the 

challenges of wait times. 

 

But this to me, from what I can see, is not a fully thought-out 

solution. And so we’ll have questions, we’ll have questions 

about this. And I’m looking forward to hearing our critic talk 

more at length at this because she is a registered social worker 

and she will have some insight into this. And I know she wants 

to make the case that benefits all people here in Saskatchewan, 

that we don’t do sloppy legislation and we pay for it further 

down the road. 

 

But, as I say, I do have some concerns. And I know that there 

will be many of us who do want to speak to it, and we’ll be 



3164 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

following this very, very closely, as it affects our constituents 

right across the province. And we want to see not only the 

ability to diagnose, and at this point we would question, what 

about prescribe? But we want to make sure there are resources 

there. It’s one thing to be able to diagnose, but the resources are 

a big, big part of it. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I do want to move adjournment of 

Bill No. 78, An Act to amend The Social Workers Act. Thank 

you very much. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 78, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 80 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 80 — The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter debate here this afternoon as it relates to Bill 

No. 80, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

And I’ve gone through this bill. It does a few different things. It 

puts forward some clarifications as it relates to utilization of 

newer technologies, fibre optic lines. It talks about some of the 

changes that are being brought forward there, making sure that 

SaskPower can operate in the changing, evolving, modern, 

technological context. Certainly that’s important. 

 

It also brings forward changes as it relates to nuisance claims. 

And as I look at the changes around nuisance claims, I will be 

seeking further clarity as to why these changes are being made 

now. What this does is it provides SaskPower the same 

protection afforded to cities and municipalities from nuisance 

claims, and provides, as it says here: 

 

The proposed exemption from a nuisance liability will 

protect SaskPower where it carries out its activities safely 

and responsibly and will allow it to avoid the high cost 

associated with even a successful defence of nuisance 

claims. 

 

And now I want to just make sure I understand what has urged 

that change, and I want to ensure that there’s a level of fairness 

back to Saskatchewan people. Who is it that’s adjudicating 

what’s safe and responsible behaviours by way of SaskPower? 

Certainly this may be a very reasonable change, but we do want 

to make sure that certainly this business, much like and just like 

so many other businesses in Saskatchewan, is required to 

respect the considerations of communities and of people and of 

residents, and making sure that this provides fairness through 

that process. So what’s causing this change now and why is an 

important question for us as we move forward. It must be a fair 

process, Mr. Speaker, and we will want to make sure that that’s 

the case. 

 

But as I look through this entire piece of legislation, what I see 

is the vast majority of it is based around borrowing limits that 

need to be raised for SaskPower. And certainly I’ll get to some 

comments on that. What I do want to say is that SaskPower’s 

such a valuable and vital Crown to the people of Saskatchewan, 

that we have some of the hardest working people in this 

province that have fulfilled their careers or have engaged in 

careers in this power corporation, fulfilling services to growing 

communities all across this province, and that they’re so 

valuable not just to the place that they fulfilled in electrifying 

this province but to the future of Saskatchewan in the modern 

context that’s referenced. And we need to do all we can to 

support the Saskatchewan SaskPower Corporation, and making 

sure that this Act allows them to continue to make the important 

investments across our province is something that we support. 

 

But what we don’t support is simply rubber-stamping 

borrowing to be transferred across for an irresponsible budget 

of this government, something we’ve seen far too often under 

this government, where it sees the Crown corporations as little 

more than a piggy bank to be drawn upon when their budget 

doesn’t materialize in the fashion that they’ve laid out, put 

forward. They’ve put forward many budgets that have had poor 

economic, poor fiscal foundations that have of course caused 

deficits in the province of Saskatchewan, has caused increased 

debt, and has caused the raiding of SaskPower which comes at a 

consequence. 

 

And I think of just a couple years ago, Mr. Speaker, just over a 

year ago, when this government had promised to SaskPower — 

just as they have here again this year, and in their annual report 

here today — that they wouldn’t touch the dividends or the 

dollars of SaskPower. And of course that promise was broken 

by this government in the late months of the fiscal year. That 

government grabbed $120 million from SaskPower at a time 

they could least afford it, Mr. Speaker, and transferred it across 

to general revenues. And of course the impact was felt directly 

by Saskatchewan people, ratepayers, families, and businesses 

who immediately or very shortly thereafter saw an increase of 

their rates to the tune of $100 million to cover off for the 

reckless cash grab of that government just a few months before. 

 

And it’s that sort of behaviour, that sort of reckless management 

that has a direct impact on people, that we don’t support. And 

that’s why, when I look at this piece of legislation, if we were 

supporting SaskPower simply to be able to make the important 

investments that we require in a growing Saskatchewan to meet 

the needs of the technological changes that are occurring, then 

that would be one thing. But if we’re rubber-stamping 

borrowing to transfer across dividends to this government that 

SaskPower can’t afford, as we’ve seen in the past, a 

government that has drawn and raided the dollars of 

SaskPower, then that’s something that we simply can’t support, 

and we’ll challenge government on every front as it relates to 

those irresponsible cash grabs. 

 

You know our province has been well-served by a strong 

Crown sector. And the future of Saskatchewan will be 



April 10, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3165 

well-served by a thriving, strong private sector and a strong 

Crown sector. And it worries so many in this province to see the 

undermining and weakening of that Crown sector under that 

Sask Party government with deliberate actions to weaken and 

undermine their ability to be strong into the future, to fulfill the 

services that they must to the growing communities all across 

the province, and putting services at risk to the people of the 

province, of course, putting uncertainty into the lives of many 

workers as well, Mr. Speaker — all important considerations. 

 

And you know the kind of economy that we believe in as New 

Democrats is one where you have that strong private sector, 

where you have that strong Crown sector. And it’s 

disappointing to see this government abandon its promises 

around once suggesting they were going to somehow protect the 

Crowns and now of course breaking those promises, actually 

selling off a profitable dividend-paying Crown corporation in 

ISC [Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], and 

directly undermining our entire Crown sector and certainly 

SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I look at SaskPower, it’s not just the raiding of those 

dollars that has had a direct impact on those operations and on 

the people of the province, it’s also this ideological pursuit of 

contracting out at all costs. And we see that in new power 

generation where this government fails to lay the information 

on the table in a common sense way and make decisions in an 

even-handed fashion. They pursue that private generation, that 

private power at all costs. And of course we know that that’s 

going to cost us far more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when I speak of us, that’s the families. That’s the 

businesses all across our province, both now and certainly well 

into the future. And this is something that we need to . . . When 

we’re looking at the nature of Saskatchewan people, 

Saskatchewan people are common sense; they’re pragmatic, and 

they expect their government to be just the same. And this is a 

government that’s tied the hands and weakened the Crown 

sector. And it seems to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It seems 

that I’ve got a little bit of excitement out of the member from 

Moose Jaw North. It’s nice to see him enter into the debate 

from the floor of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we should be talking about is the impact on the 

families in Moose Jaw who have had their bills forced with a 

significant increase as a direct result of the raiding of that power 

corporation’s dollars, Mr. Speaker — $120 million last year. 

And I had a bit of a kick out of the comments from the Minister 

of SaskPower here today who was standing on his feet and 

trying to defend raiding those dollars, who was trying to suggest 

it seemed that somehow those dollars, those revenues were 

covered off by higher hydro revenues, Mr. Speaker, and that the 

$120 million were all these surplus dollars that SaskPower 

simply didn’t know what to do with. And of course that’s not 

the case, Mr. Speaker. The facts of the matter are that, although 

we had a higher water year in the year referenced by the 

minister here today, the revenues were nowhere close to $120 

million that were derived by way of hydro revenues. I believe it 

was closer to $40 million. I don’t believe it exceeded $40 

million. That’s a fraction of what the minister seemed to be 

suggesting to this Assembly here today, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think what Saskatchewan people deserve are straight answers 

from that government. And certainly there was a direct 

consequence of the dividend raid, the cash grab that we saw of 

that government through its broken promise not to take any 

dollars. 

 

And so we get kind of . . . It seems to be a bit more of a 

charade, Mr. Speaker, when we see the annual report come out 

here again today and when we hear government claiming once 

again that they’re not going to touch the dollars of SaskPower. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they said that a couple of years ago, and of 

course they broke that promise and dipped directly back into the 

dollars of SaskPower and then asked the people of this province 

to pay for their inability to manage their finances, and a direct 

cost by way of a significant hike to the tune of $100 million to 

power bills across this province, paid for by the hard-working 

families of this province, the hard-working business people of 

this province who are paying those utility bills. 

 

We also see this Crown corporation and so many others 

weakened by the hamstringing with its so-called Sask-first 

policy, Mr. Speaker — just another example, Mr. Speaker, 

where this government has impeded the independent 

governance of those boards, has taken away the ability for those 

Crowns to operate in an independent fashion in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people, to divest risk and to bring 

back benefits to Saskatchewan people. 

 

So whether it’s been the raiding of dollars from the Crown 

sector and from SaskPower, whether it’s been the ideological 

pursuit of contracting out at all costs, only to cost Saskatchewan 

people more now and well into the future, tying the hands of 

this corporation and Saskatchewan people and governments into 

the future, or whether it’s the lack of common sense around its 

so-called Sask-first policy that has hamstrung the independence 

of those Crown corporations, we see a government with a poor 

record as it relates to the proper stewardship of our Crown 

sector. 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, this bill brings around some changes 

around nuisance claims. We want to make sure that the changes 

are in fact fair, respect the rights of communities and 

landowners and people, and making sure that we’re 

understanding what’s causing that change to be brought forward 

now. Why the change when it hasn’t been in place for many, 

many years, affording them the same protections that 

municipalities and cities have had? And we also want to make 

sure that we understand the changes that are recommended to 

enhance technology throughout SaskPower. Those are 

important investments done with proper consultation. 

 

But fundamentally, this is about raising the borrowing limit of 

SaskPower, something we won’t simply rubber-stamp, because 

we’ve seen the history of this Sask Party government who’s 

taken over $2 billion from our Crown sector in just over five 

years, Mr. Speaker. And that’s irresponsible. It’s not 

sustainable. And we won’t be rubber-stamping the automatic 

transfer of dividends that are going to be paid for with debt and 

by higher costs of Saskatchewan people into the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So that’s where we’ll bring our voice to this piece of legislation. 

Of course we need to have proper stewardship of our Crown 

corporations. As New Democrats, we believe in a strong private 

sector. We believe as well in a strong Crown sector. We believe 



3166 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2013 

that’s what builds a modern economy and that’s what we’ll be 

standing strong for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that being said, we look forward to further comments 

moving forward, but I’ve concluded the statements I wish to put 

on the record here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of the Economy that Bill No. 80, The 

Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Second reading of this bill. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the committee of 

Crown and Central Agencies. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. 

Thursday morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3135, 3147 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3135 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3135 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3135 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3135 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3135 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3135 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3136 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3148 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3148 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3153 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3154 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3136 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3136 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Red Cross Day of Pink 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3136 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3137 

 Apology 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3136 

 Skate4Smiles Fundraiser 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3137 

 Saskatoon Contacts Win Western Regional Championship 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3137 

 Briercrest College and Seminary Receives Degree-Granting Authority 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3137 

 Samuel McLeod Business Awards 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3138 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Combatting Discrimination and Bullying 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3138 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3138 

 SaskPower Finances and Infrastructure 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3139 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3139 

 IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3140 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3141 

 Education Funding 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3142 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3142 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3143 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3143 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3143 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3143 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3143 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 91 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3143 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3144 

 Bill No. 92 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3147 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3147 

  



 

 Bill No. 93 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3148 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3149 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3150 

 Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3152 

 Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3155 

 Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3157 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3159 

 Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3159 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3162 

 Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3162 

 Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3164 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3166 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


