




















































Hansard: October 23, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 1A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 23, 2013, 14:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3601 

 October 23, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 14:00.] 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 

and gentlemen, please remain standing for the entrance of the 

Lieutenant Governor and the vice regal party. 

 

[Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

14:04.] 

 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly, Honoured 

Guests, People of Saskatchewan. Welcome to the opening of 

the Third Session of the Twenty-Seventh Legislature. 

 

Just a few weeks ago, our province’s population surpassed 1.1 

million people. 

 

Saskatchewan has grown by more than 100,000 people in just 

six years – a rate of growth not seen since the earliest days of 

our province. 

 

This kind of growth brings many new opportunities and many 

new challenges. 

 

One year ago, my government released the Saskatchewan Plan 

for Growth. 

 

This Growth Plan has two overriding goals: to ensure 

Saskatchewan continues to grow and to ensure our province and 

my government are meeting the challenges of growth. 

 

CONTINUING THE GROWTH 

 

The pace of growth in Saskatchewan is actually increasing. 

 

In the most recent quarter, Saskatchewan grew by 6,895 people 

– the largest increase ever recorded in one quarter. 

 

The Conference Board of Canada recently forecast that 

Saskatoon and Regina will lead the nation in economic growth 

in 2013. 

 

Across rural Saskatchewan, harvest is winding down and it 

appears that Saskatchewan farmers have produced the largest 

crop in our province’s history. 

 

Our resource companies continue their massive expansions. 

 

Through the first nine months of 2013, employment is up by 

nearly 20,000, putting Saskatchewan on pace for the best year 

of employment growth ever recorded. 

 

While most of this growth has been driven by Saskatchewan 

businesses, my government will continue to play its role by 

encouraging further diversification of our resource-based 

economy, marketing our province throughout the world and 

maintaining a competitive tax and regulatory environment that 

encourages new investment and new jobs. 

 

MEETING THE CHALLENGES OF GROWTH 

 

While growth creates many opportunities, it also creates many 

challenges: new pressures in areas like health care, education, 

highways and housing. 

 

Much has already been done to address these challenges but 

much more needs to be done. 

 

In this session, my government will focus on meeting the 

challenges of growth. 

 

HEALTH CARE 

 

In 2009, my government announced an aggressive strategy to 

significantly reduce surgical wait times. 

 

The Saskatchewan Surgical Initiative set an ambitious goal: that 

no one in the province would have to wait more than three 

months for their surgery. 

 

This goal is being met. 

 

My government is committed to improving seniors’ care in our 

province. 

 

This past summer, my government conducted the most 

comprehensive review of long-term care facilities ever 

undertaken in Saskatchewan. 

 

This review identified many concerns with the care some 

residents have been receiving. 

 

We must do better. 

 

That’s why my government has created a $10 million Urgent 

Issues Action Fund to address the issues identified, like 

purchasing required equipment, more baths, improved nutrition, 

improved responsiveness to call bells and better training to deal 

with patients with dementia. 

 

We will also take steps to reduce pressure on the long-term care 

system by launching new home care pilot programs in 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 

 

This initiative will build on my government’s $2 million 

investment in the Home First/Quick Response program 

launched in Regina this year. 

 

Thousands of Saskatchewan seniors reside in personal care 

homes. 

 

Personal care homes are inspected and licensed by the Ministry 

of Health but inspection reports are not disclosed to the public. 

 

Seniors and their families should have access to this 

information as they select a personal care home. 

 

My government will amend The Personal Care Homes Act to 

allow for the public disclosure of inspection reports. 

 

Over the past six years, the number of doctors practicing in the 



3602 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2013 

province has increased by 300. 

 

Doctors have an important role to play in my government’s 

efforts to improve care for seniors. 

 

In the months ahead, we will announce details of a program that 

will enable some seniors with complex issues to receive house 

calls from physicians, nurse practitioners and other health care 

providers. 

 

Last year, my government announced a new approach to 

delivering primary and emergency care in rural areas. 

 

Collaborative Emergency Centres are open 24 hours a day, 

seven days a week and provide stable, predictable access for 

patients in rural areas. 

 

Last month, the first Collaborative Emergency Centre opened in 

Maidstone. 

 

In the coming months, others will open in Shaunavon, 

Spiritwood, Wakaw and Canora. 

 

It is estimated that one per cent of the patients using our health 

care system account for about one-third of all health care 

expenditures. 

 

In the coming year, my government will launch “hot spotting” 

pilot programs in Saskatoon and Regina to assist high-risk, 

high-use patients who repeatedly show up in emergency rooms. 

 

This initiative will connect patients not well served by the 

current system with the appropriate services outside emergency 

rooms. 

 

Some of these patients require care for mental health or 

addictions issues. 

 

My government will develop a comprehensive action plan to 

improve access to mental health and addictions services. 

 

EDUCATION 

 

Upon taking office, my government brought a new approach to 

health care called Patient First. 

 

In the area of education, our priority is putting students first. 

 

The Student First approach will build on successes that are 

already being achieved in school divisions throughout the 

province. 

 

For example, the Chinook School Division has used student 

reading assessments to help teachers respond to each individual 

student’s needs. 

 

Clearly, this approach is working. 

 

In 2008, 63 per cent of students were reading at grade level. 

 

By 2012, this number had increased to 84 per cent. 

 

There are similar success stories in schools throughout the 

province. 

 

The goal of Student First is to identify and replicate these 

successes. 

 

An important step in the development of Student First will be a 

wide-ranging consultation with teachers, administrators, parents 

and students. 

 

Based on what my government has already heard from teachers, 

the curriculum development process is under review and other 

education changes are on hold, pending the outcome of the 

consultation process. 

 

Early Years Evaluation for Prekindergarten and Kindergarten 

students and Tell Them From Me surveys will continue. 

 

Last year, nearly 75,000 students and over 4,000 teachers took 

part in the Tell Them From Me survey, an online, anonymous 

survey that provides students and teachers in Grade 4 to 12 an 

opportunity to provide feedback on their school experience. 

 

This year, 90,000 to 100,000 students are expected to 

participate. 

 

This feedback will play an important part in setting the future 

direction of our education system. 

 

If students are to reach their potential, they need to feel safe in 

school. 

 

In this session, my government will respond to anti-bullying 

recommendations put forward by the Legislative Secretary 

responsible, based on extensive consultations she held 

throughout the province with students, parents and teachers. 

 

My government will also host a forum during National Anti- 

Bullying Week in November to discuss directly with students 

bullying and its prevention. 

 

Students also need space to learn. 

 

A growing Saskatchewan requires new schools and classrooms 

to support its increasing student population. 

 

Since 2007, my government has invested more than $600 

million to build 20 new schools and undertake 23 major 

renovations in addition to completing approximately 900 

smaller capital projects. 

 

This week, my government announced nine new joint-use 

schools that will be built using an innovative P3 bundling 

approach through SaskBuilds. 

 

My government has also supported the development of 15 new 

Prekindergarten programs and the development of 500 new 

child care spaces, bringing the total number of licensed child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan to more than 13,700 – a 48 per 

cent increase since 2007. 

 

This spring, the Premier met with a number of teachers from 

different parts of the province. 

 



October 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3603 

Almost all of them identified slow and inadequate internet 

access in schools as a barrier to learning. 

 

In response to this concern, SaskTel will invest $5 million over 

four years through the CommunityNet program to increase 

bandwidth and improve internet access and speed at schools 

throughout the province. 

 

POST-SECONDARY EDUCATION 

 

My government has provided record support to Saskatchewan’s 

post-secondary institutions and students – a total of $4.6 billion 

since 2008. 

 

More than 4,500 students have seen their tuition costs reduced 

through the Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship and more 

than 40,000 have received part or all of their tuition costs back 

through the Saskatchewan Graduate Retention Program. 

 

Since 2007, my government has provided $388 million in direct 

student support, a 120 per cent increase over the previous six 

years. 

 

Earlier this year, Briercrest College and the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology (SIAST) were 

given the authority to grant degrees in certain programs. 

 

This will allow for greater choice and flexibility for students to 

take new and innovative courses that support our growing 

economy. 

 

My government will support SIAST as it evolves into a 

polytechnic institution which combines the practical approach 

of a college education with the depth of study usually 

associated with a university program. 

 

Polytechnic graduates can obtain degree-level programming, 

certificate, diploma or apprenticeship credentials and bring a 

high level of practical experience to the workforce. 

 

HIGHWAYS 

 

A growing province means growing pressure on our highway 

system. 

 

My government is responding. 

 

This year, we will spend more than $500 million on highways, 

bringing the total investment over the past six years to $3.7 

billion – 76 per cent more than in the previous six years. 

 

This investment has been used to repair or rebuild 8,000 

kilometres of highways in every part of the province. 

 

In recent weeks, the new Circle Drive South Bridge opened in 

Saskatoon and the new overpass opened on the west side of 

Regina, improving traffic flow in our two largest cities. 

 

We are breaking ground on a new truck bypass at Estevan and 

building passing lanes on Highway 10. 

 

My government is also exploring an opportunity to use a 

public-private partnership to construct the South Regina bypass. 

The twinning of Highway 11 between Saskatoon and Prince 

Albert will be completed this fall. 

 

Twinning is required elsewhere as traffic volumes grow. 

 

My government has started pre-construction work on three new 

twinning projects: 

 

• 26 kilometres of Highway 16 from Saskatoon to Clavet; 

 

• 24 kilometres of Highway 7 from Saskatoon to Delisle; and 

 

• Eight kilometres of Highway 39 from Estevan to Bienfait. 

 

More work is also being done on many secondary highways. 

 

My government is developing modeling that will more 

accurately predict increases in traffic volume caused by 

industrial activity. 

 

This will be helpful in areas like southeast Saskatchewan, 

where increased activity in the oil and gas industry has boosted 

the amount of highway traffic. 

 

In particular, Highways 6 and 39 running between Regina and 

Estevan have seen truck traffic increase significantly over the 

last decade. 

 

In the coming year, the Ministry of Highways will begin to plan 

the twinning of this section of highway. 

 

Sadly, our province has seen an increase in the number of traffic 

fatalities. 

 

Many of those accidents involved alcohol. 

 

During this session, my government will act on the 

recommendations of the Legislative Assembly’s Special 

Committee on Traffic Safety, with a particular focus on tougher 

penalties for drinking and driving. 

 

INVESTING IN INFRASTRUCTURE 

 

Since 2008, government ministries and Crown corporations 

have invested an unprecedented $13.2 billion in infrastructure – 

a 110 per cent increase over the previous six years. 

 

New hospitals and schools have been constructed, water and 

sewer systems have been rebuilt or replaced and the province’s 

electrical system is undergoing a long overdue refurbishment 

and expansion. 

 

But there is more work to be done. 

 

In the Growth Plan, my government committed to invest $2.5 

billion in infrastructure over three years, not including 

investments by our Crowns. 

 

We are on track to meet that objective. 

 

The federal government has announced its commitment to 

create a renewed Building Canada Fund. 

 



3604 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2013 

My government will have money in place to partner with the 

federal government and municipalities when the new program 

begins. 

 

SaskBuilds, a new organization established to pursue 

innovation in infrastructure development, is exploring ways to 

complete large, high-cost infrastructure projects in a timely 

manner through the use of P3s. 

 

SaskBuilds is working with government ministries on the 

development of new schools, the new Saskatchewan Hospital in 

North Battleford, a new long-term care facility in Swift Current 

and the Regina Bypass project. 

 

P3s will allow the government to advance certain capital 

projects more quickly while reducing costs. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations are investing record 

amounts to ensure they can continue to provide high-quality 

service to a growing province. 

 

This year, SaskPower will spend more than $1.3 billion to 

renew and upgrade Saskatchewan’s electrical infrastructure. 

 

SaskEnergy will spend more than $180 million this year 

expanding and ensuring the integrity of its distribution system. 

 

SaskTel will invest more than $300 million this year in a range 

of capital projects, including an expansion of the province’s 4G 

wireless network and an enhancement of internet service in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The Crowns are partnering with the private sector and northern 

communities to bring much-needed telecommunications 

infrastructure to the north. 

 

A SaskTel partnership with Huawei and the Athabasca 

Development Corporation will result in new cellular sites in 

Fond du Lac, Stony Rapids, Black Lake and Wollaston Lake. 

 

The Northern Fibre Expansion Project is a partnership between 

SaskTel, SaskPower and Cameco to bring high-speed 

bandwidth to the north through 566 kilometres of new fibre 

placement. 

 

HOUSING 

 

Housing is in demand as the province grows. 

 

My government has committed $344 million to expand the 

housing supply by 12,600 units and repair or update about 

24,000 units by 2016. 

 

Last year, Saskatchewan led the nation in housing starts on a 

per capita basis. 

 

The total number of rental starts in 2011 and 2012 exceeded the 

number of rental starts in the previous 16 years combined. 

 

This activity is leading to an improvement in vacancy rates. 

 

Saskatchewan now has an overall vacancy rate of three per cent, 

a level recognized as representing a balanced market situation. 

However, vacancy rates in some communities are still too low. 

 

This is why my government will broaden the HeadStart on a 

Home program to encourage the construction of rental 

properties. 

 

Since its creation in 2011, HeadStart on a Home has provided 

more than $193 million to finance the construction of 1,159 

entry level homes. 

 

In order to maintain their independence, seniors with low to 

moderate incomes often wish to sell their homes and move into 

housing that is more affordable and easier to maintain. 

 

Life lease housing programs provide affordable and suitable 

housing for seniors along with security of tenure for a lifetime. 

 

In the next few months, my government will renew and expand 

the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation’s Life Lease Program 

to improve housing options for seniors across Saskatchewan. 

 

COMPETITIVENESS 

 

Saskatchewan has one of the fastest growing economies in the 

country and the lowest unemployment rate. 

 

There are a record number of people working in our province. 

 

Businesses could employ even more people but there is a 

shortage of skilled labour. 

 

My government, working with educational institutions and 

employers, will create 1,000 new training seats this year. 

 

This includes another 300 new apprenticeship seats, bringing 

the total number of seats to 6,700, an increase of 76 per cent 

since 2007. 

 

Crown corporations will also expand opportunities for 

apprentices and fund training seats at SIAST and the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. 

 

Seven hundred new spots will be added to reduce the backlog of 

applications to the Adult Basic Education (ABE) program. 

 

This will bring the total number of ABE seats to 8,580 – an 

increase of 46 per cent since 2007. 

 

This important program provides the fundamental learning 

required by those who desire to improve their skills and 

advance in the workplace. 

 

My government’s goal is to eliminate the ABE waitlist by the 

end of this term of office. 

 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance (SGI) estimates that just 

30 per cent of on-reserve high schools in Saskatchewan provide 

driver education. 

 

This has severely constrained the ability of First Nations 

students to obtain driver’s licenses, creating barriers to mobility 

and employment for those students. 

 



October 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3605 

SGI has committed to fund driver education programs for 

on-reserve high school students in the province. 

 

It is anticipated that 2,600 First Nations students will take 

advantage of this program in its first year. 

 

Immigration is an important source of labour for our province. 

 

My government was successful in obtaining more than 25 per 

cent of the new provincial immigration nominations the federal 

government allocated across the country this year. 

 

This raised the annual cap under the Saskatchewan Immigrant 

Nominee Program to 4,450 nominations. 

 

My government will continue to press the federal government 

to boost the number of nominations to 6,000 a year. 

 

Our growing manufacturing industry is an important part of the 

Saskatchewan economy, providing stable employment to over 

27,000 people and over $14 billion in annual sales. 

 

In order to continue this growth in a competitive world, the 

industry will need to adopt new and innovative measures. 

 

My government will seek to partner with the manufacturing 

industry to create a new Manufacturing Centre of Excellence. 

 

This centre will focus on enhancing competitiveness, labour 

market development and innovation so that our manufacturers 

will continue to be successful both within Canada and abroad. 

 

One specific focus of the centre will be providing 

Saskatchewan’s First Nations and Métis people with the skills 

training needed for manufacturing jobs while encouraging and 

assisting employers in hiring Aboriginal workers. 

 

This new Centre of Excellence will assist Saskatchewan 

manufacturers as they continue to diversify our province’s 

resource-based economy. 

 

My government has established the Global Transportation Hub 

(GTH) as an independent and self-sustaining inland port 

authority. 

 

The GTH added several new clients during the last year, 

including Emterra Group, the City of Regina’s recycling 

contractor, and Morguard, one of Canada’s largest real estate 

investment trusts. 

 

Canadian Pacific has completed the transfer of its intermodal 

operation from downtown Regina and is now fully operational 

at the GTH. 

 

Next month, football fans from across Canada will gather in 

Regina for the 101st Grey Cup. 

 

The Canadian Football League championship — and Canada’s 

national party — caps a remarkable year that saw Saskatchewan 

host a number of major Canadian cultural and sporting events, 

including the JUNOS and the Memorial Cup. 

 

To build upon this success, my government will soon unveil an 

event hosting strategy through Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

This strategy will enhance Saskatchewan’s growing reputation 

as a preferred location to hold national and regional events and 

will showcase our province throughout Canada and around the 

world. 

 

INTERNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT 

 

Saskatchewan’s expanding economy is fueled by exports as a 

growing world buys more of what our province has to offer. 

 

In 2012, Saskatchewan companies exported a record $32.6 

billion worth of products, a 10.3 per cent increase from the year 

before and triple the amount exported a decade ago. 

 

Saskatchewan is now Canada’s largest per capita exporter. 

 

My government understands that in a competitive world, we 

can’t take this business for granted. 

 

Accordingly, we are working hard to engage our customers, 

particularly in Asia, the fastest growing region in the world. 

 

My government has worked hard to ensure that new 

international uranium markets are available for our industry. 

 

For the first time ever, Saskatchewan uranium is moving into 

the Chinese civilian market. 

 

My government will continue its support for the Saskatchewan 

Trade and Export Partnership (STEP), which does an 

outstanding job in helping Saskatchewan companies promote 

their products and increase exports throughout the world. 

 

My government will also create the Saskatchewan International 

Future Scholarship to provide up to 20 students annually with 

the opportunity to study business at an international institution 

provided they return to the province after they graduate. 

 

Earlier this year, the Premier visited Washington, D.C. where 

he continued our province’s efforts to push for US approval of 

the Keystone XL pipeline and promoted Saskatchewan’s 

innovative work in the area of carbon capture and storage. 

 

RESOURCE SECTOR EXPANSIONS 

 

My government is helping the uranium industry grow with a 

new royalty system that recognizes the actual capital costs 

incurred by companies. 

 

This will provide an incentive for the industry to increase 

production and invest in new mines. 

 

The expansion of Saskatchewan’s potash industry, which will 

see more than $20 billion invested, is continuing. 

 

My government is pleased BHP Billiton has decided to invest 

another $2.6 billion over the next three years in its Jansen 

project. 

 

This is an important vote of confidence in our potash industry 

and Saskatchewan. 



3606 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2013 

INNOVATION 

 

Saskatchewan has a long tradition of innovation in business, 

science and agriculture. 

 

Early next year, Saskatchewan will record another first at the 

Boundary Dam Power Station near Estevan. 

 

Operations will begin at the Boundary Dam 3 project, the 

world’s first commercial power plant to be equipped with a 

fully-integrated post-combustion carbon capture system. 

 

Boundary Dam 3 will be a major advance in the development of 

carbon capture and storage technology, which must be deployed 

if coal-fired power generation is to be environmentally 

sustainable. 

 

Over the last year, three major research institutions were 

launched in Saskatchewan as key components of my 

government’s innovation agenda. 

 

Strong job growth in innovation is a sign of a diversified 

economy. 

 

The Global Institute for Food Security, the Sylvia Fedoruk 

Canadian Centre for Nuclear Innovation and the International 

Minerals Innovation Institute will drive our province’s 

innovation agenda forward. 

 

The Sylvia Fedoruk Centre has been chosen to manage and 

operate Saskatchewan’s first cyclotron, which will be located at 

the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

The cyclotron will be used to produce medical isotopes for the 

new PET-CT diagnostic scanner at Saskatoon’s Royal 

University Hospital. 

 

AGRICULTURE 

 

Agriculture continues to be an important driver of 

Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

In 2012, Saskatchewan’s agriculture exports climbed to a record 

$11.2 billion – highest among the provinces and one-third of all 

Saskatchewan exports. 

 

Our agricultural sector is on pace to set a new record this year, 

with exports up 13 per cent in the first six months of 2013. 

 

Research is critical to increasing agricultural production and 

exports. 

 

My government has committed a record $27.7 million to 

agricultural research this fiscal year, more than double the 

research budget in 2007. 

 

This includes $3 million for the Global Institute for Food 

Security. 

 

Ensuring market access for Saskatchewan producers and 

businesses is a priority for my government. 

 

We continue to support the federal government in trade 

negotiations, such as the Canada-European Trade Agreement 

and the Trans-Pacific Partnership. 

 

We are also working to address trade irritants such as Country 

of Origin Labeling in the United States. 

 

My government has made significant improvements to Crop 

Insurance to help producers better manage risk. 

 

Coverage levels in 2013 were more than double the coverage 

offered in 2007. 

 

Improving programs will continue to be a priority. 

 

To that end, my government will continue to work with the 

federal government, Alberta, British Columbia and Manitoba to 

develop a Western Canadian Livestock Price Insurance 

Program for cattle and hog producers. 

 

FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY 

 

Fiscal responsibility is a cornerstone of my government. 

 

Since 2007, government debt has been reduced by $3 billion or 

44 per cent. 

 

This has reduced total interest costs by $600 million. 

 

In the Saskatchewan Plan for Growth, my government 

envisioned a debt-free Saskatchewan and created the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Initiative to identify options for how 

best to utilize our resource revenue after the province’s debt has 

been fully retired. 

 

During this session, former University of Saskatchewan 

President Peter MacKinnon will release his report on the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Initiative – his recommendations on 

how best to ensure that resource revenues become a permanent 

source of wealth for current and future generations. 

 

SAFE COMMUNITIES 

 

While our province is growing, we all want to maintain our 

vibrant community spirit that makes Saskatchewan the best 

place in Canada to live. 

 

This spring, my government announced funding to open 

Angel’s Lighthouse, a new transition house in Melfort 

providing emergency residential services to women and 

children fleeing domestic violence. 

 

Angel’s Lighthouse is the first new transition house in 

Saskatchewan since 1989. 

 

Helping the victims of crime is a priority for my government. 

 

This year, the Ministry of Justice has allocated more than $3 

million for police-based victim services programs which 

provide information, support and referrals to victims of crime. 

 

By the end of the fiscal year, these services will be available 

throughout the province. 

 



October 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3607 

Prince Albert was the first community in Saskatchewan to 

implement a community mobilization model which fosters 

closer cooperation among the police, community organizations, 

government ministries and human service agencies, known as 

the HUB. 

 

The results are impressive. 

 

Since 2011, overall crime in Prince Albert has fallen 18 per 

cent, violent crime is down 38 per cent and property crime is 

down 20 per cent. 

 

Yorkton, La Ronge, North Battleford, Moose Jaw and the 

Estevan/Weyburn region have now implemented the HUB 

model. 

 

In the months ahead, several other Saskatchewan communities 

will look at developing their own HUB programs to reduce 

crime. 

 

This session, my government will amend legislation to improve 

protection for adults in our community who must rely on others 

to ensure their well-being and make decisions on their behalf. 

 

One of my government’s first acts upon taking office was to 

protect Saskatchewan residents in the event of a public sector 

strike by introducing essential services legislation. 

 

This law was recently upheld by the Saskatchewan Court of 

Appeal. 

 

During this session, my government will amend The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act to include the essential services 

law. 

 

SOCIAL SERVICES 

 

A growing province generates the revenues necessary to pay for 

services that help people, like the Saskatchewan Assured 

Income for Disability (SAID) Program. 

 

More than 11,000 Saskatchewan citizens with long-term and 

enduring disabilities have now enrolled in SAID, an income 

support program that recognizes their unique needs and 

experiences. 

 

This year, my government was pleased to boost the benefits 

paid out under SAID, the third regular increase to take place 

over a period of four years. 

 

As part of the Saskatchewan Plan for Growth, my government 

committed to develop a comprehensive disability strategy to 

ensure Saskatchewan is the best place in Canada for persons 

with disabilities. 

 

My government will appoint a team of citizens to undertake a 

comprehensive public consultation on the strategy, led by the 

Legislative Secretary on Disability Issues. 

 

A few months ago, my government was pleased to increase the 

benefits paid out under the Seniors Income Plan (SIP). 

 

 

More than 16,000 Saskatchewan seniors receive SIP benefits 

every month. 

 

By 2015, benefits under this program will have tripled since 

2007. 

 

The work of the Child and Family Agenda has been refocused 

on the pressing issues facing our children and families: early 

childhood development, First Nations and Métis education, 

child welfare, parenting supports, child and youth obesity, 

crime reduction, mental health and addictions. 

 

Ministries are working together in a similar manner to the HUB 

initiative to help children succeed in school, keep communities 

safe and help vulnerable children and families get the services 

they need. 

 

ACCOUNTABLE GOVERNMENT 

 

My government will also continue to make government more 

open and transparent by introducing a new Lobbyists Act and 

will establish an independent officer of the Legislative 

Assembly to oversee its records. 

 

This new Act will make public the lobbying activities of 

corporations and paid lobbyists. 

 

PARKS AND CULTURE 

 

Saskatchewan’s provincial parks make a major contribution to 

our quality of life. 

 

My government has focused on creating the best experience 

possible for park visitors by investing almost $44 million in our 

provincial park system since 2008. 

 

This funding has supported the development of more electrified 

camping sites and improved visitor facilities. 

 

This year, there were a record 3.7 million visits to our 

provincial parks. 

 

My government also announced the creation of the Great Blue 

Heron Provincial Park north of Prince Albert, the 35th 

provincial park in Saskatchewan and the first new park in 

almost 20 years. 

 

ArtsVest Saskatchewan is growing along with the province. 

 

Under this program, my government has partnered with the 

private sector to provide $2.4 million to help arts, cultural and 

heritage organizations. 

 

A few months ago, my government launched Creative 

Saskatchewan, a new agency that will assist in marketing the 

work of Saskatchewan artists active in a number of areas, 

including music and sound recording, film and television, 

interactive digital media, visual arts and craft and live 

performing arts. 

 

Creative Saskatchewan will draw on a $5 million investment 

fund to support the activities of Saskatchewan artists. 

 



3608 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2013 

ENVIRONMENT 

 

Saskatchewan’s economic success derives from the industry of 

its people and the blessings of nature. 

 

My government understands its responsibility to ensure those 

blessings are preserved for future generations. 

 

With the unprecedented growth underway in Saskatchewan, 

there has been an increased demand for water. 

 

My government has implemented a 25-Year Saskatchewan 

Water Security Plan to ensure our water resources are used in a 

sustainable manner. 

 

In the last few years, agricultural drainage has become an issue 

of concern for farmers, landowners, municipalities and 

environmental groups. 

 

As we work toward developing new regulations, my 

government has begun consultations on agricultural drainage 

that include an innovative online forum. 

 

CONCLUSION 

 

Saskatchewan continues to grow. 

 

A growing province is a good thing, but my government is 

aware of the challenges arising from growth and is determined 

to meet those challenges. 

 

We are mindful the growth we seek is not an end in itself but a 

means to build a better province for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

We move forward more confident than ever that our resilient, 

determined, optimistic citizens can meet any challenge as they 

work to fulfill the enormous potential of this great province. 

 

I now leave you to the business of the session, knowing that you 

will favourably discharge your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May divine providence continue to bless our province and guide 

this Assembly in all its deliberations. 

 

God bless Saskatchewan. 

 

God bless Canada. 

 

And God save the Queen. 

 

The Speaker: — I would now invite Elder Betty McKenna to 

come forward and say the prayer. 

 

Ms. McKenna: — [Elder McKenna spoke for a time in 

Ojibwa.] 

 

Great Spirit, ask for a blessing for all those gathered here. Ask 

the Creator to give a blessing of the seven grandfathers as we 

stand on Mother Earth, Father Sky above us, the four directions 

surround us. I ask for a blessing for those gathered here today 

from the seven grandfathers, a blessing of growth, order, 

adequacy, love, security, social approval, and self value. 

 

[Elder McKenna continued in Ojibwa.] 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you, Elder McKenna. 

 

[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:43.] 

 

The Speaker: — I will begin our traditional Assembly prayer. 

 

Present us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious 

favour and further us with thy continual help, that in all our 

works, begun, continued, and ended in Thee, we may glorify 

thy holy name, and finally by Thy mercy attain everlasting life. 

Amen. 

 

Please be seated. I recognize the Premier. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that a Bill respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 

the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 

for this session will be Lauren Jelinski, Chantal Kimpinski, 

Francess Oruitemeka, Kristin Prentice, and Dylan Topal. 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move: 

 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

be taken into consideration on Thursday, October 24, 

2013. 

 



October 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3609 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

be taken into consideration on Thursday, October 24, 

2013. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 

adjournment motion, I have a few announcements to make. 

 

I would like to thank all of the guests and members of the 

public who have joined us today. 

 

And I want to thank the members of the judiciary from the 

Court of Appeal, the Court of Queen’s Bench, the Provincial 

Court for your attendance today. 

 

I would also like to again thank Elder Betty McKenna for 

taking part in today’s ceremony. 

 

I would like to introduce the school groups that are with us 

today. In the east gallery we have grade 5 students from Sacred 

Heart Community School in Regina. Give us a wave. In the 

west gallery we have grade 7 and 8 students from Grant Road 

School in Regina. And I would like to thank all of you along 

with your teachers for attending today’s ceremony. 

 

Welcome also to the Campbell Collegiate Chamber Choir. They 

are seated in the west gallery. I will be calling upon them to 

sing for us in a few moments. 

 

I would like to thank the members of the following 

Saskatchewan-based regular and reserve force units for 

providing us with the honour guard earlier this afternoon: 3rd 

Canadian Division HQ Domestic Operations Detachment, 15 

Wing Moose Jaw, the Royal Regina Rifles, Saskatchewan 

Dragoons, 734 Communications Squadron, 16 Service 

Battalion, 16 Field Ambulance, and HMCS Queen. 

 

As well I would like to thank the 10 Field Regiment, the Royal 

Canadian Artillery for the 15-gun salute, the Royal Canadian 

Artillery Band, and the Royal Canadian Air Force Band piper. 

They all did an excellent job. 

 

I would like to invite everyone to join Their Honours, the 

Premier, the Leader of the Opposition and the members of the 

Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s tea which will take place 

immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 

in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and the library 

reading room in the east wing. 

 

It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

I would now like to welcome the Campbell Collegiate Chamber 

Choir under the direction of Deidre Baird. The first song they 

will sing is “All Ye Who Music Love.” Their second piece “O 

My Luv’s Like A Red Red Rose” will be accompanied by Russ 

Baird, Benjamin Knorr, and Raymond Knorr. Ladies and 

gentlemen, the Campbell Collegiate Chamber Choir. 

 

[The choir sang.] 

 

The Speaker: — On behalf of everyone here, I would like to 

thank the choir for their very, very fine performance. 

 

One final announcement. I ask that members and guests observe 

the following order when departing from the Chamber: the 

Speaker’s party; Her Honour’s party; the Premier and 

Provincial Secretary; Leader of the Opposition; judges of the 

Court of Appeal, Queen’s Bench, and Provincial Court; 

members of the cabinet and their spouses; other members of the 

Legislative Assembly and their spouses; and guests. 

 

This House stands adjourned until tomorrow, Thursday, 

October 24th at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:50.] 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE ................................................................................................................................................. 3601 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Pro Forma Bill 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3608 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Pages 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3608 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3608 

MOTIONS 

 Speech from the Throne 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3608 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


