




















































Hansard: March 26, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 39B  TUESDAY, MARCH 26, 2013, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2953 

 March 26, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume on 

the special order. I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll continue to 

make comments on the budget and talk about some of the areas 

where, I guess, certain areas that were not touched on. And I 

guess people were hoping that the government would see some 

of the projects and some of the issues that are facing northern 

Saskatchewan and community members, I guess, in general 

throughout the province. And we’ll talk about some of the areas 

where this budget does not touch that. 

 

And for those joining us this evening, I did open with some 

positive comments about the budget on some of the areas where 

we see we worked with the government and pushed that 

forward. So those are positive comments, and sometimes you 

have to make sure to be fair when we have, I guess, areas where 

we work together for Saskatchewan residents. We want to 

acknowledge that and all of the good things the government can 

do when it puts its heart and mind to what needs to be done. 

 

But having said that, you know, we talked about the roads in 

northern Saskatchewan and got a chance to raise the concerns. 

And we look at Wollaston Lake, and I want to talk about 

Wollaston Lake. You know, here you have the leadership 

having to go out and find a process because the government 

wouldn’t commit to their obligation that they promised in 

February of 2008. We were hoping that money would be in this 

budget to fulfill that obligation and the government again turned 

a back on Wollaston Lake. And we’ve raised that and the 

leadership has been here. We were hoping that that money 

would materialize in this budget because the government was 

talking about the North and moving on some areas in northern 

Saskatchewan. So we thought, maybe the budget. But in the end 

we found out, again, this government has turned their back on 

northern Saskatchewan in many different ways. 

 

And I mean, some may say, in some areas with the . . . You 

look at the revenue going up with the sharing with 

municipalities and the 1 per cent of PST [provincial sales tax] 

and I want to make it very clear. It isn’t that the government 

increased the budget to municipalities with revenue sharing; it’s 

clearly, it’s 1 per cent of the PST. And that percentage is 

because there was more collected of PST, money collected by 

people buying. And that’s good. We see that. That’s good for 

our economy overall. So municipalities seeing an increase. But 

let’s be . . . and make it very clear, it wasn’t because this 

government decided that it was going to target more money for 

municipalities. It’s clearly because the amount of spending and 

the PST has gone up. So revenue went up on individual 

spending. Whether it’s business, whether it’s individual, the 

PST went up. So that’s where that increase comes. 

 

So I don’t think this government should take credit for that, like 

making it sound like . . . And that’s all right. I mean some 

individuals may want to make that sound like that’s a great 

deal, and that’s good. And if individuals get some income, 

municipalities get more income, good for them. It helps. But I 

don’t think that’s going to help their infrastructure needs. This 

is for the organizational dollars they would use to run the 

organizations for their operations. So to be very clear, it’s not 

going to help them with their infrastructure and the challenges 

that a lot of northern communities are feeling. 

 

Whether they’re in rural municipalities, whether you’re in 

urban, whether you’re in the North, Saskatchewan 

municipalities are having challenges. We know that and they’ve 

expressed that with the government, and I think they were 

hoping there would be more money for infrastructure. But for 

whatever reason, the government has chosen to spend their 

money elsewhere. And that’s the decisions of cabinet and 

government to do that. 

 

So when we see that area, we talked about the income coming 

in. And I know Prince Albert, for one, clearly have made it very 

clear. They thought . . . And maybe they gave the government a 

chance to reconsider in the budget that the government went the 

wrong way. But unfortunately the government won’t listen to 

the two MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] and the 

MLAs in that area that are Sask Party. They just will not 

co-operate with them. 

 

So they don’t want to work with them and I guess they don’t 

really get that much say at the end of the day. So having said 

that, I think the people of Prince Albert and the North who 

would utilize that new bridge . . . But when you talk about 

economics and you’re talking about the growth, and the 

government wants to talk about the growth but doesn’t want to 

help in making sure that growth moves forward, whether it’s 

Prince Albert’s second bridge or towards the North, they like to 

take the revenue out and spend it elsewhere. They don’t like to 

give it back. But that’s just one area we can talk about. 

 

The other area, you know, I want to talk a little bit about and I 

think is important, when we talk about northern Saskatchewan 

health care and we see what’s going on. Government announces 

that it’s made a very small increase in the budget to health care, 

you know. But at the end of the day you’re watching 

individuals. You’re watching the health regions talk about it 

and the challenging that they’re facing, and we hear about 

Regina and Saskatoon and just where they are starting out the 

year with their new . . . So it’s going to be interesting to see 

where the health regions go. 

 

And then on top of that, we have a government who says 

through the lean process or . . . we want to find $54 million. 

They want them to find. Well I think some of those health 



2954 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

regions are doing an excellent job and they’re trying to do what 

they can do to meet the patient needs. But where there are 

challenges and where there are shortfalls and where there are 

not the residents of our province being put first, we will make 

that very clear and we will do that as an opposition to bring 

their concerns forward. 

 

So in this budget we see under health care — where were we? 

— and here’s where we see this. We talk about long-term care. 

We talk about our grandparents. We talk about, you know, the 

moms and dads that are going into these long-term care 

facilities, that need these long-term care facilities. And on one 

side we see the government as a pilot. They look at home care 

and they’re doing a little bit of a pilot and that’s great. That’s 

good. And it may help some individuals with home care, and 

that’s good, but there’s a lot and there’s such a need for 

long-term care. 

 

And the government talks about, I think they mention 11 of the 

facilities they announced years ago and they’re just 

re-announcing it. And we’ve talked about the photos they . . . 

[inaudible] . . . more photos — photo ops, we call them. And 

I’ve referred to that and people have them, and we see those 

challenges going. So the government really isn’t making any 

new announcements. It’s just again recycling its announcements 

to hear itself say it’s looking at long-term care for our seniors, 

and it isn’t. Truly, I think the numbers will show and the facts 

are what they are. And the public will start to see that. 

 

Now you can build a brand new facility in any community and 

you could call it long-term care, and let’s say it’s 58 beds, it’s 

50 beds. But if you have 100 long-term care facility that’s old 

and you decided to shut that down and close it down but you’ve 

got a new one that has less beds, you’re no further ahead. And a 

community is struggling. It’s wondering, well what the heck’s 

with that? Really, how does that make any sense? It doesn’t 

make common sense to do that. So that’s the kind of challenges 

that I think people are asking. If you’re giving me a new facility 

but you’re closing down beds in another facility, how are we 

gaining when we need more beds, not less? And yes, we want 

to have new ones. And that’s fine. So this budget doesn’t deal 

with that at all for seniors. 

 

And if we look at La Ronge for instance — and that’s just one 

health region; we have others in the North, communities that are 

saying they need long-term care — but we look at the study that 

the health region did in my community of La Ronge. You look. 

We need a unit that would hold 48 beds. We currently have 16. 

Fourteen are used as long-term; two are respite. It just isn’t 

enough. The report was very clear. It was a critical, code-red 

rating that it got. 

 

Well here we have an opportunity for government to do 

something after they’ve seen the health region do the work that 

they needed to do and a follow-up. And here this government 

again has turned their back on La Ronge, on our seniors, on 

individuals that we should be fighting for, northern seniors, 

seniors who just ask . . . who have done . . . the pioneers. And 

you talk about them. You talk about individuals who have, who 

have made this province what it is today. 

 

But the Sask Party wants to take credit for that, and it’s a sad 

reality to see that. They figure that in 2007 everything changed, 

and that’s how they want to spin it. Well you go ahead and play 

with that and see how that works for you. At the end of the day 

the people of this province know. They know. You could try to 

spin it the way you want, and it’s interesting to see some of the 

challenges that’ll come out of that. 

 

So we look at long-term care, and we see our seniors are not 

getting what they deserve and what they need. And this 

government has to do better when it comes to this type of, I 

guess, a budget item where they don’t deal with long-term care 

the way it is. It’s going to catch up with them. And we know 

that. 

 

So for those seniors I hope this government will not take its 

bullheadedness and move ahead on some of the other priorities 

it sees, like more MLAs. Like those are some of the challenges 

where some people are wondering, where does that come from? 

And when I say that that’s the challenges people see, that this 

government has its priorities and those priorities aren’t what 

seniors and what, I guess, middle-class income earners are 

earning. And they’re struggling, and they’re finding that. 

 

And that takes me to the next thing. When you talk about 

middle class and you talk about they’re doing their best work, 

you know, some of our families, middle-class families, you 

have the husband and wife and they’re both working hard. And 

they’re trying to make sure that there’s a quality of life for their 

children, whether that’s sports, whether it’s schooling. So they 

try to provide a quality education, and they want that for their 

students. They want to be able to make sure that their kids can 

go to post-secondary, university, whatever. So they’re trying to 

save for their retirement; save for their children. 

 

And this government, of course, we see the universities going. 

There’s more and more that students and the families are going 

to have to pay for their education because of the way this 

government’s handled the university. And we talk about 

post-secondary and we see it at both of our universities. And we 

see the announcements. The Opposition Leader today clearly, in 

question period, made it very clear about the budget last year. 

Now that’s coming to effect. Last year’s budget is affecting this 

year. So you see the layoffs that are coming ahead with the 

university. Now here we’re going into a new budget and we 

don’t know yet what impact that will have on layoffs, what type 

of damage will it do the universities and where is the 

commitment. So he made that very clear today. They’re going 

to have to watch this very close and we will be watching it very 

close to see if this budget will address that. But so far we can 

see it did not address that. 

 

Now having said that, we’ll go on to education, talk about the 

quality of education. Everyone wants in the province our 

children to have a good quality education, K to 12 [kindergarten 

to grade 12]. And that’s clear. We see from the Saskatchewan 

school boards and you see the comments they’re making and 

you talk about graduation rates of our Aboriginal students. 

When we talk about First Nations and Métis, we’re just not 

talking about northern Saskatchewan. We’re talking about First 

Nations throughout this province and Métis who live within our 

urban areas, and there is lots of them. And we see this 

government, by this budget, you have failed them miserably. 

You have failed them. This is not going to do what needs to be 

done to deal with it. And it goes further than that. 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2955 

So again you have turned your back on an organization that’s 

saying we’re willing and we have to do a better job. So here 

you have an organization and you have school divisions trying 

to deal with the graduation rates of First Nations, Métis, so that 

they’re in comparison and try to do all you possibly can so that 

First Nations and Métis graduation rates are the same as all 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

And I think everyone in the education, I guess, in the education 

system is trying to work that, whether it’s the board of 

education, whether it’s staff, whether it’s teachers, whether it’s 

support staff. And we see how many support staff we have lost 

with this government’s budget. And could they have done 

better? Yes, they could have done better. They could have given 

more money to deal with some of the situations. And we don’t 

see that happening and that’s sad. 

 

And you’re saying you want to give First Nations and Métis . . . 

And some of the members talk a story and they like to be in the 

photo ops. But I don’t see anything happen. No commitment to 

the First Nations and Métis with the education with the small 

amount that they’re targeting. It isn’t going to do justice to what 

the problem is. Now that tells me something. If you think you 

can put a little band-aid on it and that’s going to make it go 

away, it isn’t. It’s a sad reality. 

 

When you have a population that’s so young, and we look 

under the age of 25, the average overall population. And I’ve 

said this before even with my own grandchildren. Cleary, 

clearly, clearly we see that that’s not going to happen. Within 

my own family I see that as not happening. You have a young 

population. 

 

So having said that, very clearly, this government has missed 

some targets that it needs to address. And the concerns that 

were brought forward to this government, they can’t say they 

didn’t know about it. They don’t know about the problem. 

Because Professor Eric Howe has made it very clear. It’s an 

economic disaster. If this government . . . And it’s this 

government. He points at the Sask Party. And ever since they 

took over in 2007 we see the unemployment rate of First 

Nations and Métis going up and up and up, and it’s getting 

worse and worse under their watch. And why is that? Because 

they truly aren’t committed. If they were committed to it, they 

would say, we’ll deal with this. 

 

And you can say what you want over there, members opposite. 

Very clearly, if your government was committed to dealing 

with this, this wouldn’t be a problem. And it wouldn’t have 

been starting since you took over government year after year, 

steady unemployment rate of First Nations and Métis going up. 

Now you look at First Nations. It’s about 22 per cent. Métis is 

about 12 per cent. What type of record is that when you have 

the rest of the province at an unemployment rate . . . And they 

brag about it. They are happy to say it’s 3 point some per cent. 

And we’re happy for the province that the unemployment rate is 

good. But there is an area where this government has not done 

justice to the people, that they deserve to do better and they 

deserve respect, and they need that. 

 

Now here is an opportunity for this government to deal with the 

situation. But will they? No. Here is an opportunity to talk 

about the growth plan. They talk about where . . . and you talk 

about the professor, Eric Howe, saying it’s an economic 

disaster. If you’re not going to spend the money on educating 

First Nations students, making sure that the graduation rates are 

comparable, if you’re not going to spend the money on training 

and employment programs, and if you see the programs that this 

government has cut year after year from First Nations and Métis 

programs, why would any government, why would any 

government want to cut any type of program that assisted 

helping First Nations and Métis with training? Clearly, why 

would that be? Why would that be? 

 

[19:15] 

 

So having said that, they can sit here and say what they want 

and they can say all that they want to say, but at the end of the 

day, the numbers and the programs and the numbers of First 

Nations and Métis that are unemployed are clearly what the 

issue is. Now they can’t hide from that. Clearly you can’t hide 

from that, their commitment. You can’t hide. 

 

So having said that, unemployment. Now you talk about 

unemployment, clearly, and we look at unemployment, and 

why? Why wouldn’t a government want to do better? Why 

would they not want to do a better job? Clearly they’ve made a 

decision — it is not their priority. First Nations and Métis are 

not a priority with this government. They’ve made that very 

clear. We see that on many different areas and many different 

files. 

 

And you’d look at the budget, and the duties to consult and 

accommodate. Why would they cut any money? Here’s a 

program that the Crowns have an obligation to duty — to 

consult and accommodate First Nations and Métis. And instead 

of using those dollars, they’ve cut the funding to these 

programs. So that what? So they could do less. So they could do 

less because they don’t want to consult First Nations. 

 

They don’t think . . . And if you look at some of the 

correspondence, will this budget deal with some of those 

situations? No. They don’t want to because they’ve turned their 

back, because they don’t think they have a right. But it will get 

challenged in court. And that’s the only way that this 

government seems to handle situations, it’s clear — it’s court. 

Sometimes the court has to clarify for this government because 

they’re bullheaded. They just want to go ahead with their own 

direction, and it doesn’t matter. They don’t want to consult. 

They don’t know to show the respect that deserves. 

 

All people are asking and Aboriginal people are asking, people 

of this province are asking, is the government to consult them, 

talk to them, share. But what do they do? They move ahead on 

their plans. And then they want to come to you after they do 

something, just like this budget, and they’ll say, well this is 

what we were proposing. And we see some of the questions 

we’re getting asked. So there’s interesting things developing 

here as time goes on, and I think it’s going to be clear. 

 

Now we’ll go into housing, housing in northern Saskatchewan 

and the rest of the province. How is it that a government who 

says it wants to support affordable housing can sell off 300 

houses, and then in the budget they announced a small amount, 

and they want to increase, for who? Who’s going to get that 

money? Who’s going to get those opportunities to build those 



2956 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

houses. Insiders? Friends? Who is it? Is it going to be an 

independent body? Is it going to go to housing authorities? I 

don’t think so. I don’t think they’re going . . . 

 

If you look at the program, what they’re going to do, they’re 

going to make it worse and worse. And it’s going to be harder 

for them to deal with the issues that we’re faced with right now, 

Saskatchewan families are faced with — affordable living. And 

you look at some of the challenges that we had, individuals in 

this House. We’ve seen individuals come to this legislature that 

had to come and get the government . . . to lobby and bring the 

concerns and the media and everything to have their rents . . . 

We’ve seen their rents going up 70-some per cent. That doesn’t 

even make sense. 

 

So does this government and budget address that? No it doesn’t 

address that, not at all. But they’re going to pick and choose 

what they want, so this budget’s going to pick and choose. They 

will pick and choose how they want to spin it because that’s 

what they do, the best thing that they’re good at. And I’ll give 

them credit. They spin. They like to spin. 

 

But do you know what? The public and the media is starting to 

pick up on it. And you know, you look at some of the 

comments, and it was interesting to see Murray Mandryk’s 

article today in the Leader-Post and The StarPhoenix. It was a 

very interesting article, very. He shed some lights on some of 

the things that’s going on, on some of the trends and concerns. 

So I think people and the public needs to pay attention to that 

article and read it. I think it’s an interesting article and it makes 

it very clear. 

 

So having said that, you know, we talk about housing. In 

northern Saskatchewan, you know, we want housing to be 

available for people. And we want programs that were up there 

that helped individuals to, you know, whether you were starting 

a new home, if you’re an individual, or you had rent-to-own, 

there was programs in northern Saskatchewan to assist 

individuals to own their own home. It was a good program. 

 

Maybe the government came in and they wanted to review that 

process. There’s nothing wrong with that. Review it. But you 

don’t just cut the whole program off and say, we don’t like that. 

It’s gone. We don’t want this social housing anymore. We want 

private housing. We want the private sector to take over. And 

you know what? We want our friends to get some of this money 

so that they can build these houses, affordable houses for 

people. 

 

That is the wrong way to go. We have organizations and we 

have people who volunteer to sit on housing boards and have 

done an excellent job and continue to do that. They have done 

an excellent job. Don’t take away from them. Give them the 

support they need to make sure that housing is available. But 

does this government do that? No, it goes ahead with its 

bullheadedness and it’s going to go ahead and do what it wants 

to do. It has its agenda and it’s going to get it. 

 

And we look at this budget and we look at the privatization 

area. That’s another area with this budget. People are watching 

the way they’re using the assets and the budget. And if you look 

at the assets that come into this government’s coffers from our 

Crowns, now that is interesting, you know. You look at the 

Crowns and individuals — they want and they used to have, 

you know, the cheapest bundle of utilities in Canada under the 

previous NDP [New Democratic Party] government. And that’s 

a record, something we can stand behind clearly. But will this 

government give that? No, they won’t. Is this budget going to 

address that? No, this budget doesn’t address that. It doesn’t 

even go near that, because you know why? They’ve been taking 

so much money from our Crowns because in special dividends, 

for whatever reason, because they want to call their so-called 

balanced budget — they’re calling their version of it — but if 

you look at the Provincial Auditor, got a different opinion. 

 

You look at what’s going on. And we need this government to 

come clean and start providing the accountability that the 

auditor has asked for, to report the finances the way the auditor 

is recommending, the way the rest of Canada does. And it might 

have been the way previous governments did it and they . . . 

[inaudible] . . . But that doesn’t work anymore. People have 

switched over to something else and there’s a process and a way 

of doing it that makes it easier for the public to understand 

them. And that’s what we need. So we show the true debts and 

we show the income. It’s very simple and it needs to be done. 

And that’s an area. 

 

Now we talk about renovations — and I want to go back to this 

because this is important — renovations and people wanting to 

repair their homes. Sometimes we have to make sure that 

there’s money in this budget to do renovations and repairs. And 

sometimes there are major repairs to homes that people live, 

whether they’re your own home you own or whether it’s the 

housing authority’s. And it seems like the housing authorities 

are getting governments turning their back on the housing 

authorities even. I don’t believe they’re going to get any money, 

increase of money. And I believe that the way they’re dealing 

with it, they might be handling the way they get their funding to 

do maintenance differently. So we’ve got to watch all this stuff. 

It’s going to be interesting to see what happens at the end of the 

day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now having said that, I talked about the options of home. We 

talked about education. We’ve talked about health care and we 

talked about the good job that the health care providers are 

providing, the front-line workers. And they are there. But 

sometimes they need something by government. Government 

controls the budgets. Government controls what they will do. 

And we’ve seen our leader talk about those questions that he’s 

had. 

 

Now it’s interesting, you know, to see and since then to talk 

about a time where government says, we want more jobs for 

Aboriginal people. We want more jobs in northern 

Saskatchewan. And then you have the Premier who goes to his 

annual Prince Albert supper, whatever they want to call it, and 

he makes comments. And it was interesting to see that one of 

the Métis locals over in the Prince Albert area is very upset with 

the comments of the Premier and what he talks about. And he 

kind of refers it to his . . . Wall said that the best programs for 

First Nation/Métis people in Saskatchewan, it’s not programs at 

all. It’s Cameco. 

 

And some people are finding it, well you’re trying to say you 

want to turn over everything to Cameco. So you want Cameco 

to take care of housing. You want all these programs that have 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2957 

been priority for northern people. And not only in the North, in 

the South, you expect Cameco to do this. 

 

The government has an obligation to do the duties, consult and 

accommodate. Let’s make it very clear. The government has 

that obligation to do that. So be very clear. And you know, at 

the end of the day, at the end of the day, you can have 

communities. You can have communities who want to say 

they’re doing really good under this government. That’s fine. 

Some communities. But let’s just make sure that northerners . . . 

And I say northerners, as the family, come together and they 

take care of one another, and they make sure they look out for 

their brothers, sisters and their cousins and their extended 

family. They don’t just take care of their family. They stretch it 

out and they make sure everyone’s taken care of. And I’ve 

watched some of those elders and I’ve watched some of the 

leaders and how they do that. It’s not just their community. 

They make sure when they’re negotiating and they’re doing, 

everybody benefits. And that’s truly about the North. I have 

learned that from northern people. They truly, they truly, they 

truly take care. They truly take care of citizens. They truly care 

of northerners. They take care of their family, their extended 

family. And that is something to be very proud of and they’re 

very proud of. So I give credit. 

 

Now having said that, you can see why there are being concerns 

raised when you have a Premier going on and making these 

type of comments, programs that would be better for Métis and 

First Nations. He talks about the best program would be 

Cameco for them. And that’s alarming to individuals. And I’m 

glad that the public is starting to talk about it. And you know, I 

don’t know if Cameco is aware that the programs that the 

government is supposed to be responsible, the government 

wants to hand off to Cameco. I don’t believe Cameco’s going to 

be so happy. I can’t speak for them, but I know if I was them I 

would be wondering, well, why are we going to be taking care 

of all these programs? So that’s going to be interesting to see 

how Cameco deals with this type of situation when you have 

the Premier going off and saying that. 

 

Now having said that, you know, you look at a program, the 

Aboriginal employment program. A program I say that did an 

excellent job. It truly did. It took partnership. It took Aboriginal 

individuals. It got them into training opportunities. And you 

know what? It got them to work. It got them trained. They got 

the skills that they needed to so that they’re not on assistance, 

so that they could have a better quality of life for their family 

and that’s what they want. It gave them a fair chance. And this 

government seen that, that it was working. So what does it do? 

It cancelled the program. And they should be ashamed of 

themselves for what they’ve done there. And do they come up 

with a new program? No, they don’t. 

 

And then they want to run around and wonder, as they cut all 

the Aboriginal programs in this province since they’ve taken 

over government 2007, then they want to have a task force or 

they want to have a review or they want to have a study. Well 

Aboriginal people, northern people, are tired of their studies 

because these guys don’t do anything with them anyway. So 

there’s exactly what it is. 

 

Where’s their commitment? In this budget will it show any 

commitment to the issues? No, Mr. Speaker, it won’t. They’re 

not committed to doing that. They just like to have photo ops, 

talk about what they’re going to do at the end of the day. The 

challenges are going to be there. It’s going to be there for the 

leadership in the North. It’s going to be for the leadership in our 

province. And that government does not listen. It doesn’t 

consult. 

 

And we see the way they handled files, the film tax credit. 

We’ve seen what they’ve done with that, questions constantly 

being challenges. We see what’s going on when government 

takes public dollars and they introduce them and they’re 

handing them out on, you know — what did they call it? — the 

handshake deals. The word, you know, here’s what it is. You 

take public dollars and you just hand them out like there’s no 

accountability. What is gone with that? 

 

And if you look at . . . The public’s watching this, and they’re 

watching it closely. And it’s not going away. It truly isn’t going 

to go away. If they think, you know, it’s going to go away, it’s 

clearly . . . If you look at the article that I talked about today in 

Mandryk’s column, clearly, in The Star Phoenix and the 

Leader-Post, it shows. And it’s showing a trend. He talks about 

that. And it’s scary that this is the way public dollars are being 

dealt with. And he refers to it. 

 

These guys like yelling out all the time. You know, since I’ve 

come here they yell about SPUDCO. And it was interesting to 

see. It was interesting to see that they want to talk about that 

now. But it’s interesting when you start comparing, and if 

individuals are going to start yelling about that, that’s going to 

be interesting where it evolves. 

 

So that so-called word, you know what? We’ll wait and see 

what happens because I don’t think this is going away. And I 

think as it’s opened up, and as the public gets a hold of the 

information, what you’re doing with their tax dollars — and I 

remind you, hard-earned tax dollars — that people expect you 

to do better, to do better for our students, to do better with our 

children who are going to post-secondary, who are going to 

university, our students. And not only that, to make sure that 

you do what is right with dollars, hard-earned dollars that 

people in this province work hard and they pay their fair share 

. . . Trust me, they do. 

 

And then you have a government who wants to charge . . . And 

you know, it’s fine. They want areas where they want to 

increase. They want to increase 20 per cent for tobacco and then 

they want to also increase the alcohol and tax. They’re going to 

be getting more revenue from the off-sale, which is fine, the 

selling of alcohol. That’s fine. Are they going to target those 

money and those profits, are they going to target them to deal 

with the addictions, with the addictions that are facing our 

province? Addictions — clearly are they going to deal with that 

addiction? Are they going to make sure that if you’re going to 

make regulations and you’re going to make changes that make 

alcohol easier, accessible to our young people, to people in our 

province, will you then provide the addictions treatment? When 

those individuals say, I no longer can make it; I’m struggling — 

will you provide those dollars for the addictions? I don’t believe 

so. I don’t believe so. I don’t believe that this government cares. 

And we’re talking about serious health problems when it comes 

to addictions, youth suicide. We talk about all this and there’s 

organizations working hard. And what does this government 



2958 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

do? It blindsides. It does things that are opposite of what groups 

are doing. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So how is this government in tune with Saskatchewan people? 

This government should be ashamed of itself when it comes to 

the track record on addictions and on what they’re providing 

when it comes to mental health, as well when it comes to 

dealing with the addictions problem. Now having said that, 

there are so many other priorities that individuals have in this 

province. But the government has made its decisions, and 

whether it’s education that’s suffering, that will pay a price, 

whether the health regions will pay a price, whether 

Saskatchewan residents will pay a price because of this 

government’s budget. 

 

And it likes to spin and wants to spin it that everything’s good. 

And when you listen to the auditor and you look up some of the 

findings and you look at the IPAC [International Performance 

Assessment Centre for geologic storage of CO2], you know, you 

look at that situation. If you look at what’s going on and the 

trends going on with this government and friends getting certain 

benefits and certain ones getting special treatment, that’s what 

the public is starting to see. And the government will pay a 

price for that because you have a budget where you could have 

done a lot more for Saskatchewan people, and you should have 

done a lot more for Saskatchewan people. You should have 

done the right thing. 

 

And maybe those backbenchers should have done a little bit of 

more fighting for northern people as well as southern, rural, 

urban — maybe they could have spoke up; maybe they should 

have spoke up — and Aboriginal people as well. They have 

Aboriginal members over there. Speak up. Fight for what’s 

going on. Don’t allow this government to not. Do what you can 

do, whether it’s the Prince Albert bridge, whether it’s fighting 

for Aboriginal people, whether it’s fighting for Saskatchewan 

citizens, our seniors, our young people who are trying to get a 

quality education and a post-secondary. This government has 

not dealt fair with the people and the finances of this province 

to deal with the priorities of Saskatchewan people. And you 

have not, you have not in this budget dealt with a lot of the 

issues that people have brought forward, whether they’re issues, 

concerns, whether they’re truly impacting those communities.  

 

You have missed in this budget. You’ve got some credit. We 

have given you credit. Our leader has given you credit, and I 

know my colleagues have. I have. Where? You’ve done some 

good things. Right on. Good. When we see things helping 

Saskatchewan people and it’s benefiting Saskatchewan people, 

we’re saying yes. Common sense things we’ll support. But 

when it’s not, then our leader and our party will stand up for the 

people who are not getting fair treatment by this government. 

And you know, I will not be supporting the motion. I will be 

supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure tonight to enter in the debate about the sixth balanced 

budget put forward by the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But before I get into the nuts and bolts of this year’s budget, I 

would like to take the opportunity to I guess first off make a 

few thank yous. Thank the ladies who work in my office in 

Lloydminster. We have a very busy office there. We try to be 

very active, and I think the service we provide is terrific — 

getting back to people, ensuring that people are heard, and 

moving issues forward. So thank you to Caren and Marilyn for 

the hard work that they do in the office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues have done the same thing, 

but we thank our wives and we don’t do it often enough. But, 

Mr. Speaker, it is something that I’m very blessed to have such 

a great wife that is so supportive and such a great partner for me 

with the work I do and the girls we’re raising. So thank you to 

my wife. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have one other thank you to make. It 

wasn’t one that I had thought of right away, but the fact is I left 

my speech on my desk over the lunch hour, and when I came 

back, scrawled in a slightly different handwriting was 

“seatmate.” So, Mr. Speaker, seeing how that my seatmate was 

so kind to help me write my speech, I really should thank the 

member from Martensville for being a good seatmate, handing 

me notes when appropriate, and when my speech is lacking, she 

even takes the time to beef it up a little. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about 

Lloydminster. It’s a great town. It’s one of the fastest growing 

cities in all of Canada. It’s consistently named one of the most 

entrepreneurial cities in the country. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

place where a young man, a young woman with ambition, with 

drive, can start off with almost nothing. If they’re willing to 

work hard, very quickly, Mr. Speaker, they can start making 

something of themselves and very quickly really be doing well. 

And I’ve seen it many times where a young person will get a 

job driving a semi, driving a truck, a pressure truck. After a year 

or two, they’ve saved enough money to buy their own truck. 

After a couple years of that, they buy two or three and start 

hiring people. And, Mr. Speaker, that story has repeated itself 

over and over in Lloydminster. It is true entrepreneurism, and it 

has made our town a very exciting and dynamic place where 

people from all backgrounds, all qualifications, with one 

common ability of willingness to work and to put themselves 

forward can really do well. 

 

An interesting thing happened not long ago, Mr. Speaker, in 

Lloydminster. Me and my wife were at one of our favourite 

restaurants. It’s a shawarma shop. A young man who’s moved 

here from Lebanon named Mo — I think it’s probably short for 

Mohammed — but we have got friendly over the last couple of 

years. He’s moved to Lloydminster. He’s gotten married in the 

last year and has just a three-month-old little baby girl, Mr. 

Speaker, new to Canada, new to Lloydminster. 

 

He’s an example of a young person with drive and ambition. He 

struggles with what many people in Lloydminster do, hiring 

enough staff. And I think he works about 20 hours a day, seven 

days a week. And just recently he has brought on some more 

staff. But he makes a great shawarma and I’m a little bit 

addicted to it. It’s something me and Ali and my girls like a fair 

bit. 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2959 

But one day, Mr. Speaker, we were in there. We were enjoying 

our lunch, and an interesting thing happened. We’re sitting 

looking out the window and a big white panel truck pulls up out 

front and three gentlemen jump out, in black pants and white 

shirts and hats. They were Hutterites, Mr. Speaker. And one ran 

next door into the 7-Eleven and the other two came into Mo’s 

shawarma shop. And my first thought was, I’d never really put 

together the German cooking style of the Hutterites and 

shawarma. It just didn’t dawn on me that that would be the type 

of food that they would necessarily be attracted to. 

 

But an interesting thing happened. They talked to Mo for a few 

minutes, and the young man ran back out to the truck, grabbed a 

couple of bags of potatoes, and in and sold Mo a couple of bags 

of potatoes. And I thought, this is a Lloydminster story where 

people that had come to Canada 100 years ago to build a better 

life have been terrifically successful, are a great part of our 

community . . . The Hutterites just north of the North 

Saskatchewan River are a fantastic part of our local community 

and, Mr. Speaker, they are engaging in entrepreneurial business 

with the newest newcomers to Saskatchewan, the newest wave 

of immigration. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s stories like that that 

make Lloydminster great, that make Saskatchewan great, and 

we’re seeing more and more of that all the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, looking more directly at this year’s budget, a 

quote came to me that I thought really stands out to this budget 

and how this budget differs from maybe some budgets and 

history of the former government in the past. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this is an E.E. Cummings quote and it is, “The three saddest 

things are the ill wanting to be well, the poor wanting to be rich, 

and the constant traveler saying ‘anywhere but here’.” And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is something that I believe is truly encapsulated in 

this budget, in the success of Saskatchewan in recent years 

relative to what was in the history of Saskatchewan over the 

years previous. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the three saddest things, 

the ill wanting to be well, the thing that dawns on me, Mr. 

Speaker, is in this budget we directly address this issue. We 

address the collaborative emergency care centres that our 

Minister of Rural and Remote Health has been championing 

that will be making a meaningful difference in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and something that health care 

affects everyone in Saskatchewan, and that commitment is a 

major part of this budget. 

 

Also the $2 million for innovative home care services, Mr. 

Speaker. This is something that I think both sides of the aisle 

will agree that home care is going to be a fundamental piece of 

ensuring health care, of taking the pressure off of our health 

care system by putting targeted investments into home care. 

Another is the Alzheimer’s First Link. Again, Mr. Speaker, I 

think both sides of the aisle would agree that supporting our 

Alzheimer’s families is crucial, support to those families. It’s a 

support to our entire system, Mr. Speaker, by taking the 

pressure off the system by putting those supports in place. 

 

And maybe the most obvious and the most emblematic of the 

past five years of this government has been our investments 

over the past four years on surgical wait times. Mr. Speaker, 

when we took over government, the wait times in this province 

were the longest in the country. It was an embarrassment in a 

national context and in a Saskatchewan context. We had 

neighbours, we had relatives, everyone in this province was 

touched with a wait-list of one, two years, Mr. Speaker. A bold 

target was put forward that nobody in Saskatchewan should 

wait longer than three months for surgery and, Mr. Speaker, we 

are in the fourth year. We’ve seen terrific success, and this 

year’s budget carries on that work with great commitments to 

round out the four-year target and get those wait times down 

where they’re acceptable. 

 

When I reflect back, Mr. Speaker, to budgets in the past that the 

former government put forward in regards to wait times and 

some of the issues around them, I was reading through a news 

article from 1996-97 when the NDP’s fifth budget . . . And it 

outlines civil service cuts. It outlines grant reductions, and 

there’s a specific mention in that time period about wait times. 

And about the same time, the Fraser Institute brought out their 

list, and it was wait times for surgeries are the worst in the 

nation according to the Fraser Institute. The government’s reply 

to this, Mr. Speaker, was that no one really knows how long the 

wait-lists are. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is telling on a couple of different fronts. 

One, they were the longest in the country as articulated by a 

third party. But, Mr. Speaker, this was in a Globe and Mail 

article from the 29th of March, and the fact that they didn’t 

know how long the lines were, they were two steps away from 

even setting a target. Because if you can’t quantify how bad 

things are, how do you know what an appropriate target would 

be? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that that, Mr. Speaker, that would have 

something to do with the ideology of the members opposite and 

them not wanting to do any sort of testing in our schools 

because they wouldn’t set targets. They wouldn’t know how 

long the lines are or, Mr. Speaker, where the investments 

needed to happen. 

 

But on health care, Mr. Speaker, the saddest thing is the ill 

wanting to be well. In this year’s budget, we’re seeing that the 

ill will be getting well, and that is very important here in our 

province. Mr. Speaker, the second saddest thing is the poor 

wanting to be rich, according to E.E. Cummings’ quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to reflect first on the record of the NDP 

and some of the stuff that I picked out of former budgets that 

the members opposite brought forward. And the one that stands 

out for me is again 1996-97 budget. And the members that sat 

on that side of the House then, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

members that have then migrated to this side of the House 

under the Sask Party, and Arlene Julé, accompanied by our 

minister for Social Services, made some very big issues of what 

they saw as flaws in those budgets. 

 

And one was the food allowance, Mr. Speaker, for families. The 

poor that were in shelters back then, our most vulnerable 

people, Mr. Speaker, were forced to live on $4 a day worth of 

food. And Arlene Julé, our minister of Social Services, took on 

the challenge of living on $4 a day, Mr. Speaker, and they 

couldn’t do it. After a couple of days, they realized, Mr. 

Speaker, that that was a ridiculous amount, something that has 

been addressed by this government, Mr. Speaker, really from 

when we became government and even further addressed in this 



2960 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

year, Mr. Speaker, where our Minister of Social Services 

corrected another injustice. Families would come into shelters, 

Mr. Speaker, and only one child would be recognized. 

Following the changes made this year by our Minister of Social 

Services, now all the children are recognized, all . . . If there is 

five children, five children get funded as opposed to one child 

being funded for food, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But going back, Mr. Speaker, to when they were . . . the NDP 

were in government, their minister at the time was Lorne 

Calvert, the future premier of the province, NDP premier. And 

Lorne Calvert said, Mr. Speaker, that . . . and I’ll quote here 

from the news article from the Gazette: 

 

Earlier this week, Social Services minister Lorne Calvert 

provoked anger when he suggested that disabled residents 

of group homes are getting more money for food than the 

average Saskatchewan person spends. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, at $4 a person per day, Mr. Speaker, I would 

question his math. I’d question his judgment and I would say 

that that was shameful. Mr. Speaker, in The StarPhoenix article 

at that same time, I’ll quote again: 

 

The $4 daily food allowance the government provides to 

disabled adults living in group homes is more than what’s 

required to feed the average Saskatchewan resident, says 

Social Services minister Lorne Calvert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was a time when the poor, Mr. Speaker, were 

not treated with the respect they needed. Where our most 

vulnerable disabled adults living in group homes, Mr. Speaker, 

were not treated with the respect that we would expect and that 

now is in place here in Saskatchewan. The flip side of that, Mr. 

Speaker, is today in Saskatchewan we see we have the fastest 

growing incomes in the country. That we’ve raised our food 

allowances in shelters. That opportunities abound and that this 

government, Mr. Speaker, has endeavoured to put a level 

playing field for all citizens. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third point made by Mr. E.E. Cummings in his 

quote is that the third saddest thing is that the constant traveller 

says, anywhere but here. And again, Mr. Speaker, a great story 

to tell in this year’s budget. We have the fastest growing time 

period in our population in over a hundred years. We see the 

people are coming to our province from across the country, 

from around the world to find opportunity. They’re bringing 

their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can’t go anywhere in our province without 

seeing it, whether it’s the potash mines, the oil fields, the 

uranium mines. We just in recent times have even seen a 

resurgence in the interest in the forestry sector, Mr. Speaker, as 

lumber prices have started to rebound. And we see investments, 

Mr. Speaker, in that field as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the flip side of that is under the former NDP 

government the “anywhere but here” line was most eloquently 

articulated by a press release put out by the NDP in 2003 where 

they boastfully said in their press release, “Outmigration is at 

the lowest level in four years.” Well, I bet you there was a real 

pat yourself on the back party with that one. I think that the next 

line would have been, you know, as people are speeding 

towards the border, we’ve seen them slow down from 130 

kilometres an hour to just 110. Their efforts to get out of our 

province are only half as great as they were in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is foolishness. The reality is in 2005, Mr. 

Speaker, when that quote came out, Saskatchewan was a great 

place to be. Today in Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan is a great 

place to be. And, Mr. Speaker, we now have the economic 

pieces in place. We have the cultural and social pieces in place 

to create the environment where people are very keen to make 

this their home, to raise their families in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to talk a little bit about some of the 

reasons that I think that that is not just important today but is 

important in the long term as incredibly sustainable. Just this 

week the figures came out on the investment intentions. This is 

put out by the Saskatchewan Business Magazine. They 

interview from across the country and they put together a list of 

business intentions for investments across the country. 

Saskatchewan has seen our business and our investment 

numbers go through the roof in recent years. This year, $20.5 

billion of public and private investment — the bulk of that, the 

large bulk of that is private investments, Mr. Speaker — oil and 

gas and mining, 8.2 billion; agriculture and forestry, 1.3 billion; 

housing, Mr. Speaker, $3.7 billion worth of investment in our 

province. This number is double, is over double what it was just 

a few years ago. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the reason this is important, these 

investments are going into our province today, are going to 

serve our province for 100 years. We look at potash mines 

where the shafts were sunk 50 years ago. Mosaic had their 50th 

anniversary of their mine sinking here this past fall. They’ve got 

a 50-year, Mr. Speaker, plan to mine out of that shaft still ahead 

of it. So all the development we’re seeing today, this $20 

billion, Mr. Speaker, it means this is the first step. This is the 

foundational building blocks of what will ultimately be the 

continued growth and prosperity, the jobs, the full communities, 

the full schools, the skating rinks, Mr. Speaker, for generations 

to come. At Esterhazy, 50 years on there are young men, young 

women going to work in that mine today whose fathers and 

grandfathers, Mr. Speaker, were there when the mine was first 

sunk back 50 years ago. 

 

Now the potash industry has had quite a storied existence in the 

last 50 years, a large portion of it thanks to the members 

opposite and the economic policies that they put forward 

through the ’70s. But, Mr. Speaker, more of that in a little bit. 

The other interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, is what does $20 

billion of investment, $20.5 billion mean relative to what we 

have? If you do the math, it works out to about $20,000 for 

every man, woman, and child being invested in our province for 

long-term sustainability. If we look at other provinces like 

Ontario or Quebec, those numbers are less than $10,000, less 

than half the investment going into those provinces as is going 

on here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that speaks to the investment 

climate that we have in Saskatchewan, one with stability, stable 

royalties, stable taxation, stable political climate, Mr. Speaker, 

that allow these long-term investments to be put in place with 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2961 

confidence. And in other provinces that is not the case. And 

reading recent headlines coming out of Eastern Canada where 

Quebec is committed to raising their royalties, that they think 

that that won’t have a detrimental effect on their mining and 

investment industry, Mr. Speaker, that is a different path than 

we’re taking here. It’s a different path than what the members 

opposite continue to put forward. And, Mr. Speaker, I know 

that the members opposite sometimes feel like we’re putting 

words in their mouth, that we say they are talking about royalty 

reviews and we can’t trust the NDP, that they have a history of 

this sort of thing. Well, Mr. Speaker, they keep reconfirming it 

for us. 

 

And this past weekend I was reading through the prairie dog, as 

I do most weekends, Mr. Speaker. And there was a great article 

in here, Mr. Speaker, about . . . And I’m going to quote. It was 

“Talking To Cam Broten.” So, Mr. Speaker, on the front cover 

it says, “Cam Broten. Meet the new NDP leader.” And, Mr. 

Speaker, I couldn’t put it down. It was a page-turner, if you 

will. And I thought that a couple of the points that he had 

brought forward in his interview were worthy of discussion 

during this speech. And the first, Mr. Speaker, was in regards to 

raising royalties and what it would do to the investment climate 

here in our province . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well he 

doesn’t even beat around the bush. He comes right out and says, 

“I’ve said . . . ” and I’m quoting here, Mr. Speaker, “I’ve said 

there needs to be a royalty review and I’m committed to that . . . 

job as Opposition leader . . .” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they talked about raising royalties in the 

campaign. They were thoroughly rebuked, Mr. Speaker. They 

talked about raising royalties I believe in their Dwain 

Lingenfelter orange book that again was Dwain Lingenfelter 

and the current NDP leader put together. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

know that. And I’m going to quote again here, Mr. Speaker. 

The only person that has signed this book is in fact the current 

Leader of the NDP. And at the end of the first page . . . Maybe I 

will start at the top of the first page, the transferral letter. It 

says, “Dear fellow New Democrats,” and at the bottom, I’m 

going to read the last line. It says, “We have listened to your 

ideas. We share your dreams of a better Saskatchewan.” Well I 

can appreciate that. And I continue to quote, “Working together, 

we can turn those dreams into a reality. Cam Broten, MLA, 

Chair of the policy review task force.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this document was the Dwain Lingenfelter 

playbook. It was put together by the Leader of the Opposition, 

and instead of distancing himself from it, instead of saying that 

this document from their campaign that was thoroughly 

rebuked, that led to nine lonely seats, Mr. Speaker, on the 

opposition bench, instead of saying that this is something that 

we’re going to run from, in fact, no. He’s now leader. He’s 

going to embrace the Dwain Lingenfelter ideology. He’s going 

to continue on that path of continued, Mr. Speaker, negative . . . 

He wants to create a climate where we don’t have the 

investments, where we don’t have the growing population, 

where we don’t have the type of Saskatchewan that so many 

people have waited for, are living, and hoping continue. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, while I have the prairie dog out, there was 

one other thing that caught my eye. It doesn’t necessarily tie in 

to the royalty section but it is something that again I thought 

was worth mentioning. It was to a question to the member, the 

Leader of the Opposition. The question was, “How concerned 

are you about the party’s presence in rural Saskatchewan?” You 

know, I think that’s a legitimate question, Mr. Speaker, because 

rural Saskatchewan is a fundamental piece of our province. It’s 

the heart and soul of our province in many ways. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it has been a place where the members opposite have 

been absolutely absent for over 15 years, Mr. Speaker, and 25 

years I hear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that in my riding that we haven’t seen a member from 

the opposition in years. In fact I’ve considered hosting an NDP 

leaders debate in our riding myself just to get those ideas 

exposed, because no one in Lloydminster would believe that 

there were members that were putting forward royalty reviews 

and advocating raising royalties on all the extractive resources. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important that we air 

these types of ideas and let people know in the light of day that 

the hard-working men and women of Lloydminster . . . that the 

members opposite are espousing such things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the thing that I want to point out about the rural 

Saskatchewan is, “We need to focus on building strong rural 

communities because that’s what people want. And that’s what 

we are good at as New Democrats . . .” Mr. Speaker, I can’t 

believe . . . Like I respect that they should reach out. I would be 

pleased if they did. I think that’s good for our province. I think 

that it would be good for their party. But, Mr. Speaker, to claim 

that they are good at building rural communities is the farthest 

thing from the truth. The people on this side of the House, the 

people of rural Saskatchewan lived through the 16 years of 

abandonment led by the closing of the hospitals, the shrinking 

school populations, the property tax, Mr. Speaker, that was 

never-ending. Rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, paid a dear, 

dear price for the 16 years that the members opposite were in 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would like to see them do the outreach. I would like to 

see them connect. I think it would be good for our province. But 

to try and claim that what they’re good at is building strong 

rural communities, Mr. Speaker, that is a little more than I think 

most people can take. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I get into a little more about my portfolio and 

some of the things in this budget that relate to that, another 

quote that jumps out at me is a Benjamin Franklin quote. And it 

says, “Without continual growth and progress, such words as 

improvement, achievement, and success have no meaning.” 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I could not agree more. 

 

Now those words had very little meaning when the members 

opposite were in government. There was no growth. There was 

decline. There was systemic decline across the health care 

system, across the economy, across the population, across the 

school-aged children, Mr. Speaker, in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is no longer the case. This budget truly 

articulates a vision that has growth and progress and, Mr. 

Speaker, where we can see all over our province that we are 

going to continue to see improvement, achievement, and 

success. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that part of that is ensuring we have 

the right investment climate. I think part of that is just telling a 



2962 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

story, telling the right story about our province, because for far 

too long the wrong story of our province was told. There were 

people, Mr. Speaker, there were people from outside our 

province that necessarily didn’t know the great things going on 

here, and people inside our province and, Mr. Speaker, part of 

. . . people in the government that told the wrong story about 

our province. 

 

And shortly after becoming Minister of Energy and Resources, 

I was touring a gold mine. And one of the geologists told me 

that when he went through university at Queen’s University in 

Ontario, his profs used to say that you couldn’t find meaningful 

properties for gold deposits in Saskatchewan or anywhere very 

far west because our geological time of our Canadian Shield 

was too young. It didn’t have meaningful mineralization like 

the Canadian Shield does in Ontario and Quebec, and 

apparently those rocks are much older. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we now have four operating gold mines in 

our province. We have one that has poured its millionth ounce 

of gold just this summer. And, Mr. Speaker, we now know that 

that geological assessment is absolutely wrong. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s important that anyone that knows better 

spreads the word about how great the investment climate and 

opportunities are here in our province. 

 

The one a little closer to home, Mr. Speaker, is the explanation I 

heard for years, outside of Lloydminster, where the oil fields on 

the Alberta sides were very, very prolific and prosperous, but 

on the Saskatchewan side of the border there were far less 

drilling, far less production. And I can remember NDP political 

leaders talking about why that was. And the explanation was it 

was a geological anomaly, that yes there was an ocean that 

covered most of the centre of the continent, but for some 

strange reason all the plankton seemed to die on one side of the 

border, and that’s why they have such prolific reserves. Well 

the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that we have seen with the right 

business climate, with the right message out about 

Saskatchewan, that in fact the dinosaurs died on both sides of 

the border and that both provinces are in the midst of very 

successful economic times because of it. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

is something we are going to continue to do. 

 

[20:00] 

 

In this budget, Mr. Speaker, in specifics, some very important 

pieces in regards to energy and resources. Probably the largest 

was the uranium royalties, Mr. Speaker. It is something that the 

members opposite put in place about 13 years ago. To talk 

about how the changes happen, at that time, Mr. Speaker, in 

2001, the NDP put together a royalty system that was based on 

assumptions. Costs were allocated based on projects. And over 

time, Mr. Speaker, it was expected that the costs would not 

necessarily reflect . . . would get further and further out of skew 

from the actual costs. So it would be very good in the short 

term, but in the longer term, Mr. Speaker, it would no longer be 

relevant. 

 

And in fact that is the situation we found ourselves in. In recent 

years in Saskatchewan as we saw the growth, the prosperity, we 

saw construction costs, Mr. Speaker, increase at a faster rate 

than even inflation. And what that meant is that our uranium 

industry was no longer competitive for bringing on new mines. 

Even though we have the richest uranium in the world, the most 

amount of uranium in the world, in recent years, Mr. Speaker, 

we have seen the investments going to places like Kazakhstan 

because we had a fundamental structural flaw in our uranium 

system. 

 

Following this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, we now have a 

system that’s based on actual costs. We know that mining 

companies can invest with certainty because it’s no longer an 

assumption-based, and those assumptions that were so far 

skewed from the reality of the costs they would have is now 

brought back in line with actual costs. 

 

The second piece, Mr. Speaker, is that we had a three-tiered 

system: 6, 10, and 15 per cent. For simplicity, Mr. Speaker, we 

dropped the lowest tier of 6 per cent, and we now just have the 

two higher royalty points at 10 and 15, with the split at $22, Mr. 

Speaker. We think that this is not just an important thing for the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the royalties we’ll collect. 

This is a fundamental piece for the growth that we want to see 

in northern Saskatchewan.  

 

We know that northern communities, northern families want to 

have the same opportunities that those in the South do. And the 

mining industry, Mr. Speaker, has created jobs in the potash 

area. The oil industry has created jobs in Lloydminster, in 

Yorkton, and Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. In northern 

Saskatchewan, we are sitting on top of some fantastic uranium 

properties. And getting the fundamentals right and ensuring we 

have a system that adequately reflects cost is going to be 

fundamental in ensuring that we see projects move forward 

because it has been over a decade since we’ve seen a new mine 

come into production, Mr. Speaker, and we think that it is 

crucial for providing the employment and the growth that those 

communities want to see. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to reach out to our 

members opposite. The member for Athabasca on occasion has 

spoken about the uranium industry. I believe that he is a 

supporter of the development and what it means to northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that he is confirming his support of 

this industry, and I am certain that the industry is supportive of 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The problem, Mr. Speaker, is his leader because it’s been tough 

to get an answer out of him as to whether he supports the 

changes to the royalty system, Mr. Speaker, whether he 

supports the new mines, that if they want to come forward now, 

have an environment to do so. And in fact just last Thursday, he 

was asked three separate times: do you support this royalty 

change which will support growth in northern Saskatchewan? 

And on three separate times, Mr. Speaker, he was nowhere to 

be seen. He talked in platitudes. He talked in the triple bottom 

line. He came up with every reason he could not to either 

support it or not support it. He had time to look at it but, Mr. 

Speaker, he had no opinion. In fact he was looking for any out 

he could find. 

 

So I would ask the member for Athabasca to lean over two 

seats, to talk to his leader, to express his concerns as to why this 

is the right thing, why this is important in his riding, in his 

communities and, Mr. Speaker, we hope for his support in this 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2963 

regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s other examples, Mr. Speaker, of where 

we’ve had a hard time getting the Leader of the Opposition to 

have an opinion. And, Mr. Speaker, we need him to have an 

opinion at times. He is not just the Opposition Leader; he’s the 

Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we had a situation here about three weeks 

ago where the federal Opposition Leader, Mr. Speaker, again an 

NDP leader, went to Washington, DC. And, Mr. Speaker, for a 

little context, we right now in Saskatchewan have a bit of a 

challenge in our oil industry. We’re producing, we’re producing 

more oil today than we ever have before. We set a record this 

year, Mr. Speaker, for oil production. We are going to continue 

to have very prolific oil fields. The problem is we only have a 

limited amount of pipeline capacity, and we need to get it to 

market. 

 

We currently refine more oil than we use, and we export it into 

Manitoba. But, Mr. Speaker, we have to get the rest of it to 

market. Traditionally most of it has gone to the Gulf Coast, to 

Texas. We’re looking at outlets to the West Coast. We think 

that those will be important. Industry is also looking at options 

to take oil to the East Coast, Mr. Speaker, to Montreal. But in 

the immediate term, the Gulf Coast and Texas are the next 

options that we need to have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Keystone XL pipeline is in the news every day. There’s a 

national effort for provincial leaders, our ambassador, the Prime 

Minister, the minister of trade federally, the minister of energy 

and resources federally, Mr. Speaker, have been in Washington, 

have been in Chicago, have been in New York talking about the 

importance of this project not just for Canada but also for the 

United States. 

 

And it is important for the United States, Mr. Speaker. We think 

there’s a great case. There’s a great safety record. There’s a 

great route, Mr. Speaker, that has been approved by all the 

states that it runs through. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re now 

waiting on the president, President Obama, to approve it with a 

presidential permit. 

 

With all this effort going forward, Mr. Speaker, it is reminiscent 

of the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] crisis where all 

of Canada bound together to try and find a market for our cattle. 

Today all of Canada is bound together to try and find a market 

for our oil. All but, Mr. Speaker, one small group, a small group 

of NDP. The federal leader, the federal deputy leader have both 

been in the United States, in Washington, actively lobbying 

against an access outpoint to export our oil. And, Mr. Speaker, 

when we needed them the most, they did the exact opposite 

things. If they would’ve sat on their hands, it would’ve been 

better than what they did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if Mr. Mulcair can take his words 

back. In fact I know that he can’t. I would ask that, Mr. 

Speaker, that he retract them or do what he can to put the 

toothpaste back in the bottle. But we can’t control him; we’re 

not a federal party or neither a federal opposition.  

 

But his provincial counterparts, Mr. Speaker, they had a role 

here too. When Mr. Mulcair was in Washington speaking 

against the interests of the people of Saskatchewan, where was 

the Saskatchewan NDP and the Saskatchewan NDP leader? Mr. 

Speaker, they were hiding under a pile of coats. It took two 

days, Mr. Speaker, for the Leader of the Opposition to find his 

way out from under the pile of coats, out of the coatroom to 

give a lukewarm response to say that actually he thinks he was 

in favour of the Keystone XL. And, Mr. Speaker, he wasn’t 

sure. And the reality was, Mr. Speaker, in the past he hasn’t 

been. It’s only recently that he’s had the conversion to support 

the Keystone XL — one day too late and a little too short. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take him back about a year. We 

had a vote here in this House on this very issue, on the 

Keystone XL. And, Mr. Speaker, it was a private member, the 

member for Thunder Creek, the member for Thunder Creek put 

forward a motion, and the motion, Mr. Speaker, was: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon all parties [all parties] in the 

federal Parliament of Canada to unite in support of the 

Keystone XL pipeline project . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a very simple, very non-political 

statement, Mr. Speaker, that we voted on: that we would ask all 

parties. We didn’t name anyone. We didn’t embarrass anyone. 

We just wanted a united stance from the legislature of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And what happened, Mr. Speaker? We talked about it for three 

separate weeks on private members’ day, and then we had an 

opportunity to vote on it. And we had a standing vote where 

each member could stand up and be asked, do you support the 

Keystone XL pipeline and that we would ask the federal 

government to support it. Everyone on this side of the House, 

Mr. Speaker, voted one way. We voted that in fact we wanted a 

common stance from Saskatchewan, and we wanted the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker, to also have a common stance in 

support of the Keystone XL. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking at the results here. There was 37 

that said yea. And, Mr. Speaker, with just a quick scan through 

the names here, Mr. Speaker, I see quite a strong correlation 

that all 36 are on this side of the House. So I asked myself, who 

said nay? Well there were six, Mr. Speaker, the nimble six. 

And, Mr. Speaker, what six would vote against the Keystone 

XL pipeline? Well it would seem that all six of them, Mr. 

Speaker, including the Leader of the Opposition, voted against 

the motion to support the Keystone XL pipeline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we needed them most, they were nowhere to 

be seen. They show up two days late and give a lukewarm 

response. I know it isn’t always easy to be the leader. It isn’t 

always easy to have a federal counterpart. But when the people 

of Saskatchewan need you to stand up, you need to stand up. 

That is leadership, Mr. Speaker, and that was sorely missing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have been finding themselves in a 

difficult spot here for a little while in regards to oil 

development, in regards to oil sands development. And, Mr. 

Speaker, just going through the headlines recently, there’s been 

several articles. And I know that the members opposite can’t 

control their counterpart, but I think the ideology shows through 

in the vote and in much that goes on. 

 



2964 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there was an article in a very great 

newspaper, the Meridian Booster from Lloydminster, and the 

headline is “Alberta NDP joins oilsands bashing.” Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the quote that I’ve highlighted here is, “‘The oilsands 

has given Alberta and Canada a black eye . . . [in] the rest of the 

world,’ provincial NDP Leader Brian Mason said.” Mr. 

Speaker, that is not the kind of common front we need when 

we’re sending a common message to the Americans that this is 

important to our country and important to their country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to oil development, Mr. Speaker 

. . . and we have a great chance in northern Saskatchewan for 

our oil sands. We think that they’re going to move forward at 

some point, Mr. Speaker, in the medium term. Cenovus has 

bought the property off Oilsands Quest. In the fall land sale, 

Mr. Speaker, two other oil sands properties were picked up by 

another company to start bringing them, Mr. Speaker, into the 

exploratory stage. We have I believe it’s close to 37 000 square 

kilometres of potential in our oil sands where there may be oil 

sands development. We see what is happening in Alberta and 

the growth that it’s providing and the jobs and the opportunity. 

We think that it’s important for the people that live in northern 

Saskatchewan to have the same opportunity. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we had a bit of a debate here in 

Saskatchewan on that a couple years ago. And in fact we had 

a group come to the legislature, as many do and, Mr. Speaker, 

they were protesting. They did not want to see development 

in Saskatchewan’s oil sands, and they had a protest out front. 

I believe it was fossil fools day and they had people dressed 

up. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine. I think it’s great that people 

come to their legislature to lobby government, to make a 

statement. But what is challenging, Mr. Speaker, is that 

members from the NDP were out there lobbying with them, 

were protesting the Government of Saskatchewan to shut any 

option for oil sands in Saskatchewan. And the most troubling 

thing is, Mr. Speaker, the leader, the former leader of the 

opposition was out there. The member for Athabasca, Mr. 

Speaker, joined them. The protest proposed oil sands 

development in northern Saskatchewan should be shut down. 

And the member for Athabasca was out front, probably 

carrying a sign, Mr. Speaker, saying no development in my 

riding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have to confront, Mr. Speaker, these sorts of challenges. 

We think that any development in northern Saskatchewan 

and southern Saskatchewan has to meet a very high and 

rigorous standard for environmental responsibility. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is across our province and an absolute 

responsibility that we expect to happen. But with that caveat 

in mind, Mr. Speaker, we want to see the opportunity and 

jobs that projects like this can bring forward. And I would 

ask those members to join with us and bring it forward. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to move through a little bit here, Mr. 

Speaker, talking about their federal leader as well on the Dutch 

disease. This is something, Mr. Speaker, that I think also needs 

addressed. They have a federal leader that has bashed our 

province, has bashed Western Canada, that our success is 

hurting where he represents in Eastern Canada. Mr. Speaker, we 

fundamentally disagree with that premise. The strength in 

Western Canada is a strength for all of Canada. The export 

market for the manufacturing in his province is our province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we want that leader, the federal leader of the 

New Democrats, to recognize this. But more than that, we want 

the provincial leader, Mr. Speaker, to again get out from under 

the pile of coats, get into the rotunda, and refute any statement 

that bashes our province and the great work that’s happening 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with these comments about the portfolio that I 

oversee, I just want to wrap up by saying I think that this is a 

budget that is going to continue to keep the advantages here in 

Saskatchewan, that continues to move our province forward. 

It’s a fiscally responsible budget. It’s a budget that’s going to 

serve us well in coming years. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 

proud of the work that our Minister of Finance has done in his 

leadership as Finance minister and of Treasury Board. It’s 

something that I think our whole province can be proud of, that 

we are likely to have the only balanced budget in the country. 

It’s going to be something that is recognized nationwide and 

probably beyond that. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I want to confirm that I will be 

supporting this budget. I call on the members opposite to 

recognize the value and the important pieces in this budget and 

support it as well. And with that, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m going 

to begin tonight by just recognizing the work of some young 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. Earlier this afternoon I 

made some comments about a group of Moosomin Baptist 

Church youth who, when informed of a friend of theirs father 

facing a challenge with cancer, organized a fundraising event in 

the community. And I had the pleasure of attending a couple of 

the events that happened on the weekend. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

one of the things they put together was a beef supper and they 

actually set three settings starting at 5:30, 6:30, and 7:30, and 

each and every one of those settings, Mr. Speaker, was sold out. 

Not only that. A number of young people took the task of 

gathering articles to be used in the silent auction as well as 

working together with the recreation director to put on a 

fundraising hockey game involving a hockey team from the 

community of Melville. 

 

Everything being said, Mr. Speaker, these young people whose 

motto was, we believe in prayer, not only spoke of helping the 

family financially but spoke of how they could reach out to the 

family in a spiritual way. And as a result of their work and 

effort, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier about the fact that some 

$36,000 had been raised. At the moment I chatted with them 

they were still waiting for some of those numbers to come in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks very well because on many 

occasions we actually hear of young people and the things, the 

difficult challenges they get themselves into or how they get 

involved in very negative opportunities in the province. So I 

think that speaks for young people and that there are young 

people in this province who are thinking not only of themselves 

but of others. 

 

And then tonight at the reception for the Saskatchewan Council 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2965 

for International Cooperation, I was talking to a young 

university student who spoke of one of the initiatives they have 

implemented. And what they have done is they’re raising funds 

and helping support I believe it’s four young girls, and I forget 

the country that they’ve come from, giving them the 

opportunity to come to this country and to get an education. 

And I thought here again, Mr. Speaker, is a prime example of 

what young people can do and the fact that there are young 

people who are very considerate out there. And I want to 

commend these young people for the work that they are doing 

and thinking of others rather than themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to extend my thanks to my 

constituency assistant. As of July 1st, a young gentleman by the 

name of Jeff Cole took over duties as the CA [constituency 

assistant] in the office, and while I had Tina Durbin there for 

some 21 years, she today is enjoying the opportunity of getting 

to spend a little more time with her granddaughter. Jeff has 

stepped into the role and is certainly doing an excellent job so I 

want to say thank you to Jeff. And Audrey McEwen continues 

to work in the office. 

 

As has been said, Mr. Speaker, this job would not be very easy 

if it wasn’t for the fact of supportive family and I too am very 

supportive of my wife, Lois, and our family. And quite frankly, 

Mr. Speaker, one of the great joys of family is not only having 

children but having grandchildren, and it’s a real pleasure, an 

enjoyment to have the grandchildren come to visit or go to visit 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is all about growth, and the theme of 

the budget is balanced growth. And why are we talking about 

balanced growth? Because we’re thinking of those young 

people that I spoke about today, and just spoke about. We’re 

thinking about our families. We’re thinking about our children, 

about our grandchildren, and the fact that as this province 

continues to grow and move forward we want to make sure that 

it grows forward in a balanced way and that there’s balanced 

growth. 

 

One of the issues and one of the challenges we face at this time, 

Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Finance said, yes there’s some 

challenges on the revenue side of government. But because of 

growth, while there’s been challenges in the resource sector, 

we’ve picked up a lot of those shortfalls just because of growth 

and taxation. Even with the lower taxes, even with the taxes 

we’ve lowered to 5 per cent, those taxes continue to bring 

revenue to the province of Saskatchewan, allowing it to move 

forward with growth. 

 

And what that has done, Mr. Speaker, it has allowed this budget 

and this Finance minister to present a fiscally responsible 

budget which in the General Revenue Fund and the summary 

financial statements is balanced. Regardless of what others 

would try to say, these funds are balanced. Mr. Speaker, if you 

look at the General Revenue Fund, you will find a surplus of 

$64.8 million, and on the summary financial statements a 

surplus of $149.8 million. Mr. Speaker, surpluses tell me that 

the budget is balanced. And we’ve found a balance between 

maintaining a balance and a surplus while at the same time 

providing services and trying to meet the needs of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We’re balancing the need to control spending with the need to 

make important investments. Part of the expenditures in this 

year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, are going to people who probably 

have the greatest needs in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 

believe it was the member from Cumberland was talking about 

challenges seniors are facing, and the fact that this government 

is letting them down. Well let me say, increasing the seniors’ 

income plan to $250 a month, triple of what it was when this 

government formed office in 2007, I’m not exactly sure that’s 

letting seniors down, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s showing that 

this government is committed to meeting the needs of seniors, 

and especially those who find themselves on very low fixed 

incomes. 

 

We’re also providing an increase in funding of close to $20 

million for community-based organizations that provide 24-7 

care for our most vulnerable citizens, including those with 

disabilities. Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks for itself. When 

you’re thinking of those least fortunate amongst yourselves, I 

don’t think one can argue that we’re not as a government 

stepping forward to meet those needs and help those 

organizations. 

 

And I know in my constituency, there are a number of 

individuals working in these community-based organizations. If 

it wasn’t for them, wasn’t for their desire and interest and 

compassion for people with disabilities, a lot of those people 

would be basically hidden in some structure, some care home, 

without any real care or concern. And you just have to go to 

some of these organizations like Pipestone Kin-Ability Centre 

and just see how welcoming these individuals are. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I think we are proving that we care and are willing to 

reach and help those with the greatest needs amongst us. 

 

As my colleague, the member from Melfort, said — and the 

Minister of Finance; he referred to the Minister of Finance — 

putting money into a new women’s shelter in the province of 

Saskatchewan, partnering with the federal government and the 

local community, Mr. Speaker, this is certainly the right way to 

go. Working with other levels of government to meet the needs 

of people and in this case building a new women’s shelter, the 

first new women’s shelter in the province of Saskatchewan 

since 1989, is that, Mr. Speaker, is that an indication that this 

government doesn’t care about those with needs around us? I 

think, Mr. Speaker, our actions are speaking louder than our 

words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget also continues funding for capital 

funding projects, especially hospitals and heavy care centres. 

We see the new Moose Jaw hospital continues to move forward, 

children’s hospital in Saskatoon, and a number of rural heavy 

care and integrated facilities that are moving forward. I think 

that’s another indication, Mr. Speaker, that we recognize the 

need. 

 

Unfortunately some 20 years ago, the government of the day — 

I believe the members sitting on the opposition benches, 

although most of the members sitting there right now may not 

have been there at that time, but that government, Mr. Speaker 

— did close 52 hospitals. And we saw the impact of the closure 

of those 52 hospitals. And there isn’t a day when I stop by the 

hospitals in Regina to visit with people, I don’t hear people 

bringing up the topic of the Plains health care centre and the 



2966 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

fact that, the impact it could have today if it was still here 

amongst us. 

 

So while we can’t replace all those beds immediately, Mr. 

Speaker, this government and this budget continues to provide 

the funding to put the beds in place so we can address the issue 

around surgical wait times, so that we can address the issues of 

families who are dealing with elderly parents or grandparents 

who unfortunately need the care that’s provided in our heavy 

care homes. And we’re also putting in place funding for the 

recruitment of doctors and the retention of our young medical 

graduates. Mr. Speaker, this budget, despite the challenges it’s 

facing, is putting the money I believe in the right places, the 

places where it’s needed most. 

 

I would like to speak of my community of Kipling as well. Mr. 

Speaker, for the first time that I can remember, our community 

was without medical service. We had no doctors outside of 

sporadic time periods since September of 2012. Recently a 

group of locums has agreed to provide care, and from what I’m 

hearing, the people of the community are very pleased with the 

service they’re getting. And we also have a medical . . . a doctor 

from out of country who is now in the SIPPA [Saskatchewan 

international physician practice assessment] program who is 

committed to coming to the community, and I’m hearing that 

there certainly are opportunities for other doctors considering 

coming to the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is reaching out to not only meet the 

needs of Saskatchewan people but to also find ways of how we 

can move forward as a province and continue to grow this 

province. Many of my colleagues have quoted from different 

people who have made comments about the budget. One 

individual, the director of the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, 

said this: the Saskatchewan budget released today, you’re not 

going to find a better one in Canada this year. I think that 

speaks very well of the budget presented by my colleague, the 

member from Canora, the Minister of Finance. 

 

This budget also has continued support for municipal people 

across the province of Saskatchewan and one of the areas where 

it is providing support, and I’ll get to that in a moment, is in the 

area of local rinks. An issue that’s been a problem for years in 

this province is community rinks and the high costs, especially 

power. And this budget is making available 1.7 million so that 

community rinks . . . communities will be able to maintain and 

support their rinks and making them more affordable. 

 

This budget also, Mr. Speaker, puts money into transit to assist 

people with disabilities by providing . . . increasing the funding 

to increase, accelerate the renewal of the paratransit fleet, 

allowing the program to expand to an additional eight 

communities. Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks very well of what 

the budget is doing to provide and enhance the growth of this 

province. 

 

One other area, Mr. Speaker, that went over very well and that 

municipal leaders across this province are really pleased to see 

is the fact that when the Saskatchewan Party formed 

government, we made a commitment in 2007 to share one point 

of the provincial sales tax with municipalities. Prior to that, Mr. 

Speaker, municipalities had to wait until the provincial budget 

to finalize their budgets to see whether there was anything 

coming from government to assist them in addressing their 

needs. Now they need no longer wait. They know that 1 per 

cent of the tax will be coming to them, and that as a result, 

they’re able to do a better job of preparing their budgets. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of provincial growth, the 1 per cent . . . 

that one point on the provincial tax this year, saw an increase to 

$264.4 million through provincial revenue sharing. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s an increase of $27 million or 11.4 per cent 

which is being shared with municipalities, both urban and rural 

and northern. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the comment from Debra Button, the 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

president, says it well: 

 

Saskatchewan’s villages, towns and cities are experiencing 

unprecedented growth. Urban governments across the 

province are on the frontline, providing the services and 

infrastructure we need to attract business and new 

residents. The government’s investment in our 

communities will go a long way to helping us meet the 

demands of growth. 

 

And then Al Thomarat from the Home Builders’ Association 

said: 

 

We are very pleased with the budget. It does stay the 

course. It’s balanced. It stays on track. We want to 

continue the momentum we see in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many other areas that we can speak 

about in this budget. This budget invests in education. Mr. 

Speaker, as we have seen over the past two or three years, 

school boards are now having to deal with increased enrolment. 

What did we see prior to 2007? We actually saw school boards 

having to deal with decreased enrolments and how were they 

going to move forward, and trying to determine how they’re 

going to provide the programming as they saw enrolments 

decreasing. We’re now seeing enrolment increasing, and this 

budget has put more money into education. In fact it’s one of 

the highest educational budgets in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the school operating fund this year will be $1.775 

billion, up 40.6 million from last year, an increase of 2.3 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks well about the growth of 

this province and how this province is moving forward. Is this 

going to address all the issues in education, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? No doubt we’re probably going to have some 

pushback from some of the school boards but, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the realities are, the increase in funding to school 

boards will address all of the contractual agreements that school 

boards have to meet as they move forward. 

 

And in many cases we’ll be seeing also capital funding in 

education. And one of the new schools that’s going up is going 

up in the community of Langenburg, the constituency, in the 

constituency of Saltcoats. And, Mr. Speaker, I know the people 

in that community are certainly pleased to see that this 

government stepped forward to meet the needs of a growing 

community and a growing economy. 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2967 

Mr. Speaker, back in 2007 this Saskatchewan Party went into 

that election saying we were finally . . . We were going to 

address the issue of property taxes and we were going to ensure 

that property owners weren’t carrying the burden of funding 

education taxes. I remember the former premier of this 

province, Premier Calvert, when he was the premier of this 

province, I believe at SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities], he basically said, the status quo is not on. 

And how many years, how many years did we see the then NDP 

government say the status quo was not on, but it never changed. 

It never changed. 

 

Well since 2007, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know what has 

happened to property tax. The burden of funding education has 

been shifted. It’s taken away from the property owner and put at 

the feet of the provincial government. The provincial 

government has been stepping forward to put the money into 

education and ensure that it is shared equally and fairly around 

the province. We still have some hiccups, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but I believe as we move forward and work together we 

certainly will meet that goal. 

 

The fact that . . . Speaking about that property tax, Marilyn 

Braun-Pollon made this comment: “The fact that they’re 

holding the line on education property tax relief for the majority 

of businesses in the commercial sector is good news.” Not only 

is it the commercial person, but it’s the property owner across 

this province who has now been able to see their property taxes 

more reflective of their abilities and also the fact that it’s the 

provincial government that should be picking up that load, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that is planning for growth. This is 

a budget that’s not only balanced but there’s money in this 

budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to work with individuals who 

would like to improve their way of life, whether it’s the adult 

basic education program, putting more funding in it to address 

the waiting line for ABE [adult basic education], putting more 

funding in place to address the issue of job skills and the fact 

that there are . . . there’s such a shortage of workers in many, 

many of the skills and many of the trades, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

money being put forward to address those issues. There’s 

money being forward to encourage and work with First Nations 

young men and women. And I just chatted with a couple of our 

First Nations young men and women at the budget speech and 

each and every one of them said they were really impressed and 

were really encouraged by the budget, the fact that we 

recognize the need to help First Nations young men and women 

become part of a growing Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a comment here, and I quote, “No question about 

it, the biggest single issue facing the business community today 

is where the labour force of today and tomorrow is going to 

come from.” The budget speaks to that. There’s an increase for 

skills training. That’s very positive. We’re happy to see that. 

We’re happy to see that. Control on spending, which is also 

very positive. So overall it’s as steady as she goes. People are 

going through skills training and getting jobs and that’s what 

it’s all about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking about . . . or Deputy Speaker, speaking 

about jobs and job opportunities, this evening, also at the 

reception, I chatted with a couple who have come from 

Bangladesh, I believe it was four years ago. They didn’t just 

come to this province to make Saskatchewan home and to build 

something for themselves. They are now putting back into their 

own country. They’ve established an educational program and 

skills training and computer training. And, Mr. Speaker, I was 

quite impressed to just chat with that couple as to how they 

were so grateful to this country and this province for what it 

was offering them. And now they are turning and they’re giving 

back to their home community of Bangladesh. So, Mr. Speaker, 

this budget speaks about growing the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

One other area that I want to speak about is Saskatchewan’s 

highways. Mr. Deputy Speaker, one highway that I’ve had the 

. . . unfortunately it’s taken me a long time to get it to the 

forefront, Highway 48. And there was a section right in my 

constituency, right in my hometown that wasn’t developed. You 

could get onto 48 highway at White City and you’d be going 

along on a beautiful piece of pavement. You’d hit the 

community of Kipling and, as most people said, for the past 

number of years it’s been a goat trail. And then you’d get off of 

that goat trail at No. 9 and you’d move from . . . you’d go down 

No. 9 through Wawota at a beautiful highway. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year’s budget put the money in 

place to begin the construction of that last phase. And this 

year’s budget, it will see the completion of that Highway 48. 

And I guarantee . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That’s exactly 

right. The Minister of Highways says we got the bender last 

year. We’re going to get from bender to No. 9 this year, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And the only thing that will dictate as to how 

quickly we complete it is how quick the snow melts and some 

of that water disappears, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I guarantee, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when that highway’s complete, it’s more 

of a direct line to a number of places. It’s a direct line to 

southeast Saskatchewan. It’s a more direct line to Moose 

Mountain Provincial Park even going through to Manitoba. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we’re looking to the completion of that. 

 

There’s so many things in this budget that, even though there 

were limitations the Minister of Finance had to deal with, yet 

this budget put money into areas and sectors where we really 

need to see our economy grow, sectors where we knew we 

needed to take care of those who are less fortunate and help 

them along, and also plan for our children’s future. The fact that 

it’s balanced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact that we continue to 

claw away at the provincial debt, I think shows sound 

leadership by the Minister of Finance and by the Premier of the 

province, the member from Swift Current. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand here and have had the 

opportunity to just express some of my thoughts and to speak 

about some of the things that this budget is doing and stand in 

support of this budget. I certainly will not be supporting the 

amendment because of the fact that this budget speaks for itself. 

It’s a balanced budget building in a growing economy. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am very pleased to 

rise this evening to support our Finance minister’s balanced 



2968 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

2013-2014 budget. I say balanced budget because this budget is 

balanced in so many ways. It’s balanced in terms of finances 

with $64.8 million pre-transfer surplus in the General Revenue 

Fund and a surplus of $149.8 million in the summary financial 

statements. But I would also like to point out that it is balanced 

in our approach to improving quality of life for Saskatchewan 

residents. It is balanced in our commitment to replace and 

invest in infrastructure. And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is 

balanced in our support for a growing economy. 

 

It will be my pleasure to expand on each of these pillars later, 

but firstly I want to offer a great big thank you to two ladies 

who are very valuable in taking care of my office back in The 

Battlefords and handling literally dozens of constituent 

concerns and requests each month. I can’t thank them enough 

for all that they do. Lil Robinson and Gail Heintz are very key 

members of our team in The Battlefords. Their concern and 

compassion for our constituents is incredible and greatly 

appreciated. 

 

And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I take every opportunity 

that I can to thank my wife, Linda. She’s been a big part of my 

journey to get here and she supported me through all of these 

endeavours and offers me the opportunity to be away as much 

as I can. I thank her very much. 

 

This budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 2013-2014 balanced 

budget, is the result of a tremendous amount of work, both on 

behalf of the Finance minister and his ministry staff and also all 

of the long hours put in by our Treasury Board members. And, 

Mr. Speaker, let’s not forget about all the pencil sharpening 

each of the ministries did to hold the line at a 3.1 per cent 

increase in expenses. I can only imagine the difficult decisions 

that they had to make, and I appreciate all of their work. 

 

I’ve already mentioned that our budget is balanced in terms of 

the General Revenue Fund with a $64.8 million surplus and 

$149.8 million surplus in the summary financial statements. So 

now I would like to move on and talk about how this budget 

outlines our plan to improve quality of life for all Saskatchewan 

residents. We know our economy is strong, but we also know 

that there are those among us who are struggling, those who 

may, because of circumstance, need a hand up, may need help, 

some support from their government. That is why, Mr. Speaker, 

we have increased our support for seniors with a $3.2 million 

increase in seniors’ income plan, which includes a $10 a month 

increase plus a maximum $25 per month for clients living in 

special care homes. That brings the seniors’ income plan to 

$250 per month, a substantial increase of $160 from the $90 

that the previous NDP government froze it at for 16 long years. 

 

We are also committed with helping those in the rental market 

with a $3.8 million increase for the Saskatchewan rental 

housing supplement. 

 

Some of our disabled citizens are very pleased to learn that we 

have implemented the first instalment of our enhancement to 

Saskatchewan assured income for disability, a program that we 

are committed to increase by $100 per month for people in 

residential care and by 350 and $400 per month for singles and 

couples respectively, who live in independent arrangements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s take a brief look now at what this budget 

holds for health care. Fully 41.9 per cent of this budget goes 

into health care. We are continuing to build on the tremendous 

progress we have made in reducing surgical wait times by 

further investing another $10 million to bring our total 

commitment to $70.5 million. This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will 

result in 7,000 additional surgeries over last year. We have also 

committed $350,000 to expand the Alzheimer Society First 

Link program. 

 

Our total health budget of $4.8 billion is an increase of $1.4 

billion since 2007. We are committed to improving health care. 

Additionally, we are investing $163.9 million in infrastructure 

in this budget. These capital projects include a hospital for 

Moose Jaw and $70.6 million for long-term care facilities. And 

I’m delighted to see $6 million allocated through SaskBuilds to 

analyze proposals and determine the most efficient ways to 

finance our new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. 

 

[20:45] 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is in sharp contrast to the record of the 

previous NDP government that closed 52 rural hospitals, 16 

long-term care centres involving the loss of 1,200 long-term 

care beds. We will ensure that our seniors are not treated that 

way. While we are on the subject, we certainly could have used 

173 doctors and 455 registered nurses that fled Saskatchewan to 

work elsewhere. Mr. Speaker, they left in the last five years of 

that NDP government, a shameful record. Since that time, we 

have 274 more doctors practising in Saskatchewan and over 900 

more nurses. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s also compare our records on 

infrastructure, spent in our infrastructure spending — or lack 

thereof in their case — $325.5 in the last six years of the NDP 

rule and $975 million in our first six years. The way I do math, 

that’s triple the amount. Mr. Speaker, instead of closing 

hospitals, we are building new ones. And we try . . . and finding 

solutions to provide health care in rural Saskatchewan where 

they closed hospitals. One such initiative is providing $250,000 

for rural physician recruitment and another is $3 million for 

rural locums. 

 

Another initiative, Mr. Speaker, that I know is of great 

importance in our area, and to my colleague from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford, is the $9.8 million for primary health care 

which will establish four to five collaborative emergency 

centres, one of which may be located in Maidstone. This is the 

way we improve health care. 

 

Of course, funding that is very near and dear to my heart is the 

$150.7 million to provide enhanced cancer care services. That’s 

a $12 million increase over last year. Mr. Speaker, I certainly 

echo the words of Michele Arscott, the vice-president of 

corporate services, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, when she 

said, and I quote, “The agency is grateful for the continued 

support to allow us to provide better care and support for our 

programs.” I know we all live for the day when this dreaded 

disease and others like it can be cured. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about quality of life for 

Saskatchewan residents, we certainly make children and 

families our priority. One of the advantages of the growth we 

are experiencing, Mr. Speaker, is that it provides us the 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2969 

opportunity to do more for our children, more for our youth, 

and more for our families. We are taking advantage of that 

opportunity by investing $13.7 million in this, the third year of 

the Saskatchewan children and youth agenda budget. 

 

Additionally we are investing $6.6 million for the First Nations 

and Métis education and employment, one and a half million 

dollars to add 300 more spaces for adult basic education. Of 

note here and a request that I have had, I’ve heard from 

educators, is early learning programs. Towards that end we 

have dedicated $589,000 to create 15 new programs for 

vulnerable three- and four-year-olds. As well, since 2011-2012 

we have increased funding for 1,500 child care spaces, bringing 

our total number to approximately 13,740. 

 

Hand in hand with quality of life for all Saskatchewan residents 

is access to affordable housing. That is why we will invest 344 

million in 12,600 new housing units by 2016. As evidence of 

our growth, rental starts in 2012 hit 1,072 units. That’s more 

than in the years from 2002 to 2009 combined. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here are a few more of our housing initiatives and 

objectives: 240 new home ownership units to the affordable 

home ownership program; 1,300 new rental units under the 

rental construction incentive at a cost of $6 million to the 

province; 40 new homes through Habitat for Humanity; and 

construction of 140 new government-subsidized rental units, 

cost shared with the federal government under the rental 

development and capital rent subsidy programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that education plays a huge role in 

making lives better. And in preparing for our continued growth, 

that is why we have made pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to 

grade 12] education funding a priority in this budget. We have 

increased this funding by 6.7 per cent. School operation funding 

will be $1.775 billion. We are very pleased to see that our 

enrolment will increase more than 4,500 students in 2012-2013, 

a sharp contrast to the 3,500 students a year we were using 

several years ago. We know that this will require more space for 

our students, so this is why we are planning 40 relocatables to 

be in place by the fall of 2013. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, since we took office we have repaired 

over half of the schools in Saskatchewan, part of the legacy that 

was left by the former NDP government. But we know there is 

still more to do, and that is why we have allocated another 

$119.6 million in capital funding. In my own constituency, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we have allocated $19.85 million for the Light 

of Christ Catholic School Division for their school division 

year-end. And for the Living Sky School Division, we have 

allocated $62.955 million for their school division year-end. 

That is our commitment to education for Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to highlight our 2013-2014 

commitment to infrastructure in this province. Again, we know 

we inherited a huge deficit in this area. But we are, because of 

our growth initiative, making great progress in rectifying this 

situation. In this 2013-2014 balanced budget, our capital 

spending component is a whopping $847.5 million. This brings 

our total investment in infrastructure to $5.8 billion since 

’08-09. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is more than double the 

investment from the previous five years, and we are not done 

yet. Our plan for growth calls for an additional $2.5 billion over 

the next three years. 

 

I remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, travelling to other provinces 

in 2005-2006 to attend interprovincial functions, and after the 

no-time-change jokes and the flatland cracks, the next comment 

usually was that we had the worst highways in Canada. Well we 

are definitely taking care of that situation. In our first term, our 

highway budget was $2.2 billion and our commitment this year 

is $280.8 million of our total $576 million maintenance 

operation budget to highway construction. That’s this 

government’s commitment to improving highways. 

 

But highways are not our only concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We know we must continue to support our municipal 

governments so that they too can handle their infrastructure and 

growth initiatives. That is why we have once again increased 

revenue sharing to a record of $264.4 million. That’s an 11.4 

per cent increase and 108 per cent higher than it was in ’07-08. 

Overall our funding to municipalities this year will be $362 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my constituency this is making a tremendous 

difference. In the town of Battleford, revenue sharing in 

2007-2008 was $407,000. Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

figure has been increased by 123 per cent to $909,000. In the 

city of North Battleford in 2007-2008, the budget received 

$1.15 million. This budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget 

allocates a whopping 155 per cent increase of that figure to now 

be a commitment of $2.95 million. That’s our support for The 

Battlefords. 

 

And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to talk briefly 

about the phenomenal growth in this province. And unlike our 

member opposite from Regina Lakeview, I do believe our 

growth is phenomenal, not a “mythical boom,” as he suggests. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I think I could fill all three galleries in 

this Assembly with residents from The Battlefords, residents 

who would stand one by one and tell their story: how their 

businesses have flourished; how their wages have gone up; how 

they now have affordable housing; how they can now have their 

surgeries in a timely fashion and not have the longest wait times 

in the nation; and certainly how they enjoy having their sons 

and daughters stay in Saskatchewan, living and working here. 

 

Let’s just take a look at one factor that illustrates the growth we 

are experiencing. According to SaskEnergy, they now have the 

highest customer base ever. Here’s a few of the annual energy 

hookups. In the year 2000, there was 3,121 hookups. Then in 

2002, a big drop down to 1,164. In 2002, it rebounded a little bit 

to 2,217. 2003 dropped again down to 1,783. 2004, it was still 

flat at 2,082. 2005 dropped again to 1,654. ’06 was 2,908; ’07, 

4,364. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a pretty good indication of 

what was happening in Saskatchewan during the NDP years. 

 

So now for comparison, let’s just take a look at the trend after 

our party, the party with a vision for the future, formed the 

government: 2008, 6,009 hookups, an increase almost equal to 

all of the hookups in the whole year of 2003, and a hundred 

more than in 2005. In 2009 we had 4,721, still a pretty good 

increase from ’07. 2010 climbed to 1,533. 2011 continued that 

trend again, 5,803. And look at 2012, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 



2970 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

7,386 hookups, a 27 per cent increase. 

 

The Saskatchewan Power hookups pretty much mirror this 

phenomenal increase with 4,226 new connects in 2008, steadily 

increasing until 2012 with a — get this — amazing 10,345 

hookups. That’s 144 per cent increase. Can we call that a boom, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? Yes, I think we can. 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, this budget recognizes that growth and 

continues to provide the businesses and individuals in this 

province with the support they need to facilitate that growth — 

support for families, support for seniors, support for First 

Nations and Métis, support for the disabled and those most 

vulnerable. It recognizes the need to build and expand our 

infrastructure, to continuously be improving our highway 

system, to invest in services like natural gas and power to serve 

our ever-growing population. It also emphasizes importance of 

good health, timely surgeries — not huge wait times — 

attracting doctors and nurses, creating education and 

employment training opportunities for all of our citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of all of these aspects of this budget, and 

also the many more that my colleagues have presented and for 

reasons I have outlined here, I will be supporting the original 

budget motion and not the amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways 

and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It’s going to be a privilege to rise and address the 

budget, being able to go on a little bit longer than what I 

normally get to when I get to stand in this position, because 

after I get going just for a little while, the Speaker keeps going 

like this to me all the time. I usually only get . . . Most of my 

speeches are a minute long. So this could be a challenge now, 

going for the next couple of hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s always a privilege to stand in the House and 

respond to the budget speech — a very good budget speech this 

year again — a balanced budget, the only one in Canada. 

Before I get into my remarks though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do 

want to thank a number of people that allow me to fill the 

position as the MLA for Indian Head-Milestone but — that’s 

the most important position — as well as then the Minister of 

Highways and Infrastructure and a number of Crowns. 

 

I want to start with my constituency assistant, Nicole 

Entner-McCullough who looks after the office in Balgonie. I 

think all of us here on this side and I’m sure all members, all 58 

members, Mr. Speaker, of this House would thank their 

constituency assistants. When we’re doing our job around the 

province or in the city, for example, in the capital city, they 

look after the calls that come into our office and deal with those 

constituent concerns and casework very, very well. And I can 

say that Nicole has done a great job since we’ve become 

government. She started with me about in 2007 and has done a 

great job for the five or six years. And so I want to thank her for 

that. 

 

I also want to thank the people that work in the office of the 

Highways, in the minister’s office for Highways and 

Infrastructure, Chris and Amanda and . . . Oh I should have 

written them down — Karalee and Kim and Clay. I want to 

thank them all for the work that they do each and every day to 

make sure that I have the information I need on a regular basis 

to deal with the concerns that come in from constituents, from 

MLAs. They do a great job in that office. 

 

[21:00] 

 

I’ve been blessed ever since I’ve had the privilege to serve as a 

minister, whether it was the minister of Health or now 

Highways and Infrastructure, and the great staff that I’ve had, 

quite a few staff over the number of years and maybe that’s a 

reflection of the minister that they have to serve, but a number 

of staff that have done a very good job on really I guess maybe 

on my behalf but more importantly on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. Is it time to wrap up already? 

 

Okay. I also want to . . . Yes, that’s probably more than a 

minute already. I also want to thank the people within the 

ministry. This is my first opportunity. This is a little different 

feeling than over the past number of years, probably over the 

past eight years. Five years that I’ve replied to the budget 

speech I was the Minister of Health and three years prior to that 

I had been the critic for Health, so about eight years when the 

budget came around and the budget speech was read, most of 

my attention was on health care. And I can tell you that it’s 

been about eight months since there has been a shift in cabinet 

and I have new responsibilities. You don’t lose that interest in 

health in eight months and I was just as interested in what was 

going on in the health file as I was in the Ministry of Highways 

and Infrastructure. 

 

What I’m really wanting to get back to though is I had great 

staff in the Ministry of Health when I worked there, under the 

leadership of Dan Florizone who is I’ll say one of the best — I 

probably have the best now, Rob Penny — but when I was in 

the Ministry of Health I had the best at that time who was Dan 

Florizone. But under the leadership of Rob Penny in the 

Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure and the ADMs 

[assistant deputy minister] and all the staff in the Ministry of 

Highways and Infrastructure, I am very blessed to be able to 

work with them as we go through the different issues that are 

put in front of us each and every day. 

 

I would be remiss especially though . . . I want to again thank 

the leadership of the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure 

but I would be remiss if I didn’t thank the hard-working men 

and women that have put up with . . . We think, I’ve said in the 

media earlier this week that we think this winter has been long 

for us as citizens. You can’t imagine how long it has been for 

the men and women that are trying to keep our roads and our 

highways safe and clean of snow and ice over this winter that 

started on October 22nd, the first snowfall where they put their 

plows on, and they’ve been going steady ever since. I should 

probably have the number, and I think it was mentioned in a 

member’s statement, the amount of tonnes of salt that had been 

put on our highways. Probably could talk about the amount of 

diesel that’s been burnt through the trucks, making sure that our 

highways are safe. I just want to say, on behalf of all the 

citizens of this province and especially a very thankful 

government, thank you very much to the men and women that 

have kept our highways clean for safe travelling. 

 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2971 

I had an interesting situation, I think it was on Friday of last 

week. I was out in Balgonie. And I was just pulling out of 

Balgonie and I saw a couple of Highways trucks that were just 

stopped, had just stopped. I think the guys were just running 

into Subway to grab a sub, to get back out on the highways 

again. And you know, it’s kind of interesting. I just wanted to 

turn around and talk to them, and just thank them, just as a 

motorist. And that’s what I did. I didn’t identify myself, and I 

doubt that they would know that I was the minister at all, from 

just talking to them. But I wanted to thank them. 

 

And it was interesting. The one fellow said, well thank you very 

much because at that day Gormley had had a talk show on the 

highways, and there were a lot of people phoning in dissing or 

being very negative. And it would be very tough, I would think, 

after spending probably how many hours of overtime, making 

sure that our highways are safe, clean, so that we can drive and 

all they were hearing . . . And I’m sure he had a very hard time 

listening. He probably wanted to turn to another station. You 

know, I would’ve myself. But he said, all I could hear of this 

morning was people complaining about the work that we are 

doing. And we’re working 24-7, as hard as we possibly can. 

 

I mean some of these storms have been unprecedented. This 

winter has been unprecedented for the amount of snowfall. And 

I just, you know, I just think it’s unfair when citizens of our 

province phone in; they don’t know the work that these people 

have gone through. So I’ve already thanked them once, but I do 

again want to sincerely thank them and tell them, don’t worry 

about the few complainers out there because the vast majority 

of people in this province respect and admire the work that they 

do here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard other members talk about, you know, 

their family and how supportive their family is to make sure 

that they can do their work that they do. And I want to also 

thank my family. Actually I really only want to thank Cindy for 

the support because really the boys have been absolutely no 

support to me over the last couple of months and years. You 

know, I don’t really know if they know that I’m an MLA or a 

minister or anything else because they’ve been, they’ve been 

pretty busy. 

 

I do just want to just say just a couple of words on each one of 

them. We have two boys, Craig who’s 21 and Mark who’s 19. 

They’re both obviously into the snowboard business. They’re 

professional snowboarders. I had an opportunity of talking to 

Craig just earlier tonight about an hour ago, and he’s in Spain 

right now at a World Cup event. And Mark certainly is getting 

most of the press, and rightfully so, but Craig is doing a very 

good job too. He ended up 17th today in a World Cup event in 

Spain. There is 150 that started, and he ended up 17th which 

puts him in the top about 9 or 10 in the country, which allows 

him then to be on the national team going forward next year. So 

he came through an injury at the very end of last year, started 

slow but finished not too bad at the end of this year. And we’ll 

have a hopefully a busy filming season from now on. The 

competitive season is over. Now they get into filming and going 

into trying to get video parts that go into different videos that 

are sold, and they make a little bit of money that way. So Craig 

has done very well. 

 

And of course Mark has had an unbelievable year. He started in 

December winning two golds in a Dew Tour stop in 

Breckenridge, then the X Games, which everybody . . . a lot of 

people saw, I should say, not everybody, getting a gold and a 

silver there. And there in Vail just recently at the US [United 

States] Open getting a gold there, I think. Yes, a gold there. We 

had the opportunity of getting down to Colorado and seeing 

those three events. We don’t catch him when he’s over in 

Europe, which he was last weekend and finished first at the . . . 

No. Geez I can’t even remember. I think it was second at the . . . 

Wow I’m getting red. I can’t remember. But anyway he 

finished in the top two, first or second, at the European X 

Games, just got home on Sunday. He’s been home for a couple 

of days and is leaving right away again. 

 

So they’ve both had an amazing winter, and it’s amazing how 

many people are recognizing me, certainly not as the Minister 

of Highways but as Mark’s dad which is kind of really quite 

flattering. Anyway so they’ve had a good time, and that’s 

enough on that. 

 

I do want to get to the budget and the excellent budget that was 

read by the minister on Wednesday of last week. As I said 

earlier that this is, and many have said on this side of the House, 

a balanced budget, you know, a fifth consecutive balanced 

budget by this government, Mr. Speaker. And it doesn’t matter 

whether it’s on the summary financial statements or on the GRF 

[General Revenue Fund]. 

 

Now the member from Athabasca is already kind of laughing 

from his seat. You know, I guess what he would laugh about is 

because I don’t really know if he would know what a balanced 

budget was. They talked a lot about a balanced budget in the 

NDP years, Mr. Speaker, and never did quite get there, never 

got around to it. But, Mr. Speaker, this is balanced both on the 

GRF and on the summary financial statements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It really does, it really does, when you look at what is 

happening in other provinces, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it puts us on 

a different level. We are very, very fortunate, Mr. Speaker, that 

we have . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member 

opposite is yelling we have nothing to do with it. Mr. Speaker, 

it is the people of Saskatchewan that have everything to do with 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Was the NDP . . . I’m sure they thought they had everything to 

do with it. But here in Saskatchewan and under the 

Saskatchewan Party government, it is the people of 

Saskatchewan, it is the resources that we’re blessed with, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what happens and that’s what causes a 

government to balance a budget. It certainly isn’t the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. It is hard work by these members that 

get us to that point, but it is the people of Saskatchewan that 

allow this budget to be balanced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the . . . Oh wow. The member from Athabasca has 

got an awful lot to say tonight. It’s a good thing because, Mr. 

Speaker, there doesn’t seem to be a lot coming from that other 

side recently and even tonight, but there seems to be one 

spokesman from the other side, and he said all the work was 

done in the previous years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the work 

that was done under the NDP’s 16 years was out-migration, a 

population decline every year under the NDP. That’s the work 

that was done, Mr. Speaker. 



2972 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

Since we’ve come to government, we have seen the largest 

population this province has ever seen. 1,089,087 people now 

call Saskatchewan home, Mr. Speaker, 21,000 more in the past 

year and 82,000 since our government took office. A huge 

increase, Mr. Speaker, and you can see it in every community 

that you go into. 

 

I am blessed to serve the constituency of Indian 

Head-Milestone, and when I go to Fort Qu’Appelle or Indian 

Head or Milestone or Avonlea or a number of the communities 

around the constituency, some very good communities, 

Avonlea, Rouleau, Wilcox that unfortunately I may be missing 

come the next election — and the member from Thunder Creek 

is going to pick them up and I’m a little jealous over that — but 

great communities that have seen growth over the last number 

of years, huge growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can tell you in Milestone in the last number of years, they 

opened up 25 lots and within three years they’ve all been sold 

and all been built on but two. They’ve been sold, waiting for a 

home to come in. Twenty-five new homes in the last three 

years. And in the last 25 years, Mr. Speaker, prior, there had 

been four homes built in Milestone. That is the variation that we 

see in the past number of years. 

 

The optimism that we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, has been huge, 

and I can just honestly tell you when I talk to people within my 

constituency, yes there are pressures, yes there are issues, but 

the one thing they are almost unanimous and not quite 100 per 

cent . . . I see Gunnar Passmore in the gallery every so often. 

He’s not quite unanimous, but most people would say they 

never want to go back to the dark old days of the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they will say that perhaps not everything 

is perfect under our government, but we’ll never go back to the 

dark old days of the NDP. 

 

Boy, he’s got a lot to say tonight. He’s a lone, he’s a lone wolf 

over there speaking out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province is doing well, absolutely. And there 

are pressures in certain places, but we know that the growth is 

positive. And we can see it in so many ways, whether it’s in 

population growth, whether it’s in business, whether it’s in jobs. 

It’s an amazing record to have that we have the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada, Mr. Speaker. That’s an 

unbelievable number because it wasn’t very long ago when 

people were leaving the province for sure to find opportunities 

in other provinces. But I don’t think you have to go to too many 

Roughrider games or concerts or whatever and you run into 

people that have just moved back to Saskatchewan, many 

people that are repatriating from other provinces, from Alberta, 

from Ontario, many people coming from other parts of Canada. 

 

But what has been really interesting, I have found over the last 

year or two since I’ve had the opportunity of travelling the 

province, is the number of immigrants, people coming from 

other countries, whether it’s Ireland — certainly has been a 

huge influx — whether it’s been the Philippines. And I 

remember back in 2008 and ’09 when we went on the 

recruitment to recruit more nurses into Saskatchewan from the 

Philippines, roughly about 300 more nurses, of course, the NDP 

were dead set against that, Mr. Speaker. We have seen huge 

influx of people. 

I was down in the Redvers, Carlyle area, and I was amazed at 

the new hotels that have opened up in Redvers and Carlyle — 

you know, communities that haven’t seen growth like that or 

building like that for decades. But it was interesting to also stay 

in the one hotel that we did in Redvers as we were at a wedding 

this past summer. And the people that were working at the desk 

were all newcomers to Canada and to especially Saskatchewan. 

And it wasn’t settling in Regina and it wasn’t just settling in 

Saskatoon. They were settling in Redvers and they were settling 

in Carlyle. 

 

Certainly the oil boom there has really taken off and agriculture 

is doing well. But all the supporting industries, when our 

economy is growing and doing well, when the oil and gas 

industry is doing well, when agriculture is doing well, when 

potash is doing well, the spinoff jobs, the support services that 

need to be there — whether it’s in hotels, whether it’s in 

restaurants — all of those support services are there growing in 

rural Saskatchewan, something that we have never seen for 

many, many years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think probably, and maybe it would be only the member for 

Athabasca could go back far enough and would remember the 

first renaissance of the province, when people were moving into 

this province from all over Europe and other provinces. But it’s 

probably been since the early ’20s that we have seen a 

renaissance like we’re seeing here in the province, Mr. Speaker, 

something that everyone in Saskatchewan should be proud of. 

 

We’re certainly proud of it as a government, not that it is 

necessarily because of the Government of Saskatchewan, but I 

would say it would have something to do with the attitude shift 

of a government that is welcoming businesses and residents into 

the province as opposed to trying to nationalize businesses and 

chasing them out and the jobs that went with them, outside the 

province, Mr. Speaker. That’s a huge attitude shift, and I think 

that’s what this province has seen more than anything else in 

the last five years is an attitude shift to welcome people in as 

opposed to chasing people out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:15] 

 

And I would say it’s a great deal of credit to the Premier of this 

province as he goes around, not only across Canada but down 

into the States and across Europe and sells the style of life that 

we are blessed with here in Saskatchewan. He’s probably the 

best salesperson we could ever have, Mr. Speaker, going around 

spreading the message, the hope, and the vision of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is resonating around the 

world and we’re seeing it because droves of people are coming 

to this province, Mr. Speaker. Very proud of the work that not 

only the Premier is doing, but also the Finance minister to 

ensure that the future of our province is bright because of just 

another balanced budget by the Saskatchewan Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I just didn’t touch on some of the 

highlights in health. A heck of a Health minister during the 

budget deliberations obviously, because we see a real nice 

increase, 3.5 per cent increase in spending in this year’s health 

budget, bringing it to $4.8 billion. I used to remember trying to 

figure out what’s $4.8 billion a day. It’s a lot of money per day. 

I don’t know exactly but I would say about 14 million. If 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2973 

somebody could get on the calculator real quick and help me 

out, that would be nice. But about $14 million roughly a day, 

each and every day just spent on health care. You know, a 3.8 

per cent increase or going to $4.8 billion is a . . . $4.8 billion 

divided by 365. $4.8 billion is about a little over $200 million 

increase from last year because last year it was about 4.6. 

 

And all we’ve heard from the opposition is, you need to spend 

more. It doesn’t matter how much we spend; they need to spend 

more. But I have yet to hear from them on their side. They’ve 

got a few of their catch phrases, a few catch lines as to how you 

could, you know, if you wanted to spend more you could not do 

this or you could not do that. We certainly heard that if we 

didn’t do three more MLAs, how many more hospitals they 

would be able to build. If we didn’t have three more MLAs, 

how many more highways we could build and how many 

long-term care beds we could add to the province if we just 

didn’t add those three MLAs. They really like to catch that one. 

And lately they’ve talked a little about some of the renovations 

in the building, which are very nice to see, and a change in the 

Premier’s office as far as hardwood. But it’s amazing again how 

much they could do with that $20,000 if they could ever get 

their hands on it. Because when you ask them, they need to 

spend more money. They want us to spend more money. Where 

would you find it? Where would you cut? Well we know the 

member from Lakeview would certainly cut in rural 

Saskatchewan. That’s nothing to be surprised, Mr. Speaker, but 

they very seldom ever come up with an alternative. 

 

It’s one thing to criticize. Absolutely remember being on the 

opposition benches, but we came up with alternatives that were 

doable that would make this province move forward, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’ve heard very little from that side. 

 

So on the health side, I think, as I said, the Minister of Health 

has done a very good job. And before I move off health, as the 

numbers are coming in soon I hope, that there has been a huge 

expenditure in health — not only on the capital side, to see 13 

long-term care facilities move forward; not only on the capital 

side, to see a children’s hospital move forward; 13.15, I was 

just a little high on the 14 million, but about $13 million a day 

is spent on health care each and every day. Huge expenditure. 

 

So now I can go on to highways, and we’re moving on to 

highways as that’s the responsibility that I have. It has been a 

very interesting transition over the last eight months to learn 

more about the Ministry of Highways and see the great work 

that the Highways staff do and the expenditure on highways. 

 

We had made a commitment in the 2011 election campaign to 

put $2.2 billion into highways and infrastructure in this 

province, a record amount of spending over a four-year period 

of $2.2 billion. With this budget combined with last year’s 

budget, we’re well over $1.1 billion, or well over halfway to 

meeting our campaign commitment. 

 

And I think that’s one thing that people of the province have 

looked at and I think really have respected, that when we make 

a commitment — and making a commitment of spending $2.2 

billion on highways and infrastructure is a huge commitment — 

that we followed through on our commitment. The four years 

previous, from 2007 to 2011, I think that was a bit of a hallmark 

of the government to make sure that we kept the promises. We 

did keep those promises, and we’re continuing to, well over 

halfway on the highways commitment of $2.2 billion, well over 

the 1.1 after the last two budgets. 

 

This budget is $156 million that will be spent on highways. 

There actually will be more spending than that done in this 

coming fiscal year. The budget is $576 million. We had put in 

$50 million at the end of the last fiscal year in about September 

that was to be spent if we could get it spent, you know, on 

projects leading up to the freeze in 2012. Of course the snow 

came a little bit early, as I said, October 22nd. We weren’t able 

to move all that money out. That money is still there. So we’ve 

got $576 million along with the $50 million that we put into 

highways last year. I think people will again this year get 

frustrated at times as they are trying to make time going up and 

down our highways and running into orange zones because 

there is so much construction, maintenance and capital, Mr. 

Speaker, over the next number of months making sure that our 

highways are in good shape. 

 

Some of the highways that will be worked on this year are 

Highway 15, and I certainly heard lots from the member from 

Arm River on that. Highway 22, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll be 

happy about that. Highway 41, 42, 51, 58, 305, Highway 55, 

none of which are in Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

So we’ve done a lot of work although . . . Some of the major 

projects that this government will be moving on, some of the 

megaprojects, about $63.3 million for megaprojects, starting 

with the Estevan truck bypass, Mr. Speaker, doing work on that 

to make sure that the huge increase in truck traffic in that 

Weyburn-Estevan area and especially in around the Estevan 

area . . . All that truck traffic on 39 Highway is funnelled right 

through the main street of Estevan — heavy trucks, dangerous 

goods, and everything else, Mr. Speaker. It will be great to see 

the route moving around Estevan so that a lot of those trucks 

will be diverted around Estevan. And I know the member from 

Estevan is very, very supportive of that and has been a great 

lobby for that community over the past . . . well she’s been here 

for quite a few years. 

 

Some of the other projects that we’re working on, megaprojects 

that we’re working on, is the west Regina bypass. And anybody 

that has had the opportunity to drive to Moose Jaw over the last 

year and a half will see the work that’s being done on No. 1 

Highway, whether it’s the traffic lights there on No. 1 Highway 

which is only there . . . They’re only there temporary until the 

overpass is done. You can see the main girders are across the 

highway that will hopefully be open later on this summer. A 

major interchange so that people can, that truck traffic can get 

to the GTH and, more importantly, when they leave the GTH 

and come back to No. 1, that they can turn on to No. 1 in a safe 

manner. That work has been done as well as twinning all the 

way up to Dewdney will be work that’s completed. 

 

Other work that is part of the megaprojects that we’re working 

on in this fiscal year will be . . . and this is very important that 

we make note that this was announced a couple of years ago, a 

year and a half ago at least, well before I became the Minister of 

Highways and Infrastructure. But a passing lane project on No. 

10 Highway from Balgonie out towards Fort Qu’Appelle, where 

passing lanes will be put on No. 10, huge traffic volumes in that 

area, want to put the passing lanes in and see how effective they 



2974 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

are. They’ve been effective in other jurisdictions. We had them 

in our province many years ago, moved away from them. The 

way they’re redesigned now have been fairly effective, so that 

work will be moving forward through this summer and certainly 

glad to see it. As I said, that work, that was decided on well 

before I was the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure, but 

we have the funding to move forward on it. 

 

Some of the specialized programs that I want to talk about is in 

municipal transportation infrastructure — $25.5 million to the 

MREP [municipal roads for the economy program] program 

which is really to SARM to make sure that they have money to 

repair bridges and culverts and a number of those things, 

Clearing the Path projects. It’s an increase of $2 million over 

last year. 

 

I do know that SARM was looking for more, and I can certainly 

appreciate it because I know they’ve got pressures in the rural 

communities . . . the rural roadways I should say. We’re able to 

see an extra $2 million as well as an extra million on top of that, 

which really brings it up to 26.5 million from the Ministry of 

Agriculture. That’s putting $1 million dollars in just to deal 

with some of the bridges over the irrigation canals that we have 

in parts of our province. So really it’s about $26.5 million that 

will be going to rural RMs [rural municipality] that will deal 

with the pressures that they’re seeing on their roadways, and as 

I said, $1 million dollars particularly for bridges over irrigation 

canals. Seven point nine million or almost $8 million to the 

urban highway connector program is certainly important and 

700,000 to support community airport improvements. 

 

So it is a budget that covers a number of bases in the highways 

area, and we do know that . . . I will say, I will be a predictor 

that probably some time in the next three to four weeks we’re 

going to hear of some highways that are in pretty rough shape. 

That is not uncommon in Saskatchewan. Any time you go 

through the freeze-thaw cycle, and this year it’s going to be a 

quick thaw cycle I would imagine, there are real pressures that 

are put on the highways. Certainly potholes and heaving, all of 

those things, as well as the water concerns that we have moving 

forward are definitely pressures that we’re going to see. But we 

have the budget in place certainly and the preparedness. 

 

I know the Ministry of Highways has been working on making 

sure their equipment is ready and up to speed to make sure that 

they can deal with some of the issues that we’re going to face, I 

would say, in the next month to month and a half in our 

province with the huge snowfall that we have, the flooding, and 

of course the freeze-thaw cycle that we go through. 

 

For anybody that’s been south, I often . . . I never looked at 

their roads. Maybe it’s just a function of the business, but I had 

the opportunity to be in Phoenix for about five days not very 

long ago. And I often thought, like wouldn’t it be nice if we . . . 

Their highways are so nice and smooth, but they don’t have too 

many 30 below days, you know. They just don’t have that 

freeze and then thaw where there’s heaving and shifting like we 

do in our province. It’s a natural fact, so I know there’s going to 

be pressures and there’s going to be some complaints. 

 

What I will say, with $576 million, well over $200 million, well 

over $200 million for maintenance, they may not . . . the 

highways will take some, they’ll be some pressures on those 

highways for repair work. We are committed over . . . through 

the summer to make sure that repair work is done. And I can 

say generally that our highway system, by the time we hit July 

and August, is far better than what the people see it in April. So 

I’m asking for motorists to be patient as we get, as the 

Highways ministry gets out there and fixes those roads as we 

go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other responsibility that I have and was 

touched on in the budget is SaskBuilds. Very proud of the work 

that SaskBuilds is doing. It has worked hard to do a five-year 

capital plan of all the capital in our province, looking at whether 

it’s health or highways or post-secondary, making sure that we 

have a five-year capital plan and now working on more of a 

10-year capital plan because of some of the capital builds 

extend past five years. So working on a 10-year capital plan to 

move forward. 

 

Other provinces have had a capital plan, a government capital 

plan. We haven’t in the province of Saskatchewan, so 

SaskBuilds has worked very hard under the leadership of Brian 

Manning to make sure that we have a strong capital plan 

moving forward. 

 

But the other part of the capital plan is looking at alternative 

financing, looking at how we can properly fund these capital 

projects, Mr. Speaker. And certainly P3s [public-private 

partnership] have come up over the past, well yesterday and a 

few days, maybe a few other times in question period. We think 

this is an alternative. If it makes economic sense for the 

province, that’s the work that SaskBuilds is doing over the next 

number of weeks and months to make sure that these projects, 

megaprojects move forward. 

 

I mentioned in question period all the other provinces that have 

moved forward with P3s. If we look at all the municipalities — 

certainly Manitoba government, provincial government — but 

the city of Manitoba and their Mayor Sam Katz is a strong 

proponent of P3s as we move forward. Mr. Speaker, this is 

something that we’re not ideologically bent on, but if it does 

make economic sense, we’re going to certainly move towards it, 

which is unlike the opposition, Mr. Speaker. If you just say P3 

they just automatically say no. It is an ideology thing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[21:30] 

 

But unfortunately, as we learned yesterday in question period, 

you know, it’s a little bit like the left hand doesn’t know what 

the other left hand is doing. They’re really kind of offside with 

their federal cousins, you know, whether it’s on P3s where their 

federal counterparts have said, you know, there are savings that 

can happen; there are some efficiencies, even though this NDP 

has been completely offside. Which kind of reminds me of the 

week earlier when the federal NDP was completely against 

Keystone but then this provincial government was with 

Keystone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish I was, you know, a bit of a bug on the wall 

to listen to the conversation between the new Leader of the 

Saskatchewan NDP and Thomas Mulcair, just to see how that 

conversation is going. Do they say, where are you on this 

subject? Because if you’re here, we’re going to be there, Mr. 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2975 

Speaker. They just don’t really quite have any idea where they 

stand. Mr. Speaker, a lot of flip-flopping for sure. But what I 

have noticed, Mr. Speaker, more than anything else over the last 

three or four months from the NDP is the ability to say one 

thing and words in one direction, but their actions are absolutely 

opposite. And I can hear the member from Athabasca again 

chirping, the lone wolf on that side, chirping from his side of 

the benches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He’s talking about what we should do in Highways many, many 

different times. He stood in this place and said we should build 

a second bridge in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. As I said, when 

he was the minister they couldn’t fix the bridge they had, let 

alone build a second bridge. 

 

I’ve heard both members . . . well the two members from the 

North are here. They talked, and I heard the member from 

Cumberland talking an awful lot about how much we should 

put in northern Saskatchewan. I will put our record of the 

Saskatchewan Party up on northern Saskatchewan spending, 

and especially in Highways, against five years of the NDP any 

day of the week, Mr. Speaker, because they are absolutely . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised those two members 

are here, Mr. Speaker, with the job that they did for northern 

Saskatchewan, and especially the member from Athabasca. We 

have spent more money . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 

member opposite is asking me to name one thing that we’ve 

done in northern Saskatchewan. Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there is a road that’s going to connect a Cameco mine 

and develop prosperity, Mr. Speaker, called 914 . . . Well the 

member laughs. You know, he asked me to identify one. I 

identify one, Mr. Speaker, and he doesn’t want to hear it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Airport in Stony Rapids, is that another thing, Mr. Speaker, that 

we could identify in northern Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, the 

hypocrisy coming from that side just doesn’t end with the 

member from Athabasca, even though I think he’s one of the 

strongest proponents for the hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. But it’s on 

many other levels, Mr. Speaker, many other levels. 

 

It wasn’t very long ago that the member from Lakeview, the 

member from Lakeview talked about ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]. He was a minister at the time 

responsible for the legislative instruments committee. ISC was 

in the Crown protection Act and it was deliberately at the 

eleventh hour taken out of the Crown protection Act. That Act 

definitely would have had to go past legislative instruments 

committee for this to happen, but the member at that time who 

was the leader of the opposition just simply forgot. They took it 

out of the Crown protection Act, Mr. Speaker, because they had 

intentions on moving it to the private sector, Mr. Speaker. That 

is no secret, Mr. Speaker, except to them. They can’t quite 

come to grips with it. But again they think it’s a crime that our 

government would move on ISC when that’s what they were 

planning on doing. All the evidence points in that direction, Mr. 

Speaker. Again it’s another example of the NDP saying that we 

shouldn’t do something that they had plans on doing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again the member from Rosemont also talked an awful lot 

about P3s and they were dead set against P3s, Mr. Speaker. If 

you look at the record of the NDP when they were in power, 

they were intent — I was going to use a word before intent — 

they were intent on moving forward with P3s, Mr. Speaker. 

They had an inclination that they thought this would be a good 

idea. They sent delegations out to British Columbia to deal with 

Partnerships BC, which is the P3 organization. We have the 

letter that says what would the delegation be interested in. They 

are interested in the practical application of P3s for schools, 

hospitals, and Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. Once again 

they can talk about it but, Mr. Speaker, if we act on it there 

seems to be some sort of a problem. 

 

Now the lone wolf is going, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

because I’m just going to wrap up. I guess I can wrap up now 

that he’s left, Mr. Speaker. But I will say . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Oh I’m sure he’s here right now. Mr. Speaker, 

this budget is a balanced budget, the only one in Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, it has been five consecutive balanced budgets by this 

party and this government. Six balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker; 

this one still has to be voted on. That will be the sixth one, Mr. 

Speaker. But this one will most definitely move forward. I am 

quite confident that we have the forces on this side to move that 

budget forward to make it the sixth balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am glad to be supporting this budget 

and with the colleagues, the great colleagues that I get to work 

with each and every day that lobby hard for their constituencies 

— very, very hard for their constituencies — and make sure 

that we that have the opportunity to serve in Executive Council 

know what’s needed. I think this budget has heard those 

concerns as well as the concerns of the general public. That’s 

why I’m supporting this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is such a privilege 

to enter into the debate on this budget and it is such a privilege 

to have the opportunity to represent Saskatoon Riversdale. It is 

still such a pleasure and such a privilege to represent the 

community that’s been my home for most of my life, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Before we get into the budget debate, I think it’s always 

important to say thank you to some very, very important people 

in my life who keep me going and allow me to be able to serve 

my community to the best of my ability. 

 

My family is huge in my life. I live just a few blocks from my 

childhood home. My parents actually still live in my childhood 

home. So my parents, my mom and dad are a huge support, not 

just emotionally, but the reality is when you’ve got young kids, 

which I have — I have a 15-year-old and a 5-year-old — and 

family and on-the-ground support is really important. So my 

mom and dad, I have to say thank you to them. 

 

My sister Michelle and her husband, John. My sister Michelle, I 

know I’ve said this many times here, but is like a second mother 

to my kids and really enables me when I come to Regina to 

know that my kids are well taken care of. Ophelia’s dad, Blair, 

is a huge, huge help. He had taken a leave of absence for the 

first two years that I served in this job, from his employment, 

and just returned last January. And again I couldn’t do this job 



2976 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

without the support. My child care providers, Aryn and Carly, 

are absolutely amazing. A nice little group of children. There’s 

about four kids that come together and Aryn and Carly take 

great care of Ophelia and the rest of the children. 

 

Dionne. I have a good friend who makes sure that during 

session I’m always well-fed, which I really appreciate. I know 

all of us in this job struggle to find time to exercise or to eat 

well and it’s really nice to have those supports to ensure that we 

at least have some of the balance in our lives that we should. 

 

My next door neighbours, Anita and Graham, especially in light 

of all this snow. I’m not a great snow shoveller. Graham has 

been amazing. And the drifts outside my house are almost as 

high as me, Mr. Speaker, and so Anita and Graham are great 

neighbours. I think I’ve had to shovel my own walks twice. And 

they’re always there, whether it’s fixing my door or bringing 

me a loaf of bread or something good to eat. 

 

Really important for me to mention my kids. I know the 

Highways minister had an opportunity to chat about his kids, 

and really, I think a lot of the time, my kids are the reason that 

I’m here in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and chose to run for 

the nomination and then subsequently as the candidate in 

Riversdale. 

 

Hennessey and Ophelia put up with an awful lot having their 

mom come to Regina for about 20 weeks of the year and not be 

there and hands-on. Hennessey’s an amazing kid. She’s in grade 

9. She just got her learner’s licence yesterday, Mr. Speaker, so 

that’s created a little bit of anxiety or stress for me. But she’s a 

good kid and is now behind the wheel of a car. And thankfully 

her dad is the one who has taken on the job of the driving. So 

Hennessey’s pretty awesome, as is Ophelia who just turned 5 a 

few months ago. And Ophelia is in maternelle at the 

francophone school in Saskatoon and is quite an amazing little 

person too. So those are my . . . I always get a little choked up 

when I talk about my family, Mr. Speaker, so forgive me for 

that here. 

 

But I also have to say I have an awesome staff who really do a 

great job of supporting the people of Saskatoon Riversdale, 

dedicated and committed to ensuring that people who come into 

our office have the best possible service. Vanessa is on 

maternity leave with her beautiful little guy, Montgomery, and 

her kids Benjamin and Faith. Judy who is filling in for Vanessa, 

actually coincidentally enough, is in China right now on a 

holiday, and people who filled in my office very capably — 

Kent, Puck, and Cody — have served very well. So again our 

staff, I know for all of us, our staff make our job so much 

easier. 

 

Someone that I don’t want to forget . . . or people that I don’t 

want to forget is our caucus office staff here in Regina, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re a small staff in the opposition, but they do 

absolutely amazing work and are here early in the morning and 

into the wee hours, Mr. Speaker, for example poring over a 

300-plus page FOI [freedom of information], do all the little 

things, Mr. Speaker. The staff prepare us, make sure that we are 

doing the best possible job too. So a big thank you to our 

caucus office staff. I know sometimes they don’t get the kudos 

and the appreciation that they should. 

 

And I also want to thank all the people in Saskatoon Riversdale 

who still come by the office or I meet when I’m out and about, 

who always have words of wisdom or thoughts or things to 

share with me. And aside from my children obviously, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatoon Riversdale and what 

they share with me is really the reason I’m here. So I think it’s 

important to say thank you to the people of Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Now on to the business of the budget here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I know that the government often likes to . . . I keep calling you 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my apologies. The Deputy 

Speaker was in the Chair for quite a while this evening, so my 

apologies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that this government often talks about, well why isn’t 

the opposition more positive? Why do we not say more good 

things about the government? My first counter to that is, well 

our job isn’t here to praise the work of the government. And I 

think they do a pretty fine job of doing that themselves, Mr. 

Speaker. I would say that modesty and humility certainly are 

not the hallmarks of this particular government. So I think 

they’re doing pretty well themselves on the praising front, so I 

don’t think that they really need our help on that. And our job 

actually is to point out the places where this government is 

falling down. And in this particular budget, there are some 

serious, serious, serious areas of concern for people that I know 

in Saskatoon Riversdale and across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I do want to take a moment to give the government kudos 

on a couple things that I think really stand out for me in 

particular. I’d like to talk about the transition house in Melfort 

to support women and children who’ve experienced intimate 

partner violence. I know that they’ve been working on this 

transition house for several years in Melfort. It’s desperately 

needed. I believe in 2010 in September they had submitted an 

application, the North East Outreach and Support Services. 

They’ve been working on this for a long time. 

 

I had the pleasure of visiting Melfort back in I think it was the 

summer of 2010 and touring North East Outreach and Support 

Services who are the proponents of this shelter, Mr. Speaker. 

And they had told me stories about having to send women and 

children from the northeast to Yorkton, a long way, a long way 

away from their home communities, because there were nothing 

to serve the northeast area. 

 

There is a shelter in Prince Albert but it was often overcrowded. 

I believe in 2012 they had to turn away about 2,000 individuals 

who came to the Prince Albert shelter. So building this 

transition house in Melfort is much needed and much 

appreciated, and I would commend the government for doing 

that, Mr. Speaker. It was absolutely imperative. 

 

[21:45] 

 

I would also encourage the government to think about a 

long-term strategy to deal with intimate partner violence. We 

had a study about three weeks ago that showed Saskatchewan’s 

rates were way, way, way, way too high, Mr. Speaker, just not 

acceptable. It’s not someplace that we should brag about having 

high numbers. 

 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2977 

And so aside from their support of this transition house in 

Melfort and the support that they’ve offered, I believe to P.A. 

[Prince Albert] and Regina, I would encourage the government 

to seriously look at a comprehensive strategy to deal with 

intimate partner violence because a transition house isn’t 

permanent housing. It is a temporary stopgap. And I would 

argue that parts of that strategy would include housing. I know 

that there’s been a few studies done that flag the cost of housing 

as being incredibly problematic in terms of supporting women 

and children to leave abusive relationships, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Housing, child care, a good income — there’s all kinds of 

things that keep people stuck in relationships that are abusive. 

So again, I just want to commend the government for the 

transition house in Melfort. 

 

I think it’s important to mention the support of First Link. 

There’s an increase to this program by $350,000. First Link is 

an important link to support those with Alzheimer’s and other 

related dementias. And I know now that they’re going to be 

able to expand the program beyond Regina and Saskatoon. 

With our aging population, we have many challenges here in 

Saskatchewan, and I know that expanding First Link is one 

small piece of that puzzle. 

 

Also the home care pilot project is, I think, worthy of support as 

well. It’s great to see a pilot. And I hope that this pilot is 

successful and I hope that this pilot is expanded. One of the 

most effective ways of supporting seniors, I believe, is keeping 

them in their homes, in their comfortable environments. And I 

just don’t believe this; I think statistics bear this out and 

evidence bears this out. 

 

So supporting the home care pilot project, and hopefully it’s 

successful and the government builds on that, as we have an 

aging demographic here. Baby boomers are set to retire this 

year, 2013 onward — en masse actually, is what one of the 

predictions is. And I know this is worthy of, I think, some 

kudos to the government for doing this as well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But there was some clapping on the other side of the 

House when I did say some positive things and I appreciate 

that, but there’s many things that I have to say where I think 

this government is lacking and lagging behind. So I don’t think 

there’ll be too much clapping from the other side of the House 

now. 

 

I think that I want to talk a little bit about some of the rhetoric 

we’ve heard from this government. We’ve heard everyone get 

up on the government side of the benches and talk about the 

sixth balanced budget as a talking point, but I would argue that 

it’s not such a reality. I actually sit here and wonder how 

members opposite can stand in their place and with a straight 

face talk about how they have six balanced budgets. 

 

All one needs to do is take a look at page 57, and when they 

talk about their cutting of debt, all you need to do is take a look 

at page 57 of the budget summary to see the summary statement 

of debt. So in 2012, the actual debt was 8,502,100,000. 

Forecasted in 2013, 9,610,500,000, which is an increase. 

Estimated in 2014, 10,445,800,000. So I don’t know how you 

can argue that you have a balanced budget if you’ve been 

increasing the debt year over year, Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t 

make sense to me, and I wonder if actually some of the 

members opposite have looked at budget documents and some 

of the numbers themselves. 

 

I would also point out that there’s maybe some budget tricks 

going on on the other side of the House. All we need to do is 

take a look at the PDAP [provincial disaster assistance 

program] budget line. So this government has talked about a 

balanced budget. All we have to do is look at the PDAP budget 

line: 2.65 million has been allocated for this year, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. In the technical briefing last Wednesday, asking 

questions about the rolling average, what has been spent, I 

believe it was the last three years, it was 105 million spent on 

PDAP claims on average in the last three years. 

 

So I have to point out for the members opposite that 2.65 

million is considerably less than 105 million. That’s about 102 

million off the mark. So I suspect that would probably throw 

your, skew your supposed surplus a little bit out of whack if you 

actually budgeted for what the last three years have produced, 

especially when we look at the snowpack out there. Especially 

when we look at the news stories, everyone in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, is preparing for flooding. And hopefully it won’t 

come. Hopefully the melt will happen in an orderly fashion, as 

orderly as mother nature will let it happen. 

 

But the reality is it’s a lot of spin and PR [public relations] 

when they talk about their balanced budget and about debt 

being reduced. The reality is you just have to look at page 57 of 

the budget document to realize that in fact this budget is not 

balanced and debt is on the way up. So that is one thing that I’d 

like to mention, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that another place that I’d like to talk a little bit about is 

on education. And you know what? I’m going to start again by 

giving the government props for increasing pre-K 

[pre-kindergarten] investments. That is one . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The government says, well what would you do 

differently? Particularly I think investment in education is 

absolutely critical. If we’re going to turn around people who 

perhaps don’t have the best start in life, if we’re going to make 

a difference 20 years from now, we have to start now in 

seriously investing in early years, which includes child care, 

pre-K, kindergarten onward, Mr. Speaker. But I’ll give the 

government props for increasing the pre-K spots. That’s 

absolutely critical. 

 

I also have to point out that there’s some serious flaw in their 

child care and in . . . Well I have to point out that we’ve got 

child care on one end, pre-K, and then kindergarten. So this 

government . . . I’ll talk a little bit more about child care in a 

moment. But kindergarten, the reality is this government has 

forced school boards to have to make incredibly difficult 

decisions. 

 

In my own constituency and throughout Saskatoon, full-day 

kindergarten has been cut. In my constituency that is a huge 

blow to so many families. I have families who speak no 

English. Many of the refugees who come to Saskatoon — not 

just immigrants, but many of the refugees who come to 

Saskatoon — start their life in Saskatoon Riversdale and 

Meadowgreen and have huge language struggles. They’ve never 

held a pencil. Many of them have spent their birth onward in 

refugee camps, very challenged experiences. Full-day 



2978 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

kindergarten is hugely important for other children who’ve 

maybe not had, maybe not started at the same places as some of 

our children have, could really benefit from full-day 

kindergarten. Talk to an educator and find out how very 

important that full-day kindergarten has been in preparing 

children for grade 1 and onward, Mr. Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, my apologies again. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s the real deal. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — He is indeed the real deal, as the member 

from Greystone has pointed out for me. 

 

So I want to talk a little bit about this education budget. So 

there’s been a cut of more than 190 million to educational 

agencies, down to 775 million. This government has committed 

to pay millions of dollars for testing instead of teaching, close 

to $6 million, which is, that’s not for programming. That’s for 

software, Mr. Speaker. That is for software and the 

administration of that software. 

 

So $6 million, what could that $6 million do in classrooms in 

communities throughout Saskatchewan? The reality in this 

education budget, $80 million is going to pay for pension 

obligations. And the government has talked about building new 

schools, bundling them together. We’ve heard the Premier talk 

about bundling schools together as P3s, and I will talk a little bit 

about P3s later. So huge, huge problems. 

 

So what are some of the third party agencies or outside 

stakeholders, people not in this legislature, saying about 

education? Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the STF 

president, Colin Keess, pointed out that no funds were 

identified to support student learning and student engagement. 

He says, “It’s glaringly evident that the additional 3.9 million 

has been allocated for data collection through standardized 

testing, as opposed to classroom supports.” 

 

The Saskatchewan School Boards Association has this to say: 

 

“As a result of the government’s decision to fully fund 

pre-K to 12 education in Saskatchewan, school boards are 

on a fixed income determined by the province and 

individual school boards have little flexibility to respond 

to challenges within school divisions,” said SSBA 

President Janet Foord . . . 

 

“Currently, only 30 per cent of Aboriginal students 

graduate from high school in Saskatchewan,” said Foord. 

 

And: 

 

“Today, the government announced a $3 million 

investment in First Nations and Métis education — that 

amounts to 0.0016 percent of the total pre-K to 12 

education budget. This is simply unacceptable if the goal 

of eliminating the Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal student 

achievement gap is to be realized.” 

 

So those are what some third party individuals have to say 

about the government in this. 

 

I want to talk about some personal examples, things that I hear 

both in Saskatoon Riversdale and throughout the city of 

Saskatoon, and some of the challenges. I’d like to talk about 

some of the challenges that our educators and families are 

facing, Mr. Speaker. And again I would argue that education 

and a solid education from those early years onward is really 

what’s going to ensure that our province continues to flourish, 

Mr. Speaker. But they’re not going to flourish when we have 

classrooms with 31 children. I was speaking with a teacher, a 

grade 1 teacher, Mr. Speaker, who has 31 children in her 

classroom. Twenty-two of those are boys and nine girls — 31 

children in a grade 1 classroom. How is that providing a good 

start to children, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I was chatting with another teacher, actually. In her classroom 

she has four English as additional language students. This is no 

word of a lie. This is not hyperbole, but the English as an 

additional language teacher comes into this classroom and sees 

students 10 minutes a week — not 10 minutes a day, not 10 

minutes half a day — 10 minutes a week. These children in her 

class, these English as additional language children, some of 

them who speak no English at this point, 10 minutes a week, 

Mr. Speaker. That is hugely, hugely problematic. And that is in 

one school. 

 

A more affluent east side school, about two months ago there 

was a parent gathering, actually. It’s not just educators who are 

concerned. It’s parents who are concerned. There was a parent 

gathering. They called a meeting. They are very concerned 

about class sizes, Mr. Speaker. And this is a government who is 

not willing to cap classroom sizes, Mr. Speaker, which we think 

is hugely problematic. They’re willing to regulate schools in all 

kinds of other ways — standardized tests, set school hours, all 

kinds of things, making sure the school year starts after Labour 

Day — but they are unwilling to cap class sizes, which has a 

real impact on learning for individuals. 

 

A school in Saskatoon Riversdale last year, Mr. Speaker, last 

year one of the learning assistant teachers at one of the schools 

that has a very high newcomer and a very high First Nations 

and Métis population, the special education teacher, they were 

out of classroom space in the school. Mr. Speaker, no classroom 

space. This EAL [English as an additional language] teacher 

was teaching in the hallway. She had a table in the hallway. So 

children who first of all . . . you don’t want to stigmatize or 

marginalize children any more than they already are. I know 

teachers do their very best to ensure that there isn’t a stigma to 

receiving extra support, but the reality is there often is. And it’s 

even worse when you are getting this support in the hallway, 

Mr. Speaker, which is not acceptable. 

 

My colleague from Saskatoon Nutana was chatting with 

someone who actually was teaching virtually in a closet, Mr. 

Speaker. So there are many challenges and pressures on the 

education system, and I would argue that if you’re going to pick 

a place to invest, education is absolutely imperative, Mr. 

Speaker. And again, I would say that the no cap on classroom 

sizes is hugely problematic. 

 

[22:00] 

 

So I think the government has fallen down on education and 

needs to do some serious work. The standardized testing, some 

of the literature on standardized testing, looking at an article 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2979 

from Education Week, the article is called “Teachers Place 

Little Value on Standardized Testing: survey finds other 

assessments deemed more important.” This is from Education 

Week on March 28th, 2012. I’d like to quote: 

 

[K to 12] Educators . . . on the panel emphasized what 

they said were the limits of standardized tests in their 

current configuration, saying such assessments are not 

well-matched to contemporary teaching and learning 

goals. “How can you get critical thinking in a bubble?,” 

asked Cate Dossetti, a teacher at Fresno High School in 

Fresno, California. 

 

Another quote: 

 

Teacher-effectiveness authority Charlotte Danielson 

added that “not a single one of the 21st-century skills can 

be assessed on a multiple-choice test.” She said that the 

appeal of standardized test scores is that they “give you a 

number” but that teaching is too complex to be captured 

in that way. 

 

So those are a couple of thoughts from some American 

educators who have seen and experienced standardized testing 

first-hand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have one more article, a Canadian study actually, 

from the Canadian Journal of Education in 2011. It’s called 

“High-stakes Standardized Testing and Marginalized Youth: An 

Examination of the Impact on Those Who Fail.” One of the 

things that the study points out that: 

 

Interviews with youth indicate that the unintended impact 

of high-stakes testing is more problematic than policy 

makers and educators may realize. In contrast to . . . 

[literate] policy’s aims to help promote the “well-being” 

of all learners and “equity” within the educational system, 

youth attest to feeling “shame” and show further 

marginalization due to this testing mechanism. 

 

So those are just a couple of studies. There’s a quote around 

marginalized youth and standardized testing from the same 

article: 

 

There is a considerable amount of literature on how social 

inequalities along racial, social class, and gendered lines 

are reproduced and sustained through school practices . . . 

Arguably, standardized testing (re)produces these 

inequalities . . . 

 

So we have some serious concerns about this government’s 

desire to test, not teach. I’ve heard it from educators. I’ve heard 

concern from parents. 

 

It was interesting in question period today when the minister 

got up and he said, as an educator, that parents were asking for 

standardized testing, that he could . . . Standardized testing 

would be better to articulate concerns to parents than he could 

as an educator, which I don’t know if he really meant that or 

not. But the person who knows the student the best in any 

classroom is the teacher. And I think that we’re not cardboard 

cut-outs when we go into school, and we certainly shouldn’t be 

cardboard cut-outs when we come out. But the goal should be 

able to make sure that we’re putting in place the supports to 

ensure that children have what they need to achieve their full 

capacity. And standardized testing doesn’t seem to be one of 

those, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have some huge problems with the government’s 

approach, as do educators and parents, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister hasn’t been able to articulate a clear vision of why 

we’ve gone in this direction, and we’d like to see some 

evidence of that at some point because it absolutely makes no 

sense. This is not a common sense approach, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the education front, under that same portfolio, under 

Education is child care. This is something that, as a mother of 

young children and who has many friends who have young 

children, over the last 15 years . . . I have a big span between 

my children, so I’ve gotten the opportunity to talk to a broad 

age range of people over the last 15 years who’ve been in the 

thick of child rearing young children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in this budget, the government is committed to creating 500 

more child care spaces. They committed to 500 spaces in last 

year’s budget. But I need to point out that as per a written 

question that I asked just last week, of those 500 spaces — it’s 

not quite as rosy as the government would make it look — of 

those 500 spaces, only 185 of those spaces are actually 

operational at this point, Mr. Speaker. But if anyone thinks . . . 

And they all have been allocated, but the reality is they’re not 

operational. So a child care space that isn’t operational serves 

no one any good at this point in time. 

 

But I want to point out some numbers here for the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. In 2009 there were 14,536 live births; 

2010, 14,978 live births; 2011, 14,577 live births; 2012, 15,035 

live births. So that’s about 60,000 births in the last five years, 

Mr. Speaker. So these children are all under the age of five, and 

presumably some of them need child care spaces, Mr. Speaker. 

Their parents would need child care spaces. And so 500 a year 

is not something to brag about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think some of the . . . The reality is child care, from my 

perspective as a feminist, child care enables women to be 

engaged in paid labour, which many women choose. I’ve been 

an at-home mother too and . . . But I think most people 

recognize that child care, it’s still women who are primarily 

responsible for caregiving, that the reality is that still happens. 

And child care, having quality, affordable, accessible child care 

allows women to be engaged in paid labour. So from that 

perspective, that’s absolutely imperative. 

 

And that’s part of an economic development strategy. If you’re 

facing labour force shortages and your citizens can’t work 

outside of the home because they can’t find child care, that’s 

hugely problematic. So not only are we not creating enough 

spaces, but we’ve heard last year, Mr. Speaker, we had two 

delegations . . . Twice a delegation of child care directors came 

to talk about the struggles with staffing. They say that early 

learning and care educators are not following behind them, 

partly because it’s not paid incredibly well. So these child care 

directors, some of them who’ve been in the field for 20-plus 

years, are very worried about the lack of EKE, or early 

childhood educators, following behind them. 

 



2980 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

I still actually need to confirm this via the written question, but 

I was talking to a manager last week actually at a child care 

facility who had said . . . And this is an organization that has 

many years experience providing child care in the city of 

Saskatoon, a very well-respected organization. And they’ve not 

asked for any of the 500 spots in recent years. And why not? 

She says one reason they haven’t asked for spots is because 

they can’t fill the staff. They can’t hire the appropriate staff. 

And she pointed out . . . So I still need to confirm this, and I’ll 

do this through a written question. But she said that there were 

only 10 early learning and care educators who graduated in, she 

said Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. So I want to clarify that. 

 

So you’re creating 500 spaces, but you’re only graduating 10 

level 3 ECE individuals to staff those spaces? So I think there 

may be a disconnect between creating spaces, making sure that 

we have the qualified staff. So that is a huge problem, Mr. 

Speaker. But again I would point out that 500 child care spaces 

a year with 60,000 live births in the last four years is nothing to 

brag about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would argue that there’s huge challenges with subsidies as 

well. The turning point, this is . . . The turning point is the point 

at which you no longer receive the full subsidy and you start to 

lose some of that subsidy is when you make $1,640 — $1,640, 

Mr. Speaker. That is not much more over minimum wage. I 

want to point out that this has not changed since 1983. So that is 

not a good thing, Mr. Speaker, the fact that people who make 

$1,641 presumably start to lose some of the subsidy. So that is 

hugely problematic. 

 

Along some of the subsidies, two child care directors have told 

me that the length of time it takes to process a subsidy 

application . . . So if someone comes into your child care and 

they want a spot and you want to ensure that they have a spot, 

so you start providing child care. But it can take anywhere from 

six to eight weeks to process that subsidy application. So you 

guesstimate, well they think that they’re making this much if 

they happen to be on a government program. So they think 

they’re making this much. You estimate that, oh they’ll get this 

much subsidy and they have to pay this much of the parent 

portion. But because it takes six to eight weeks, it’s six to eight 

weeks . . . They may find out at the end of the eight weeks that 

they’re not eligible for subsidy or not as much subsidy as they 

thought. So then the child care has some debt. 

 

And when people are on a low fixed income, trying to come up 

with the extra money to pay for that debt is very difficult. So 

either what happens is . . . Well what happens is the child care 

carries that bad debt. But that individual who’s been using up 

that child care space, because they can’t afford it even with the 

subsidy, they end up dropping out of the child care. So you 

have someone who is using child care to get an education or to 

be employed, and then they end up dropping out of the child 

care. And then you’ve got a huge problem there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think something else that I’d like to flag, some concern, is this 

government does not know how many people are currently 

looking for licensed child care. You can’t tell me, Mr. Speaker, 

that there can’t be a measure developed or some way . . . 

Manitoba has an online child care registry. The Ottawa capital 

region has an online child care registry. There has to be a way 

to be able to determine, not just with the number of live births 

or how many young families are in a particular area, but we 

have to figure out a way . . . or this government, the onus is on 

this government to figure out a way — how many child care 

spaces do we need, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I would challenge the government to think about that. How 

can you create a program and build on a program if you don’t 

really know what the needs are? I think you need to fully 

understand what you’re dealing with, Mr. Speaker. How many 

people want licensed care? In order to be able to have a plan to 

support people to access licensed care which supports 

education, which supports employment — and as I would 

argue, it’s an economic development strategy — if you don’t 

have care, you can’t work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know we’ve heard in this legislature and beyond that 

there are some challenges with people finding employees. I 

know that one of the other challenges is finding licensed child 

care outside of the Monday to Friday, nine-to-five workday, or 

we’ll say eight to six just for argument’s sake. There are people 

who work at places, often service sector lower waged 

employees, who would be eligible for child care subsidies but 

there’s not licensed child care available to them at 6 in the 

morning or at 8 o’clock at night, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would challenge the government to think about a 

comprehensive strategy for child care that quantifies the 

numbers of child care spaces that we need, that addresses the 

subsidy situation, that addresses not enough staff. There are so 

many things, I’m sure . . . I’m the queen of sticky notes, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m sure that I’m missing something on this front 

but . . . Oh, I did miss something. 

 

Actually in written questions I had asked about the range of 

subsidy paid out in 2012. You’ll be interested to know, Mr. 

Speaker, that we paid a 25 cent subsidy, Mr. Speaker, to some 

family somewhere. And I think this will involve further 

questions in estimates or further written questions. How much 

does it cost to process a 25 cent subsidy, Mr. Speaker, and how 

was that paid out? Is that a direct deposit? Is that a cheque? So I 

think that that clearly illustrates that we have some challenges 

here in child care. 

 

And I would encourage the government to seriously think about 

looking to our neighbours to the east and implementing a 

serious strategy around child care, and not ad hoc and not done 

on . . . [inaudible interjections] . . . The members opposite are 

saying, how many did you create? Well first of all, I have been 

here for three years, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, the reality is this is 2013. This is 2013. If we want to 

talk about balanced growth, not having a child care strategy in 

place is not balanced growth, Mr. Speaker, not balanced growth 

at all. This is 2013. Let’s deal with the child care challenges 

that we have to ensure that families have the supports, that 

families have the supports they need to fully engage in 

employment and education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All one needs to do . . . Actually I was wrong. I have much 

more to talk about child care. All one needs to do is look at 

some of the news articles of even just the past couple months. I 

have a couple here that talks about, well people struggling with 

the qualifications, and that goes to staffing levels. But “Nanny 

shortage in Saskatchewan.” This is from Global Regina on 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2981 

Thursday, February 28th: 

 

Families in Saskatchewan looking for a live-in nanny are 

finding them in short supply. With daycare shortages 

forcing many parents to look elsewhere, nannies are now 

in high demand. 

 

[22:15] 

 

So daycare shortages. So people are turning to nannies. “Need 

for nannies surging in Saskatoon” posted February 13th, 2013 

from CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] News. 

 

Nannies are a hot commodity in Saskatoon, a fast-growing 

city with a young demographic. 

 

While many parents say they would prefer to find spots for 

their children at licensed daycares, for some families 

juggling shift work and two careers say nannies are often 

the easiest option. 

 

So we have another article from Thursday, February 7th, 2013. 

This is a Global News article. In Saskatoon: 

 

A growing, and younger, population is putting the squeeze 

on childcare providers in the province. 

 

On Wednesday, Statistics Canada released figures that 

named Saskatoon as the fastest growing metropolitan area 

in Canada along with having the youngest median age. 

 

This is creating issues for parents looking to work but 

unable to find a daycare provider. 

 

One person feeling the pinch is Angela Brown. She 

recently moved back to Saskatchewan from Alberta with 

her husband and two young children and although she 

managed to secure a part-time spot for her 4-year-old 

daughter at Parents’ Child Development Cooperative, her 

15-month-old son is still on the waiting list. 

 

“To have a place that you trust and that is reputable and 

the child enjoys is huge,” she said. “If you don’t have that, 

your days at work are awful,” said Brown. 

 

Brown has yet to rejoin the work force since neither of her 

children have full-time placements at child care facilities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s not me saying that we have a child care 

challenge. There are many people in Saskatchewan saying that 

we have a child care challenge, Mr. Speaker. I think that the . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will move on to culture, the culture and parks portfolio, which 

is mine. And you’ll notice I have many, many thoughts on this 

file, Mr. Speaker, so I hope . . . many, many, many thoughts on 

this file. 

 

So one thing that we have to talk about here is the Arts Board. 

This year happens to be the 65th anniversary of the Arts Board, 

and the Arts Board is the body that supports the creators in 

being able to create, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one of the things that we’ve heard this government talk 

about is the 5 per cent increase to the Arts Board allocation this 

year, which is much needed and incredibly important and very 

appreciated, I’m sure. But I think we need to take a look at this 

government’s record on the Arts Board on this the 65th 

anniversary of the Arts Board. Thank goodness the government 

saw fit to increase their allocation by 5 per cent, because if we 

go back to 2007-2008, the last NDP budget, the Arts Board 

allocation was 10.534 million, Mr. Speaker, 10.534 million in 

2007 and ’08. 

 

What did we see under this government 2008-09? We saw 

clawback, Mr. Speaker, $6.094 million. 2009-10, we saw a 

marginal bump, 6.338 million. 2010-11, we saw a hold the line 

budget again, 6.338 million. 2011-12, 6.433 million. So we did 

see a marginal increase. But last year, what did we see for the 

Arts Board? We saw a status quo holding the line budget, 

$6.433 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what does a status quo budget mean? A status quo 

budget means that you can’t keep up with your annual costs, 

Mr. Speaker. So I’m very glad that this government has seen fit 

to give the Arts Board a 5 per cent allocation. But their track 

record for the Arts Board has not been stellar, Mr. Speaker. It 

has not been stellar. And the numbers . . . All they need to do is 

take a look at the estimates and see that there is nothing to crow 

about on this file. 

 

We can look at the Western Development Museum, which is an 

institution I know . . . The one that I’m very familiar with is the 

Western Development Museum in Saskatoon. And we heard 

last year, there was quite a furor last year with a holding the line 

budget for the Western Development Museum which forced 

them to close their doors on Monday, which in fact . . . and staff 

took unpaid leave. They didn’t fill vacancies, which has an 

impact on the public, Mr. Speaker. The Western Development 

Museum in Saskatoon actually, coincidentally enough, has just 

won some awards from RV magazine and should be very proud 

of that. But it’s not because of the support of this government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know in my own experience, the Western Development 

Museum in Saskatoon, for me growing up, visiting Boomtown 

was a wonderful experience. It was, and it continues to be. Over 

the years, actually in the last government, the building the 

prairie gamble was . . . or it’s called Winning the Prairie 

Gamble, but creating that exhibit has further enhanced the 

Western Development Museum. It’s a big thing for children to 

do, for school groups to come and visit. But it’s also a great 

way for all the newcomers who come to Saskatoon or any of the 

other three communities where there’s WDMs [Western 

Development Museum] — in Moose Jaw, North Battleford, and 

Yorkton — it’s a great opportunity for newcomers to have a 

sense of the province that they’re coming to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it also . . . What else does the Western Development 

Museum do? It highlights innovation. There was a great exhibit 

on the cobalt bomb just last year, Mr. Speaker. So we have not 

. . . This government has not shown great support for the 

Western Development Museum. And again having spoken to 

the executive director there some time ago, she said a status quo 

budget . . . I believe she said her annual increase in cost, if you 

hold the line, is $100,000. That’s for maintenance of utilities, 



2982 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

all those kinds of things. So their budget goes up by about 

$100,000 annually. What did this government do in the last four 

years? In ’09-10, 3.99 million; ’10-11, 3.99 million — so a 

status quo budget — ’11-12, an increase of 60,000 to 4.059 

million; and ’12-13, it was a status quo budget; ’13-14, a status 

quo budget, Mr. Speaker. So we are challenging some of our 

institutions here that, I think, contribute a great deal to the 

quality of life here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think one of the things that I’d like to talk about is the film 

employment tax credit. We heard a little bit about it today, Mr. 

Speaker. We heard a little about it today again when we 

discovered through a freedom of information request that this 

government last year made a decision to cut it, and that after 

they made a decision to cut it, they decided they’d better do 

some quick research on it, Mr. Speaker, just a few short days 

before they were going to announce the decision to cut it. So 

this was all about PR and spin, Mr. Speaker, because apparently 

they had not done a thorough analysis of the program. That’s 

hugely problematic. 

 

So we’ve heard from this cultural minister saying that, oh well, 

we’ve got Creative Saskatchewan now. And he’s been quite 

critical of me arguing that Creative Saskatchewan is not a 

replacement for the film employment tax credit. The reality is, 

you know what? It does, in fact, raise the bar for some of the 

other creative industries and people are cautiously, cautiously 

optimistic. I know talking to many of the other cultural 

industries, they are cautiously optimistic about, they are 

cautiously optimistic about this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

It’s quite funny, Mr. Speaker. Those members opposite are 

saying shame on me, Mr. Speaker. That is absolutely hilarious, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the reality is, Mr. Speaker, many people in the creative 

industries outside of film are cautiously optimistic, but they saw 

how the film industry was treated this year, and this government 

has a long way to make up in terms of trust because people are 

not quite sure if this is all that it’s cut out to be. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Speaker? You could raise the bar for 

other creative industries without killing one of the creative 

industries that brought in huge production values, Mr. Speaker. 

So we could have raised the bar for other creative industries 

instead of raising them for some and cutting for the others, Mr. 

Speaker. And I have not spoken to a single person in other 

creative industries who thought the film tax credit was a bad 

thing. So although these members are trying to paint this as, 

well the member from Riversdale only supports film, the reality 

is I’ve not heard people in other creative industries say that the 

film employment tax credit was a bad thing. In fact they saw the 

benefit. They saw their specific industries benefit from a strong 

and vibrant film industry. So we did not have to kill one 

industry to raise the bar for others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know what? I actually haven’t had an opportunity yet 

today to review the Creative Saskatchewan legislation. It’s been 

a busy day and I’m looking forward to doing that tonight and 

tomorrow. But you know what? The one thing that I have heard 

from these creative industries, they’re very concerned. They’re 

cautiously optimistic but they were concerned about not having 

members of their industries on the board for Creative 

Saskatchewan. So I’m curious to see how that’s all shaken out 

in the legislation, Mr. Speaker. They were concerned that the 

minister and the ministry did not want members from the 

creative industries on the board of Creative Saskatchewan, 

which they said was absolutely imperative. 

 

Also one thing to flag in this budget, that the money for the 

creative industries, for the industry associations, the one thing I 

know the creative industries have said is that money has to be 

there to support them. They are the link to the creators, Mr. 

Speaker. And there’s many questions that are going to be asked 

in estimates, but I understand that money for the cultural or 

creative industry organizations is only in place until the end of 

August. So I have some questions in estimates to figure out. 

There’s one budget line that’s up, there’s one that’s down. What 

does that all mean? So there’s still many questions to ask, but 

the bottom line is we could have raised the bar for every other 

creative industry without chasing hard-working folks from 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And you know, I have to say too that a couple of weeks ago, 

our first week back, the member from Indian Head-Milestone 

— I just heard say something from his seat — it happened to be 

three of the members, the member from Indian Head-Milestone, 

the member from Estevan, and the member from Kindersley, 

actually two weeks ago was saying, oh Danielle, you’ve made a 

mountain out of a molehill. We haven’t heard from . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We never said that. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — You did in fact. These members did in fact 

say this. They were saying that they had not heard from 

anybody in their constituencies, Mr. Speaker. Those three 

members . . . Perhaps the member of Estevan didn’t say I made 

a mountain out of a molehill. Perhaps it was her seatmates, but 

she did in fact say she didn’t hear from a single person. 

 

So all I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is when you talk, I can tell 

you that there are hundreds of people who have been negatively 

impacted by this, Mr. Speaker. You tell these people, Mr. 

Speaker, a gaffer who was in Saskatchewan for 27 years from 

BC [British Columbia], who’s made his home in Saskatchewan 

for 27 years and helped build the film industry, that he couldn’t 

work here in Saskatchewan anymore. So he’s now moved back 

to his home community of BC but it’s really hard to set up shop 

in a new community, Mr. Speaker. So he’s working in BC. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Film credits wasn’t here for 27 years. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — No, no, no, I didn’t say the credit was here, 

Mr. Speaker, as the member from Milestone keeps heckling 

from his seat. I said he was here for 27 years and helped build 

the industry, Mr. Speaker. That is what I said. So you tell him 

that there weren’t huge personal costs for this. You tell the 

couple, the two producers who are now . . . Actually one of 

them comes from Nipawin. So I’m sure that . . . and helped 

produce amazing crop dusting program actually. The two 

producers are now living in Toronto. And you know what’s 

really . . . I mean it’s wonderful. She is pregnant. She’s having a 

baby. Her family here in Saskatchewan will not get to grow up, 

will not get to be with their grandchild as their grandchild 

grows up, Mr. Speaker, because of a short-sighted, nasty cut 

from this government that apparently didn’t involve any 

economic analysis before it happened, Mr. Speaker. A really 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2983 

talented woman who is now in northern Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

working as a film commissioner. She had organized a digital 

conference, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You tell these people. And this is a drop in the bucket. I had the 

opportunity 90 seconds last spring to read the start of a list of 

people who’ve left Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And many, 

many people have left Saskatchewan. But it’s children who are 

being separated from their families or from their grandparents. 

 

There are people who are having to choose another career 

because their career here in Saskatchewan has ended. You can’t 

earn a living, Mr. Speaker, in the film industry here in 

Saskatchewan. The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that the $60,000 cap 

that was on the place, in place on this transition grant that the 

government had put in place does not, does not, will not do 

anything, Mr. Speaker, for bringing in production from 

anywhere else, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Does this government think other provinces, other investors 

from elsewhere, their money isn’t good enough, Mr. Speaker? 

Seventy per cent of money in the province spent in film came 

from out of province, Mr. Speaker. Seventy per cent of that was 

new money to Saskatchewan. Does this government not 

appreciate that? You talk to any filmmaker who says they are in 

fact entrepreneurs. It doesn’t fit with this government’s 

narrative that they talk about attracting and retaining young 

people to Saskatchewan. In fact around the film industry, they 

have pushed them out, Mr. Speaker. That is exactly what has 

happened. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of adjournment, 

this House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2953 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2958 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2964 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2967 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2970 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2975 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


