




















































Hansard: April 25, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 53A  THURSDAY, APRIL 25, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3365 

 April 25, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a 

statement. I’m seeking leave for both myself and the Leader of 

the Opposition, and when we each finish our statements we will 

be alternating and reading names. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

asked for leave for himself and the Leader of the Opposition to 

make statements. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 

 

National Day of Mourning 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sunday, April 

28th marks the National Day of Mourning for workers killed or 

injured on the job. This is a day of reflection, a chance to join 

with over 100 other countries as we think of those who were 

injured in the workplace and remember those who have died as 

a result of their job. 

 

It is a day to express our sympathy and extend our condolences 

to those who have lost a loved one to a workplace injury or 

illness. The Day of Mourning is also a day for each and every 

one of us to renew our personal commitment to promoting, 

creating, and maintaining safety in the workplace and at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Workers’ Compensation Board recently 

announced that they accepted 60 claims for Saskatchewan 

people who died in 2012 as a result of work-related injuries and 

illnesses. It is unacceptable that so many have died needlessly. I 

hope that everyone in Saskatchewan can honour their memory 

by making safety a priority. 

 

The Workers’ Compensation Board also reported that there 

were approximately 40,000 work-related injuries in 

Saskatchewan in 2012. Those injuries impact the lives of the 

injured workers and their families as well as the businesses they 

work for. We are all responsible for our own safety and for 

considering and protecting the safety of others at work, at 

home, and at play. The 60 lives lost in 2012 remind us that 

when we forget to make safety a priority, the results are 

devastating. 

 

I hope that on Sunday we can all pause for a moment to reflect 

on the lives that were lost this year and in previous years and to 

think about the suffering of those who have experienced 

workplace injuries. I encourage my colleagues in the legislature 

to attend one of the vigils that are happening throughout the 

province on April 28th. To remember and honour these 

workers, the Canadian flag on Parliament Hill and the flags at 

the Saskatchewan Legislative Building will be flown at 

half-mast. 

 

The names of those we honour today are being read into the 

official record and will be inscribed in the national registry at 

the Canadian Labour Congress in Ottawa. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 

opposition, I want to express our deepest sympathies to the 

families and friends of those who’ve died as a result of 

workplace injuries and illnesses over the past year. 

 

The Workers’ Compensation Board has accepted 60 claims for 

people who lost their lives in the past 12 months due to their 

work. As we look at that list of 60 names and to read those 

names into the official record today, we are deeply moved 

because we know that each and every one of those deaths was 

preventable. And we know that there are a whole lot of family 

members and friends who continue to grieve the loss of their 

loved ones. 

 

Each of these deaths is a stark reminder of the fundamental 

importance of occupational health and safety. Mr. Speaker, we 

are mindful as well that an average of 14 people die every year 

as a result of incidents on our province’s farms and ranches. 

These deaths are not included in the official lists from the 

Workers’ Compensation Board but these people are on our 

minds today as well, as their deaths serve as a reminder of the 

importance of farming safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we recognize the Day of Mourning for workers 

killed or injured on the job, may we all commit ourselves as 

legislators to do everything we can to ensure healthy and safe 

workplaces for every Saskatchewan worker. May we renew our 

resolve to make occupational health and safety a much higher 

priority, and may we not give up on that mission until there’s 

not one single name to be read on the Day of Mourning. 

 

I think we owe that to the memory of the 60 workers who’ve 

lost their lives at work in the province this past year. We owe it 

to their families and to their friends and most especially, Mr. 

Speaker, we owe it to every Saskatchewan worker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all 

members rise while I read the names of those who have lost 

their lives. 

 

Curt Seidler Tyson Juhlke 

Shawn Chomyk Ricky Martin 

Wesley Althouse Howard Willems 

Sean Itterman Cassell Nightingale 

Barry Guenther Calvin Hande 

Glen Salminen James Douglas 

Pat Wagner Ronald Lornson 

Charles Mills Judy Moore 

Edward Crumley Dale Hermanson 

Ashley Richards Tyson Jones 

 



3366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, the member of the Opposition will read the next 

20. 

 

Mr. Broten: — 

 

Walter Stan Sakundiak Gordon Diggins 

Jacob Whitney Nicholas Fedyk 

Curtis Krip Leo Hoffman 

Adrian Regehr Christopher Reid 

Wyatt Penner Father Joel Rama 

Ross Jardine Don Griffiths 

Jan Wyma Bryce Molyneux 

Steven Lachance Zsolt Varga 

Rick Masuskapoe Jeffrey Tweedie 

Edward Wayne Standinghorn Theodor Lehn 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — 

 

Allan Rudyk Stan Adamek 

Ralph O’Shea George Brailean 

Elsie Nimilowich James Palmer 

Kent Kreller Curtis Lindbergh 

Darren Schmidt Keith Parrish 

Cliff Dawson Keith St. Paul 

David Flegel Ronald Skogstad 

Roy Osolinski Terry Alexander 

Mark Venier Roy Leech 

Winston Lewison Raymond Cummine 

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I express my 

deepest sympathy to the workers’ families and loved ones. 

 

I also express condolences to the families and loved ones of 

those who have died due to farming and ranching incidents. 

While those individuals are not included in the statistics 

compiled by the Workers’ Compensation Board, we recognize 

that they too died as a result of their job. Every year an average 

of 14 people die as a result of incidents on farms and ranches, 

making us painfully aware of the risks associated with those 

jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to commemorate this day, I ask that when all 

members’ statements for the Day of Mourning are done, we 

observe a moment of silence in this House. 

 

[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to table, according to section 38 of The 

Ombudsman Act, 2012, the 40th annual report of the Provincial 

Ombudsman for the year 2012. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to take the 

opportunity to introduce our Provincial Ombudsman seated in 

the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Kevin Fenwick, along with some of 

his staff. I would ask members to welcome the Ombudsman to 

the provincial legislature. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour and a privilege to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly a group of fine students and supervisors from the 

great community of Kamsack. Specifically 26 grade 4 students 

from Victoria School are with us today, and I welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

But I’d also like to welcome the supervisors, the adult 

supervisors which include principal and teachers and bus driver 

and others along. And I’d like to introduce Mark Forsythe, 

Kimberly Chutskoff, Jana Thomas, Sherri Hackywicz-Dietz, 

Ryan Stanko, Andrea Werrell, and George Musqua. Welcome 

to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce someone that’s very, very special in my life. Seated 

in your gallery is my grandson, Beau Duckarmie. So Beau, if 

you’d give us a wave. 

 

Beau is a grade 12 student at the Estevan Comprehensive 

School. He’ll be graduating this spring. And he really enjoys 

history and he enjoys politics. Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to 

say that Beau’s political views align with members on this side 

of the House. So I ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Beau to his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, I want to welcome two special visitors and 

guests from Manitoba. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have 

Ed Yaknovich from Benito, Manitoba, and Roger Quill from 

the Sapotaweyak Cree Nation, also of Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 

And these two gentlemen want to see how the Assembly works 

today. And I invited them, and I’m really pleased that they did 

show up. 

 

And for the record, Mr. Speaker, it should be known that Ed 

always boasts that he beats Roger in Texas hold’em, but in 

confidence Roger told me he lets Ed win now and then because 

Ed doesn’t talk to him for several days when he beats Ed. So I 

think it’s important that people know the dynamics of these two 

good friends and these two new friends of mine. And I would 

ask members of the Assembly to welcome our Manitoba guests 

here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce two individuals in your gallery. Firstly I’d introduce 

Lauretta Ritchie-McInnes, my constituency assistant from 

Yorkton. She’s been a CA [constituency assistant] for I think 

upwards of 18 years now. So when she was 12, I guess she 

started. And she’s just a just an amazing asset to our office in 

Yorkton, and her work capacity and knowledge capacity is 

something I think hard to rival. 



April 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3367 

With her is her niece from Melfort, Alexis Gerski. She’s a 

grade 4 student at Reynolds Central School in Melfort. She 

recently received an exemplary report card, so now she gets to 

take a couple of days off with auntie in Regina. After visiting 

here today, they’re going to the Science Centre, to the RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] Heritage Centre. Besides 

being very academic she also plays guitar, piano, softball, is a 

Girl Guide, likes to hunt, fish, snowmobile. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, she has her own Polaris 340 snowmobile and word on 

the street has it she’s a better rider than her brother Cole. So I’d 

ask all members to welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, sitting in the west gallery is an old co-worker of 

mine. Sorry if I said the word old, but Carol Dawson worked on 

the girls’ side of Dales House for, if I said 25 years I’d probably 

be pretty close, and mentored a countless number of female 

youth for decades — and really, really great work. And I’m 

proud to know her and proud for the fact that Carol’s here 

today. And I’d like all members of the Assembly to please 

welcome Carol to her Assembly. Thanks. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — It’s my pleasure to introduce to 

the Assembly, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, a group of 18 

grade 3 to grade 12 students from the Sterling North Oxbow 

Campus in Oxbow. Along with the students is their teachers, 

Charlene Lewis and Darlene Wayling, chaperones Pam 

Hodgson, Esther Shimwell, and Jaqui Cooley. I would ask all 

members to welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

[10:15] 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to stand today to present a petition in reference to 

cellphone coverage for the Northwest. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; Buffalo River First Nation, also with the adjoining 

communities of St. George’s Hill and Michel Village; and 

English River First Nation, also known as Patuanak, and 

the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nation, 

along with the community of Turnor Lake, including all 

the neighbouring communities in each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while the people from all throughout 

Saskatchewan signed this petition in support of the call for 

cellphone coverage in the Northwest, the people that have 

signed this particular page of the petition are primarily from 

Dillon, Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

School Recognized for Use of Technology 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. St. Mark School in 

Saskatoon Riversdale is the first designated technological 

elementary school in Saskatoon, and was the only school in 

Canada to be named a Microsoft Innovative Pathfinder School 

for 2012-13. 

 

With students from 46 different countries, St. Mark’s principal, 

Owen Fortosky, had to find a way to deal with the challenge of 

connecting with numerous English as an additional language 

students. Mr. Fortosky has found that the use of technology has 

allowed the teachers of St. Mark School to better connect and 

teach EAL [English as an additional language] students. 

 

The school has embraced technology. The students have access 

to lectures via Skype or recorded an uploaded version on the 

class SharePoint site. St. Mark School students have been 

focusing on building a global village by connecting with other 

students around the world. For example, the grade 2 class 

connected with a school in Colorado on a project about 

deforestation. Kindergarten students connected with a school in 

Kenya to share their experiences of Canadian winters, and the 

grade 6 class connected with students in the Bahamas. 

 

These technological connections allow students at St. Mark’s to 

learn about other cultures, share our Canadian culture, and 

provide the immigrant students an opportunity to connect with 

their former homes. These connections are invaluable for all the 

students, but especially for those for whom English is not their 

first language, for those who have immigrated to Canada, and 

for those who have come here as refugees. 

 

I’d like to ask my colleagues to join with me in congratulating 

the staff and students at St. Mark’s on their commitment to 

finding new ways to learn and on their successes so far. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is National 

Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week. One person 

donating their vital organs and tissue can save the lives of as 

many as eight other people and make a difference in the lives of 

many more. Transplant operations have become much more 

common, but there’s nothing routine about the impact on 

someone who is waiting for a transplant and the life-saving or 

life-changing effect when they receive the procedure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are dozens of Saskatchewan patients living 

with the hope that a blood, organ donor, or tissue will become 

available, and the dread that it may not happen in time. The 

Saskatchewan transplant program cannot do its good work 

without the forethought and generosity of donors and their 

families. 



3368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, we encourage all Saskatchewan residents to 

consider organ donation. Most importantly, you need to let your 

family know of your wishes. Taking action can be as simple as 

sending an email to friends and family so they know that you 

support organ donation. That single action could make a world 

of difference to someone in the future whose life or whose 

quality of life depends on a transplant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the provincial government, I thank 

the Saskatchewan transplant program and our community 

partners for their good work in encouraging and facilitating 

organ and tissue donation. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Parkinson’s Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, April is Parkinson’s Awareness 

Month. Parkinson’s is a neurodegenerative disease faced by 

thousands of Canadians. Currently there’s no cure. Movement 

is controlled by dopamine, a chemical that carries signals 

between the nerves in the brain. When the dopamine-producing 

cells die, Parkinson symptoms appear. 

 

The theme for this year’s Parkinson’s Awareness Month is My 

Family Lives with Parkinson’s. Families can feel the impact 

from Parkinson’s disease. Daily activities and simple tasks can 

be difficult for the person with Parkinson’s and can mean that 

more responsibilities are placed on the other members of the 

family. Household chores, planning family events, and helping 

with personal hygiene become shared tasks. 

 

Parkinson Society Canada is the national voice of Canadians 

living with Parkinson’s. It has 10 regional partners and 240 

chapters. The society provides support groups, education 

support, as well as advocacy on behalf of 100,000 Canadians 

living with Parkinson’s. Funding innovative research helps 

expand knowledge on prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of 

Parkinson’s and will ultimately lead to a cure. Every 

September, there’s a SuperWalk in 90 communities across 

Canada, including Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of the House to join 

me in recognizing Parkinson’s Awareness Month. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Prince Albert Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 

today to recognize the Prince Albert Sports Hall of Fame 23rd 

annual induction banquet, which I was happy to attend this past 

Saturday along with my colleague from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

After this year, there will be 165 inductees in the Prince Albert 

Sports Hall of Fame, which recognizes and honours a collection 

of role models, people who have made remarkable 

contributions to sport in the city of Prince Albert and 

surrounding area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the 2013 inductees and 

their categories in the House today: the 1948 Royal Hilltops 

fastball team for team category; Barry Mihiliwicz for football, 

builder category; Dwight Bergstrom and Wayne Simpson for 

alpine skiing, builder category; Ron Horn for multiple sports 

under the builder category; Darren Whitehead for Special 

Olympics, meritorious service category; Malcolm Jenkins, 

community philanthropist, meritorious service category; and 

Sherry Anderson, curling, athlete category. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether it’s through volunteering as a referee, 

event organizer, or competing in a sport, these individuals help 

sports thrive in Prince Albert and area. I ask that all members of 

this Assembly join me in recognizing all the Prince Albert 

Sports Hall of Fame 2013 inductees who help make Prince 

Albert a great place to work, live, and play. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Yorkton Technician Receives Safe Worker Award 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

House today to recognize a local resident of Yorkton who 

recently received the highest safe worker award in the province. 

Carey Gleason who is a technician at Terry Ortynsky’s Royal 

Ford in Yorkton received the Safe Worker Award for 2013. 

 

This award highlights the important contributions workers 

make in eliminating or reducing injuries or illnesses in the 

workplace, and to recognize an individual who has shown an 

exemplary commitment to workplace health and safety. 

 

Mr. Gleason was nominated for the award because of the work 

he has done to help the dealership enhance its safety practices. 

He has undertaken a number of initiatives to continually 

improve safety in his workplace, including fabricated a hoist 

hanger at minimal cost to the dealership to help address 

concerns about potential back problems in relation to hoisting 

tires; installing anti-vibration wrap on shop tools to lessen 

vibration; and regularly reminding technicians about the 

importance of wearing hearing protection, safety glasses, and 

safety boots. Carey is a trusted technician and he helps resolve 

safety concerns, making his role integral to this organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing Mr. 

Carey Gleason for his efforts in workplace safety and on 

receiving the important Safe Worker Award. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Awards of Excellence 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to rise in this 

Assembly today to draw attention to the Merit Awards of 

Excellence, which took place recently in Saskatoon. These 

awards, hosted by Merit Contractors Association, honour 

Saskatchewan’s open shop construction industry in nine 

categories. 

 

Two of my constituents, both employees of Peter Crushing and 

Hauling, were nominated for awards. Ben Rushton of 

Rocanville was nominated for the Leadership and Mentoring 



April 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3369 

Award while Brent Schann of Whitewood won the award for 

worksite innovation in a tie with Dennis Turcotte of Alan 

Construction in Saskatoon. 

 

Regina-based Coram Construction took home the Merit 

Employer of the Year while one of its employees, Ian Knibbs, 

was honoured with the Leadership and Mentoring Award. 

 

Other individual award winners included Cody Diggins of 

VCM Construction, Chad Leverick and Teresa Darcy of 

Alliance Energy, Sheldon Ponto of Bexson Construction, and 

Rick Bond of Quorex Construction. 

 

In addition to these individuals’ awards, Mr. Speaker, the 

Community Builder Award was given to recognize the 

combined efforts of several members of the construction 

community in the building of Ronald McDonald House in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

recognizing and congratulating all award winners and 

nominees. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Soccer Team Named Team of the Week 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this 

Assembly to speak about a very special group of young men. 

Saskatoon Hollandia Gremio youth soccer team has been 

named Bank of Montreal’s national Team of the Week. This is 

a group of boys that continually show respect for their peers, 

display leadership, and carry a positive attitude in training as 

well as competition. The boys are more than willing to 

contribute to the community, as they lend a hand whenever and 

wherever they are asked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Gremio under-12 team were not named 

national Team of the Week solely for their play on the pitch, 

but rather for their extraordinary efforts in organizing a 

fundraising barbecue in support of their head coach’s mother 

who was recently diagnosed with cancer. Although the event 

was hosted on a wet and cold day, the boys fought the elements 

and their enthusiasm helped raise an outstanding $2,000. 

 

These boys pride themselves on being good sportsmen. Their 

actions show that they are well on their way to becoming great 

leaders of our community. I would ask this Assembly to join 

me in recognizing the Gremio under-12 men’s youth soccer 

team for their extraordinary achievements on and off the pitch. 

Thank you Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Pediatric Health Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We keep hearing 

concerning stories about individuals who are having problems 

with the health care system. Yesterday we heard from Barbara 

Blyth, a woman in her 80s with cancer, Mr. Speaker, who broke 

her foot and was required to go to a women’s shelter, as 

opposed to something in the health care system. 

 

There’s other examples as well, Mr. Speaker. Here’s one 

example: Sydney Dorosh is an 11-year-old girl who has 

grappled with various serious health issues since she was just a 

baby. Last November, Sydney travelled to Calgary to get a 

cecostomy tube implanted in her abdomen. This surgery was a 

complete necessity to allow her body to function properly and 

to avoid frequent trips to the hospital. But since that necessary 

surgery, Sydney has struggled because the province doesn’t 

fund the necessary supplies for the tube to function properly. 

 

My question to the Premier: is it a common sense approach to 

pay for an invasive surgery for a young girl but then refuse to 

provide her with the necessary equipment and medication to 

make that surgery actually worthwhile? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. We take very seriously these cases as they are raised 

in the legislature, as we field them in our constituency offices, 

or as they come through the Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker, from 

the various quality care coordinators. As a government we 

move to extend coverage in terms of important medical supplies 

and equipment and some new drugs to the formulary. We can 

undertake to look at this specific case, and we’ll do that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think it’s also important for us to clarify about yesterday’s 

case because I think all the facts should be presented. What 

happened to the woman from northern Saskatchewan was 

unfortunate, but the entire story is, Mr. Speaker, that her 

furnace . . . she was receiving home care and her furnace broke 

down. So, Mr. Speaker, efforts were made to try to provide a 

place, an accommodation for her, Mr. Speaker, while the 

furnace was fixed. It’s unfortunate that that had to happen, but I 

think it’s an important and germane fact to be brought forward 

to this legislature if these specific cases are going to be raised. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when an 84-year-old woman has 

cancer, has a broken foot, needs someplace safe and warm to 

stay in a cold winter, Mr. Speaker, it should be in a health care 

facility, Mr. Speaker, not in a women’s shelter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the sole function of the cecostomy tube that was 

implanted in this 11-year-old girl is to administer her 

medication and saline flushes, yet the province only covers half 

the cost of several of the items needed for her daily flushes, and 

the proper medication is not provided. 

 

Sydney’s mother, Corry, is here today because she feels left 

behind by our health care system. She has fought tirelessly, Mr. 

Speaker, for the health of her daughter. She has advocated to 

the extended health benefits branch about her daughter’s unique 

situation. And Sydney’s doctor here in Regina has advocated to 

the Ministry of Health for full coverage of Sydney’s needs. 

 

My question to the Premier: when a sick child’s doctor 

advocates for coverage of supplies that are crucial for her 



3370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2013 

health, why is the Sask Party government stubbornly refusing to 

listen to those concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the 

question. This is clearly a very compelling case that he raises, 

and we’ll look into the specifics around it. Coverages vary 

across the provinces. There are many provinces that don’t cover 

things that are covered here in Saskatchewan. And yes, there 

may be things that are not fully covered here but are fully 

covered elsewhere. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health will 

undertake to look into this specific case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again back to the previous case though, the 

member stood and said the 84-year old woman who has cancer 

and then a broken ankle needed a warm place to stay. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what the health care professionals found for her, 

and I think it’s an important fact. These cases certainly should 

be brought to this legislature. They should be taken to all the 

different avenues that are available to people, including the one 

he raises today. But if we’re going to have a honest and fulsome 

discussion, we need to have all of the facts onto the floor of the 

legislature. And I would encourage the Leader of the 

Opposition to do that in the future. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here are the facts about 

Sydney’s situation and the work that her mother, Corry, has 

done to advocate for her cause; the work also, Mr. Speaker, that 

her physician has done in order to have the proper benefits, the 

proper health measures in place to care for her daughter, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Premier said that they would be happy to meet with Corry 

to discuss the situation of Sydney, Mr. Speaker. The meeting is 

good and I hope they do meet, Mr. Speaker. But this shouldn’t 

be a surprise to the government members, Mr. Speaker, because 

Corry has contacted, sent two emails to the Health minister’s 

office about this issue, Mr. Speaker, and informs me that she 

did not receive a reply on those concerns. 

 

So my question to the Premier: when an individual contacts a 

minister’s office about a concern, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, 

is it appropriate that a response is not given to her from the 

minister’s office? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is the priority of this 

government to respond to emails and letters and inquiries that 

come in via the telephone or even over Twitter or other social 

media networks. If for some reason there hasn’t been a return 

call or return email, it’s something we would look into. 

Knowing the Minister of Health and the seriousness with which 

he takes these cases and the effort he puts into his file, I would 

be surprised, if this did happen, if it was anything but an 

unintended, Mr. Speaker, oversight, and one that should be 

looked into. And we’ll do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we took over office in 2007, we inherited a 

health system, Mr. Speaker, that was under severe crisis. We 

had the longest wait-lists in the country. We had inherited 

government from an NDP [New Democratic Party] that had 

closed down long-term care beds, never mind opened long-term 

care beds. We inherited government from an NDP government 

administration — and the former Health minister is sitting right 

there — who didn’t cover these things and all of the other items 

that we’ve added to the list. 

 

We will undertake to look at this case, Mr. Speaker. And I 

would hope that the people of the province will understand, 

when we do look at these cases, we do that with a serious view 

to remedy the situation, unlike frankly what the NDP provided 

for 16 years, which was mostly talk. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, because of Sydney’s situation, 

Mr. Speaker, and the ongoing health challenges, the pediatric 

intensive care unit here in our capital city is a constant 

possibility for Sydney. When Sydney’s mother heard about the 

potential closure of the pediatric intensive care unit, she had 

this to say: 

 

I now have the expense of food, travel, long-distance 

phone calls, and no family and friends to help. I deal with 

that when I’m in Calgary, and it is costly, lonely, and 

makes a difficult situation even harder. 

 

This family, Mr. Speaker, knows the value of the pediatric 

intensive care unit here in our capital city. And like all 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, they can’t understand how 

the closure of this valuable unit is being considered, especially 

at a time, Mr. Speaker, when the economy is doing so well. 

 

My question to the Premier: what does he have to say to Corry 

Dorosh about the decline of health care services under his 

watch? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there has not been a decline of 

services since this government was elected in 2007. Wait times 

are shorter, long-term care beds are finally being built, 1,000 

more nurses practising in the province. There are more doctors 

than there were under the NDP. So, Mr. Speaker, we know 

there is more work to do, but certainly there’s been clear 

improvements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the issue the member raises, 

whether or not the health region makes certain decisions about 

the pediatric services offered here in Regina, it won’t be about 

the budget. It won’t be about the economy. It will be about the 

best care for kids, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What the minister has said and what the Leader of the 

Opposition ignores in his question, because it doesn’t fit with 

the context, I guess, of his question, is that the health region’s 

bringing in some experts to review the standard of care for kids 

in Regina from the Stollery Children’s Hospital. It is the 

intention of the health region to make sure that that care is at an 

optimal level. 



April 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3371 

Mr. Speaker, we are building a children’s hospital in this 

province. We’re going to make sure that care for pediatric care 

in Saskatchewan is first class and a top priority. Mr. Speaker, 

that may mean some changes in the different health regions, but 

at the end of the day it will be about the best possible care for 

kids, better even than it is today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Technology Company and University 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I raised a leaked 

report from the management of IPAC [International 

Performance Assessment Centre for geologic storage of CO2] to 

its board of directors in March 2011. The report is scathing. The 

report alleges waste. It alleges gouging. It alleges completely 

unethical behaviour by CVI [Climate Ventures Inc.], the private 

company that was built by that government with taxpayers’ 

money. 

 

The government has tried to suggest that the subsequent MNP 

investigation exonerates players from personal gain. MNP’s 

report certainly doesn’t do that. In fact it clearly states that 

despite requests, MNP was denied access to CVI’s records. 

CVI, of course, was built by the Sask Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the minister and government that created 

CVI in the first place with taxpayers’ money not ensure full 

access to its records with such scathing allegations of waste and 

wrongdoing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had this debate in 

the House for a period of time now. The member opposite well 

knows the responsibilities here and where they lie, Mr. Speaker. 

The member opposite makes the assertion that CVI, Mr. 

Speaker, is something to do with the government. This 

company, Mr. Speaker, does not.  

 

The Government of Saskatchewan provided funding to the 

university, Mr. Speaker, to do research on how they would 

commercialize their carbon research, Mr. Speaker. Funding was 

provided to the university. They did a study in this regard and, 

Mr. Speaker, they now have that study. 

 

Now another company, Mr. Speaker, a for-profit company, a 

company that’s not related to commercializing technology — in 

fact it’s an IT [information technology] company, Mr. Speaker 

— it has entered into these contracts the member speaks of. But 

in relation to the investment our government has made into the 

university, Mr. Speaker, these two things are not related. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the MNP report doesn’t 

exonerate anyone from personal gain. Its investigation was 

hamstrung by lack of access to CVI, the company created by 

that government with an order in council and with taxpayers’ 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On page 18 of the MNP report, it highlights their attempt to 

access CVI’s books. I quote: “MNP asked Mr. Jaffe if he would 

allow a review of his books and records to verify his assertion, 

and Mr. Jaffe refused.” They had no access to CVI’s books, Mr. 

Speaker. MNP was stonewalled by CVI, the very company 

alleged of wrongdoing, the very company created by that 

government in 2008 with taxpayers’ money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why does that government suggest MNP’s report 

exonerates wrongdoing and personal gain when they must 

know it does no such thing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of the 

member’s questions and in fact, Mr. Speaker, the premise of the 

member’s entire argument for the last several months hinges on 

this CVI issue, Mr. Speaker. If the member is so interested and 

so convinced that this is a link, Mr. Speaker, I would ask him to 

reference the order in council that he speaks of. It’s a public 

document. It’s an agreement between the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the university for research into how they can 

commercialize their carbon capture research, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that funding went to the university. They did 

the study. My understanding is the study was done in 

accordance with this agreement, and the study is now at the 

university. I do not believe that the university has acted to 

create a company, a non-profit to commercialize their research. 

I am aware that there’s a private company that started to do IT 

work. These two things are not related, Mr. Speaker. I would 

ask the member to review the order in council, and he will have 

all the answers he will need. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, not a cent of ministerial 

responsibility or accountability is carried forward by that 

minister. That government’s company, CVI, has stonewalled 

investigations and audits. That government has stonewalled the 

public on its IPAC affair and has hid the books of CVI, despite 

the scathing allegations of waste and wrongdoing. They’ve 

denied providing the auditor a full mandate. They failed to 

ensure access to the needed information. They’ve denied 

accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, enough’s enough. Will this government open its 

books, invite the auditor, and take its IPAC affair to the 

RCMP? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as I said over a month 

ago now, if that member opposite has additional information 

that has not been reviewed, he by all means should take it to the 

appropriate authorities. He’s made these allegations a number 

of times. Whatever he has, we welcome him to take it to the 

proper authorities. 



3372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2013 

The report he referenced yesterday was a report done by the 

CEO [chief executive officer] of IPAC who presented it to the 

board. The board then took action and that was to get MNP to 

do a forensic investigation into those allegations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, MNP was unable to substantiate the allegations 

made by one individual. And they did however issue a report 

that there was overspending on a contract and the contract was 

sole-sourced, and that it was, there was a conflict of interest, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a quote from the MNP report is, “Dr. 

Wilson and Mr. Bailey did not disclose their conflict of interest 

to the University of Regina. However we have no evidence that 

Dr. Wilson or Mr. Bailey monetarily benefited from their 

relationship with CVI.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, once the report was concluded, the MNP report, 

the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Future of Tree Nursery 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year’s federal 

budget cut the funding for the province’s important tree nursery 

and shelterbelt program at Indian Head. It’s the wrong approach 

for our province and our country. The tree nursery is in its 

111th year of operation. The shelterbelt program provides 

well-needed trees to producers and farmers who use the trees to 

preserve valuable topsoil from erosion and protect the land. 

 

Public reaction to this announcement was strong. There was a 

petition of over 10,000 signatures and countless letters urging 

the federal government to reverse their decision. In response, I 

understand the federal Minister of Agriculture confirmed this 

year’s funding but has yet to commit to keeping the tree nursery 

alive beyond 2013. 

 

To the minister: what conversations has he had with his federal 

counterpart to save the tree nursery and the shelterbelt 

programs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member is 

correct. This is a federal initiative to get out of the business of 

operating the PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration] tree nursery at Indian Head. I’ve met with the 

people, the group from Indian Head, an area that are attempting 

to save the PFRA tree nursery. And we had a very good 

meeting, Mr. Speaker, and they had several concerns with the 

way that the federal government was getting out of that 

business. And I related all of their concerns to the federal 

minister, Mr. Speaker, including their request for a delay and 

request to clarify the process for private entities to take over the 

PFRA tree nursery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Preserving the tree 

nursery and shelterbelt program is about more than trees 

protecting the prairie. It’s about good environmental 

stewardship in our province. 

 

On April 22nd, Earth Day, a coalition of prairie farm leaders 

announced an action plan to ensure that the tree nursery in 

Indian Head stays open. This newly formed group is developing 

a transitional business plan and are looking for provincial 

government support and involvement. 

 

To the minister: what involvement in the new business model is 

the province considering as a way of saving the tree nursery and 

shelterbelt program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On reviewing 

this situation with the people from Indian Head, it became 

apparent that there is a potential business plan for this entity for 

a private entity. And I think that, hopefully, that a private entity 

will come forward. And we’ve actually heard some interest 

from a major farm group that’s willing to be either the entity or 

part of one. So you know, the province is not going to operate 

this facility that’s being downloaded from the federal 

government, and we’re hopeful that a private entity will take 

over. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Health Care for Seniors 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been hearing a lot in the 

legislature over the past week about seniors’ care here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve been having cases here, Mr. Speaker, on the floor of the 

Legislative Assembly. There have been call-in shows on the 

radio as well, whether it’s Blue Sky or a series that NewsTalk 

radio is running, Mr. Speaker. And these stories are alarming 

because they’re indicating that the standard of care, the level of 

care that our seniors, our grandmas and grandpas or moms and 

dads are receiving in many places throughout the province 

simply isn’t up to the standard that they deserve and not given 

the dignity that the elders in our province most certainly 

deserve. 

 

My question to the Premier: what will it take for his 

government to take the issue of seniors’ care seriously so every 

senior here in this province can live with dignity and have the 

healthiest life possible? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we have taken the issue of 

seniors’ care in this province seriously since the day that this 

government was formed, Mr. Speaker.  

 

First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, we know that we have aging 

facilities all across this province, Mr. Speaker, neglect by the 

NDP in not replacing long-term care facilities. In fact worse 

than that, Mr. Speaker, they closed 16 of those over 16 years, 

closing 1,200 long-term care beds in their term of government, 

Mr. Speaker. So we worked hard to address those with 12 



April 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3373 

long-term care facilities being funded in this year’s budget, Mr. 

Speaker. One of those is already opened — which they voted 

against those, each and every one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a new, innovative long-term care aging in place 

concept that has been piloted in Saskatoon, which those 

members opposed, Mr. Speaker. And we have provided 

considerable support, Mr. Speaker, to income support for 

seniors which, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know full 

well they ignored for 16 years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what NewsTalk reported 

yesterday: “Saskatchewan’s health minister admits he’s hearing 

more complaints about long-term care homes but he isn’t 

planning to look at mandating staffing levels.”  

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re hearing complaints. They’re hearing more 

complaints, but they’re actually not listening to those 

complaints. Because if they were listening to those complaints, 

Mr. Speaker, they would be looking at the staffing situation that 

so often causes the heartbreaking situations that we see, Mr. 

Speaker. Without proper staff, Mr. Speaker, calls don’t go 

answered as they should. Mr. Speaker, individuals don’t receive 

the attention that they need, and people fall through the cracks. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is he refusing to mandate a 

staffing ratio that ensures that our seniors receive the proper 

care that they need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

thank the member for his question. Mr. Speaker, is the Leader 

of the Opposition asking this government to go away from the 

assessment tools for long-term care staffing that they put in 

place in the mid-1990s, Mr. Speaker? Is that what the member 

opposite is asking us to do? We are . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . He won’t say. Exactly, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Mr. Speaker, what we are doing is we are asking . . . What I’ve 

instructed through board Chairs is that the CEOs and the senior 

management spend the next 60 days on the floor of our 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, in every single one of 

them across this province to see exactly what is taking place, 

Mr. Speaker, because we know that there have been some 

concerns identified. But there are some very good news stories, 

Mr. Speaker, and we want to be able to replicate what is 

happening in those facilities all across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have invested significantly in long-term care 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. We have invested significantly in 

regions to be able to fund long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, 

knowing full well that more work needs to be done, Mr. 

Speaker. But I don’t think this government needs any lessons 

from the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — From the report yesterday, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Health Minister Dustin Duncan insists setting staffing 

standards is not something the government is currently 

considering. He says each health region gets a quarterly 

report on staffing from each care home and he doesn’t see 

reason for alarm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no reason for alarm? Tell that to the family, Mr. 

Speaker, who sees their grandparent not having the dignity that 

they deserve in their last years and their final years, Mr. 

Speaker, in life and here in Saskatchewan, people who have 

built this province. Mr. Speaker, tell the family members that 

there’s no cause for alarm when a call button goes off, Mr. 

Speaker, and there’s not a staff person there to take care of the 

loved one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the right ratios need to be in place so that seniors 

in this province have the dignity they deserve, they have the 

quality of life they deserve. My question to the Premier: how 

can they say that there is no cause for alarm when we look at 

seniors’ care here in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, through the work that is 

going to be done by the CEOs and the senior management 

reporting back to me, Mr. Speaker, over the next 60 days, we 

will be looking at whether or not the assessment tool that was 

put in place by the members opposite is reflective today of the 

needs on our long-term care patients, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in terms of setting a staffing ratio, Mr. Speaker, every 

resident is unique. Their needs are unique, Mr. Speaker, and 

every facility is unique, Mr. Speaker. And that needs to be 

taken into account rather than setting across the board a 

standard for care, Mr. Speaker, a staffing level. Mr. Speaker, 

we need to take into account the level of service that is required 

within each and every long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s the work that is going to be undertaken by senior 

management within the health care system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t know how the members opposite can explain their 

record when it comes to long-term care, Mr. Speaker, when 

they closed 16 of those facilities, Mr. Speaker, when they 

closed 1,200 beds, Mr. Speaker, and when they left, Mr. 

Speaker, seniors in long-term care facilities that were well 

beyond replacement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know we have more work to be done, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’ll do that work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services 

was just heckling about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company]. We’re talking about care for our 

seniors in this province, Mr. Speaker, and that is the level of 

seriousness we see from government members on this issue. 

 

The minister can give bureaucratic answers about quarterly 

reports if he wants, but that does absolutely nothing, Mr. 

Speaker, for the seniors and the families in this province. 

 

[Interjections] 



3374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2013 

The Speaker: — I think that the seniors of the province would 

be interested in the answer, and in the question and in the 

answer. And unfortunately with the general rumble in the 

Assembly, their hearing aids may not be able to pick them up. 

So please, let the member give his question and let the minister 

answer. 

 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what else the report said. 

 

The Health minister isn’t considering a move towards 

mandated staffing levels. Instead he says he is 

encouraging health region CEOs to visit facilities and visit 

with patients more often to ensure they’re receiving a 

proper level of care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, CEOs can visit facilities if they want. But unless 

those CEOs are going to answer the call buttons, unless those 

CEOs are going to provide care to the seniors who need it, Mr. 

Speaker, there won’t be much point. And it’s going to be taking 

up time of staff who actually need to care for residents here in 

the province. 

 

My question to the Premier: this issue, Mr. Speaker, requires 

leadership from the provincial level. They can’t just slough it 

off to the health regions. When will this Premier see this is a 

concern and take real action for seniors here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I find it passing strange that the Leader of 

the NDP would question whether or not members on this side 

of the House take these matters seriously. When we sat in those 

benches and we would raise the cases of individuals in this 

province who weren’t receiving the care we thought . . . what 

did the NDP call them, Mr. Speaker? What did the current 

Health critic call those people who came to the legislature? He 

called them patients of the day, Mr. Speaker, dismissively 

called them, oh it’s another Sask Party patient of the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we took office, we took very seriously the 

plight of health care in this province. We took very seriously 

the fact that we were under-resourced in terms of the number of 

nurses. Now there’s 1,000 more. We didn’t have enough 

doctors, and we still don’t, but there’s 200 more than there were 

before. Mr. Speaker, we took very seriously the fact that when 

they were in office they closed 1,200 long-term care beds, 52 

hospitals, and the Plains, Mr. Speaker, that we had the longest 

wait times in the country right here in the birthplace of 

medicare. 

 

We took all that very seriously. And while we know there is 

more work to be done, we also know that for five years work 

has been under way to address all of those issues that were 

neglected by the NDP. And I think, Mr. Speaker, it lacks 

credibility now for the new Leader of the NDP to say, well, 

we’ve changed. Just trust us. Mr. Speaker, the measure is in the 

record. We’ll stack ours up against theirs any day of the week. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to move a motion, Mr. 

Speaker, by leave of the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Would the Premier please briefly explain his 

motion under rule 59. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Combatting Cyberbullying 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Justice ministers from across the country met to discuss some 

measures that could be taken by the federal government with 

the support of the provinces to help in the cause against 

cyberbullying. Mr. Speaker, it was informed in part by the case, 

the very, very tragic case of Rehtaeh Parsons in Atlantic 

Canada, and where the government there has certainly led this 

initiative, as well as the federal Minister of Justice, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I can tell you that shortly after that case was well known, that 

tragic case was well known to the country, our Attorney 

General wrote to his counterpart in Nova Scotia, offering 

whatever support we could from the province as they looked at 

various options to deal with cyberbullying. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s worth some support from this Assembly to 

the Justice ministers of Canada. That support can come in the 

form of a motion that would read — and I’d like to add a few 

comments after the motion, if leave is granted — but the 

motion reads as follows: 

 

That this Assembly supports the effort . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave, pursuant to 

Rule 59, for an emergency motion related to cyberbullying and 

the Nova Scotia situation. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

motion reads as follows: 

 

That this Assembly supports the effort of the federal, 

provincial, and territorial Justice ministers to better . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Mr. Premier, you do not want to read the 

motion now. You wish to explain the motion and read it at the 

end. Otherwise your debate will be ended for your part. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take your counsel. I was 

going to go over the motion, speak to it, and then repeat the 

motion, but I’ll take your advice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a parent . . . and I’m sure everybody in this 

Assembly, wherever they may sit, cannot even imagine, cannot 

fathom the decision that Leah Parsons and Glen Canning had to 

make with respect to the life of their daughter Rehtaeh. 

 

On the 7th of April they made the decision to take her off of life 

support because on the 4th of April, Mr. Speaker, this 

17-year-old had attempted suicide by hanging. Mr. Speaker, the 



April 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3375 

spectre of all of this is really, really hard to fathom, not just in 

terms of what the family has gone through, but that this young 

life has ended so tragically and so prematurely, and that Canada 

and Nova Scotia . . . and that Canada is deprived of whatever 

her great contributions might have been. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know well why she made this very dark 

decision to attempt suicide on 4 April. She made it because of 

cyberbullying. Mr. Speaker, the events are well known, but I 

think it’s important that we canvass them. If we’re trying to 

bring awareness to cyberbullying in this province and in this 

country, we need to go over what are very, very tragic and dark 

circumstances around what happened to Rehtaeh. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when she was 15, her mother, Leah, alleges, states 

that four boys sexually assaulted her. Mr. Speaker, after a year 

of investigations, the RCMP with the tools currently available 

determined that there was not enough evidence to support the 

allegations to lay charges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that a photo was taken of the attack and 

was circulated around her Cole Harbour, Nova Scotia school. 

We know that she was said to have been mocked by her 

classmates. She endured relentless humiliation and harassment. 

There was a lot of name-calling about her on Facebook. There 

were text messages that involved that sort of name-calling as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the 7th of April, I think the country has been 

galvanized by this particular issue, asking the question, as we 

all do as parents, is there something that we could do better to 

prevent this from ever happening again, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s why we are going to have this debate and hopefully 

support the initiatives of the Justice ministers of the provinces, 

territories, and of Canada. 

 

On the 9th of April, her mom on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] News said: 

 

She was never left alone. Her friends turned against her, 

people harassed her, boys she didn’t know started texting 

her and Facebooking asking her to have sex with them 

since she had had it with their friends. It just never 

stopped. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that on 22 April, Rehtaeh’s parents, 

Leah and Glen, met with the Prime Minister for 45 minutes. 

Mr. Speaker, we know that Premier Dexter in Nova Scotia has 

been leading in this as well and helped facilitate the meeting 

and what has happened since. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal Justice minister, together with the 

provincial and territorial Justice ministers, yesterday resolved 

that we should pursue every potential improvement to the 

Criminal Code that would stop the posting of these kinds of 

pictures and then therefore hopefully stop the attendant 

harassment and bullying. And bullying just doesn’t seem like 

strong enough a word, but that’s the one that is certainly used. 

But if we could, through Criminal Code changes, just make it 

that much more difficult, make it illegal, frankly, for the posting 

of these pictures without consent. 

Mr. Speaker, would that this was only an individual case, one 

very tragic case, it would be one too many. The sad news 

though, Mr. Speaker, is we know and I know from, you know, 

reports that I can get from my own kids who are all teenagers 

that this is not isolated, that this kind of thing is happening 

today. 

 

On the 12th of October, 2012, 15-year-old Amanda Todd 

committed suicide at her home at Port Coquitlam, British 

Columbia. Prior to her death, Todd had posted a video on 

YouTube in which she used a series of flash cards to tell of her 

experience of being blackmailed, bullied, and physically 

assaulted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when Amanda was just in grade 7 she made a 

mistake. She used a video chat to meet some new people over 

the Internet and she was convinced by a stranger to bare her 

breasts on camera, and then she was later blackmailed with 

threats that this photo would be exposed to her friends. 

 

And if you can imagine this, Mr. Speaker, during a week in 

2012, in early 2012, the police informed Amanda that the photo 

was circulating on the Internet. And so, as was the case with 

Rehtaeh, this photo became a touchstone, a lightning rod for the 

kind of harassment and bullying the likes of which we can only 

imagine, we can only possibly imagine as parents, and never 

mind Amanda and Rehtaeh who went through it. 

 

And so again, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for all of us as 

provincial legislators, as those who can affect things not just 

here in the province but in the country, to canvass all possible 

options to stop this from happening. At the very, very least, to 

hold those who are accountable for posting these pictures 

without consent in a way that they currently cannot be held 

accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my kids make fun of me because I creep on their 

Facebook, as they say. Although it’s just a friendly discussion 

we have, it’s also an understanding that we have. I as a parent, 

and like so many parents, we do want to know what’s 

happening in those aspects of our kids’ lives, given what is out 

there today. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would want us to consider supporting 

the motion and then transmitting the support to the federal 

Justice minister. I look forward to hearing from the Leader of 

the Opposition as well. And I think the Attorney General has a 

few remarks, and then we have a Legislative Secretary who’s 

going to be focused on anti-bullying, and perhaps she will have 

a chance to enter the debate as well. 

 

But I want to finish with this. Laws are important and public 

awareness is important, and we should be doing all of these 

things, Mr. Speaker. But there is individual responsibility here 

that we need to focus on as well. Each parent has a 

responsibility to know what’s going on in social media with 

their kids. And as our kids are getting a little bit older, we can 

have an expectation of them as well for responsibility, 

especially if we would take the time to have this discussion. 

 

Maybe if there were more kitchen tables around the province 

that talked about Amanda and Rehtaeh in very graphic terms 

and told that story, maybe even showed a bit of YouTube video 



3376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2013 

of funerals, of those funerals and had a discussion, we would 

know that their lives were not lost in vain. And we would also 

hopefully understand that our kids can be a great source of hope 

in all of this. They can help turn it around just as we, as parents, 

adults, mentors, coaches, teachers can help be a positive 

influence talking about these things. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m grateful for the leave to discuss it, and 

grateful for the co-operation of the opposition when we asked if 

we could have this discussion just before we get into some 

other business on private members’ day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope we will send a strong and clear message to 

the federal government that they need to look at all Criminal 

Code improvements that could put an end to this sort of thing, 

with the posting of these pictures, and also that we would 

resolve as individual legislators to provide a message to 

ourselves and to all that might be watching and others that we 

will talk to about this issue, that we can take some 

responsibility ourselves, and that we should and that we must, 

because, Mr. Speaker, Amanda and Rehtaeh’s memory demand 

no less. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly supports the efforts of the federal, 

provincial, and territorial Justice ministers to better protect 

children by combatting cyberbullying, including but not 

limited to changes to the Criminal Code of Canada that 

would make it a specific criminal offence to share images 

without consent. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly supports the efforts of the federal, 

provincial, and territorial Justice ministers to better protect 

children by combatting cyberbullying, including but not 

limited to changes to the Criminal Code of Canada that 

would make it a specific criminal offence to share intimate 

images without consent. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Premier has 

read the motion and has talked about it, Mr. Speaker, he 

reminds all of us that this is indeed a very important discussion 

that we need to be having here in Saskatchewan. And it’s a 

discussion that’s happening in many jurisdictions across the 

country, and it’s appropriate to do so because it’s such a 

reminder, Mr. Speaker, about how decisions that are made can 

affect young people in a way that have fatal consequences. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to have this discussion today I think is 

appropriate. It’s timely in the sense that we’ve seen examples 

where things have ended so tragically, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

it is appropriate. So I will be speaking in favour of the motion 

that the Premier just read. We know, Mr. Speaker, that since 

hearing about the tragic deaths of Amanda Todd and Rehtaeh 

Parsons that this issue has indeed captured the attention, and 

very appropriately so, of people across the country. Because 

anyone who knows a child, anyone who’s been a child, anyone 

who has children understands how this affects people and how 

this is in fact the most important thing that we need to do in 

protecting our youth here in the province and in the country. 

 

Rehtaeh’s father wrote an absolutely heartbreaking piece about 

his daughter, and I’d like to take a moment just to read a bit of 

that into the record. 

 

My daughter was three years old when we went to watch 

Babe: Pig in the City. There’s a part in the movie when 

Babe knocks over a goldfish bowl and the fish falls onto 

the floor and starts flopping around. When this happened 

Rae suddenly stood up on her chair in the movie theatre 

and started screaming for someone to help the fish. She 

cried for it as I tried to reassure her Babe would help 

(thank God he did) and that the fish would be alright. 

 

That was the nature of my daughter Rehtaeh. She was like 

that her whole life. I couldn’t go for a walk in Halifax . . . 

without her asking me for change to give to someone in 

need. She was always looking for people or animals that 

needed help. She called Animal Control Services on our 

neighbours because they left their dog outside too long. 

Her room and her life was always full of little creatures 

. . . 

 

They say parents need to teach their children. Instead, it 

was Rehtaeh who was my teacher. My precious gift. She 

was the absolute best part of my life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s impossible to read those words and not think 

of one’s own children. It’s impossible to read those words and 

not think of grandchildren, nieces, nephews, the little ones that 

we know so well and that we love so much. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to do everything we can, here in the province 

and in the country, in order to protect young ones especially, 

Mr. Speaker, when they’ve been sexually exploited, bullied, or 

mistreated. 

 

As a result of Rehtaeh taking her own life, Mr. Speaker, as well 

as the case of Amanda Todd, Mr. Speaker, people from across 

the country are wanting more, are expecting more, and we 

absolutely need to do more as legislators. 

 

Amanda Todd was bullied and assaulted and, seeing no hope 

for the future, she committed suicide on December 10th. A 

video Amanda posted on YouTube prior to her death outlined 

her heartbreaking experience. 

 

Because of the stories of Amanda and Rehtaeh and because of 

all the stories that haven’t received as much attention, people 

across the country expect and want better for our children, Mr. 

Speaker. They expect laws to be in place that will hold people 

accountable who bully and victimize others for their own 

benefit. It’s as a dad, Mr. Speaker, that I enter into this 

discussion and most certainly support it. The Assembly . . . In 

the motion, to highlight it again: 

 

That this Assembly supports the efforts of the federal, 

provincial, and territorial Justice ministers to better protect 

children by combatting cyberbullying, including but not 

limited to changes to the Criminal Code of Canada that 

would make it a specific criminal offence to share intimate 

images without consent. 



April 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3377 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that there is a new reality in the world 

as it relates to social media as it relates to smart phones. Any of 

us who have regular contact with little ones and have lent a 

smart phone to them to look at photos or to use an app or 

anything like that, it’s shocking, Mr. Speaker, how easily and 

how good small children can be at using smart phones, teaching 

others that are much older, Mr. Speaker, how to navigate them. 

And watching them use a smart phone, watch them use social 

media, it’s intuitive. They’re able just to use it, and it’s a new 

reality. 

 

When we think of bullying, when we think of the types of 

things that many of us would have seen during our school 

years, it is very different now. And because it is different, we 

need to respond in a different way. It’s also necessary to 

respond, Mr. Speaker, because we think about the development 

of children and judgment and experience, I mean how many of 

us in this room have sent a tweet or have made a posting or 

something and then afterwards had a second thought, oh maybe 

I shouldn’t have said that or maybe it should have been framed 

differently or maybe I shouldn’t have used that word. It’s so 

instant but it’s so permanent — everything on the World Wide 

Web, everything that is electronic. 

 

And if we have those challenges as people who are cognizant 

and very much aware of dealing with the public and what our 

image should be and how we should communicate with people, 

we can imagine the challenges that our children will be in as 

they go through these stages — as they have Facebook accounts 

as the Premier spoke about, as they have Twitter accounts, as 

they have a smart phone always in their pocket — able to make 

decisions which might seem like a good idea at a party, might 

seem like a good idea in whatever context, but then has horrible 

ramifications for many years and can spread in a way that we 

never could imagine just not too many years ago. So it’s with 

that recognition, Mr. Speaker, that we recognize that as 

technology changes, so too must our legislation in order to keep 

up with those advancements. 

 

I’m very pleased that the family of Rehtaeh Parsons and 

Premier Darrell Dexter of Nova Scotia have led this charge to 

make this matter a priority and to implement changes as soon as 

possible. And so it is good that this effort is happening in 

different jurisdictions by parties of all political stripes because 

this is at the core of why people seek office, of why we want to 

do what we do in whatever Legislative Assembly or parliament 

we may be in. 

 

Nova Scotia’s also, Mr. Speaker, being proactive in combatting 

cyberbullying. And I think it’s important to have a discussion 

about, yes, this motion but also the other steps and the 

components that need to accompany such a motion. And 

perhaps the Legislative Secretary to the Justice minister will 

also elaborate on some of this. But I want to highlight some of 

the steps that Nova Scotia’s taking because I think there are 

certainly lessons and applications that can apply to different 

jurisdictions. 

 

This year’s Speak Up: An Action Plan To Address Bullying and 

Cyberbullying Behaviour lays out a solid timeline for new and 

expanded actions to combat cyberbullying. It’s a multi-year 

action plan that combines more than 40 actions involving 

police, schools, teachers, communities, health care providers, 

families, and government. So it’s comprehensive, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s going to the places where children are and where 

change needs to happen. 

 

The plan also makes it clear that there’s no simple solution to 

cyberbullying and that a number of initiatives will be required 

to deal with the devastating effects on a young person when 

they’re found in this situation, but then most importantly to 

have a coordinated effort to deal with what has occurred so that 

people aren’t acting in isolation, so that youth feel properly 

supported — not just feel properly supported, but are properly 

supported. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Some of the deliverables that Nova Scotia has focused on and 

has provided a timeline include training for school staff to help 

identify mental health problems in secondary schools; 

expanding Nova Scotia’s strongest families program to ensure 

families have access to telephone coaching services that help 

children and families deal with behavioural or anxiety issues; 

providing after-school programming for youth for those who 

may be in a vulnerable situation; providing free access to sport 

and recreation facilities to encourage healthier children, 

healthier interpersonal relationships, and better activity choices; 

and also, Mr. Speaker, looking at curriculum, what is taught in 

the schools, especially as it relates to responsible digital 

behaviour. 

 

I very much appreciated the words that the Premier said about 

the need and the role for parents to be hands-on and to be 

involved in the lives of their children as it relates to their online 

presence. That is important, but it’s also very complicated. And 

even with the best intentioned and the most active hands-on 

parent, things can still happen, Mr. Speaker. And sadly there 

are also situations where parents may not be as engaged with 

and paying close attention to the activities of their children as 

they should be. And so there is a role through curriculum and 

through the schools to also have this discussion in that 

environment and provide better information to children. 

 

Hiring an anti-bullying coordinator is another initiative, as well 

as amending Nova Scotia’s Education Act to ensure all school 

staff have a duty to report known incidents of severely 

disruptive behaviour, as well as creating programming that 

focuses on diversity including sexual diversity, adapting all of 

Nova Scotia’s Human Rights Commission programs and 

initiatives to recognize amendments to the Nova Scotia Human 

Rights Act on transgender issues, supporting the development of 

gay-straight alliances in schools, and increasing suicide risk 

identification. So that’s a bit of a snapshot of the 

comprehensive approach that Nova Scotia is taking in response 

to situations that they have experienced and work that they are 

doing.  

 

But we know that we need do so much more, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to bullying, when it comes to harassment, and 

when it comes to the protection of our children. And so for this 

reason, we support . . . for that reason tougher laws are part of 

the answer. And when there can be steps that modernize our 

legislation to reflect the current reality, that’s a positive thing, 

and it’s for that reason we support the motion today. 

 



3378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2013 

But we need to go beyond that. And I imagine there’ll be 

comments about what will be beyond that. But there are 

immediate things we could do right away. We have had a 

discussion in the Assembly over the past few weeks about the 

presence of gay-straight alliances in schools. We’ve had a 

discussion about the role and steps that we can take because we 

know bullying does take many forms. There is the electronic 

component which we are discussing, but it can be tied into 

many different aspects.  

 

And we know that GSAs [gay-straight alliance] are one very 

concrete, constructive way to provide assistance and support to 

youth in our schools. So we have called for information to be 

posted on the Ministry of Education’s website about the 

benefits of gay-straight alliances, about how one could be set 

up, how allies or students or teachers would go about doing 

that, fitting within the current legislative context that we have in 

the province and what’s occurring in Catholic and public school 

divisions. 

 

So I think that is a concrete step that could happen. It could 

happen sooner than later because I think it is based on common 

sense. Some of the work is going on, but it could provide some 

immediate benefits and be another example of a tangible action 

that we could take as legislators to complement the motion that 

we are debating today recognizing that there needs to be, there 

must be a very comprehensive and overall strategy to address 

this concern. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, Rehtaeh Parsons’s father had this to 

say. He said, “My daughter wasn’t bullied to death, she was 

disappointed to death. Disappointed in people she thought she 

could trust, her school, and the police.” 

 

He went on to quote: 

 

I don’t want her life to be defined by a Google search 

about suicide or death or rape. I want it to be about the 

giving heart she had. Her smile. Her love of life and the 

beautiful way in which she lived it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for Rehtaeh Parsons, for Amanda Todd, for every 

child that’s bullied, for our own children, Mr. Speaker, we need 

to do so much better. It’s good that we’re discussing this 

motion here today, but it can’t end with this motion. There 

needs to be a lot more, and there are immediate steps that we 

can take. So I thank, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to speak to 

this motion, and thank all members for the opportunity to make 

some remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in my 

place today to continue the important discussion on a matter of 

national importance. The death of 17-year-old Rehtaeh Parsons 

in Nova Scotia, after having intimate images of an assault 

distributed on the Internet, has focused the country’s attention 

on the harm that such activity can cause. And so it should be 

that we should take what action we can as legislators to stop the 

kind of action that led to Rehtaeh to take this most desperate 

action. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, our first thoughts are with the family of 

Rehtaeh Parsons. Our thoughts and prayers are with them and 

with all the victims of cyberbullying and their families across 

this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Rehtaeh is not alone. Last October in Regina, 

federal, provincial, and territorial ministers of Justice heard 

from the British Columbia Minister of Justice of the suicide of 

Amanda Todd who took her life as the result of the distribution 

of an intimate image on the Internet. Every day we read in here 

of other people who are caught up in this web. 

 

We also heard from the Minister of Justice in Ontario and his 

call for action by the federal government for legislation dealing 

specifically with the issue of the non-consensual distribution of 

intimate images on the Internet. Some positive 

cross-jurisdictional work has already begun as a result of the 

meetings last October. This set the framework for the meeting 

yesterday and the foundation upon which we can build. 

 

With all this in mind, Mr. Speaker, this week provincial 

ministers met with the federal Minister of Justice and the 

federal Minister of Public Safety to press our collective request 

for changes to the Criminal Code. That request was first 

championed by Nova Scotia Justice minister, Ross Landry, the 

Justice minister from Rehtaeh’s home province. We extend to 

Minister Landry and the federal government our sincere thanks 

for the leadership that they are showing on this most important 

issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to report that the province was 

represented at that meeting, and the federal ministers were 

unanimous in our desire to see the federal, provincial, and 

territorial working group on cyberbullying accelerate their 

deliberations. We asked the working group, which was 

established last October in Regina, to deliver their 

recommendations by June for consideration by Ministers 

Nicholson and Toews. By pressing for an early report, the 

federal, provincial, and territorial ministers are sending a signal 

to Canadians that we take the issue of cyberbullying very 

seriously. 

 

This report will not only make recommendations with regard to 

cyberbullying generally, it will specifically address the issue of 

the distribution of intimate images without consent. It was 

acknowledged that within the Criminal Code there are sections 

of the code that have applicability. However as ministers we 

collectively feel that there are gaps and that with regard to the 

distribution of intimate images, whether taken consensually or 

not, a new section is required where the distribution is without 

consent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it should not be restricted to minors. Given 

the harm associated with the non-consensual distribution of 

intimate images and its nexus with the existing Criminal Code 

offences, we need to seriously consider whether a new criminal 

offence should be created to squarely capture it. This 

consideration must include associated actions. Saskatchewan 

would also make its case for a takedown provision in the code 

similar to those for child pornography, obscenity, and hate 

propaganda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no blinking at the fact of the horrific 



April 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3379 

consequences that flow from cyberbullying and the distribution 

of intimate images. As the Prime Minister has clearly said, we 

need to start calling this type of behaviour what it is. It is not 

bullying in the classic sense of that word. It is much more than 

that. We need to recognize that and deal with it with penalties 

that are commensurate with the potential consequences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Internet and social networking have brought 

tremendous positive educational, economic, and social benefits 

to society. Today we have the collective knowledge of mankind 

in front of us and available by the push of a button or the touch 

of a mouse. We’re able to keep in contact with friends and 

family wherever they are around the world. 

 

But with all advances, these facilities have also created the 

opportunity for the infliction of real harm. While the justice 

system has responded to some of these challenges, in some 

ways it’s always played behind the line. In terms of 

cyberbullying, it is agreed that there is work to be done. The 

time has come to create liability for the kinds of harmful 

conduct we are now considering. The time has come to deal 

specifically with cyberbullying in the Criminal Code, and 

specifically the non-consensual distribution of intimate images. 

 

Typically, but not always, this destructive action is taken by a 

depicted person’s former intimate partners. For our youth, it 

may begin with sending an intimate picture, perhaps quite 

innocently, via smart phone. This is commonly referred to as 

sexting. In the case of Rehtaeh, it was a distribution of a video 

depicting an alleged sexual assault. In most cases, the action is 

taken out of revenge or in order to humiliate or harass the 

victim, and in some, it is someone’s idea of a joke. But 

whatever the reasons, the consequences can be horrific, as we 

have witnessed. Of course this action has a multiplier effect by 

virtue of the ongoing and uncontrolled distribution via the 

Internet. 

 

Regardless of the motivations of the perpetrator or the mode of 

distribution, the impact is all too frequently devastating — 

public humiliation, destruction of reputation, loss of career 

aspirations, physical harm, thoughts of suicide, and suicide 

itself. 

 

To quote Justice Harris from the Ontario court: 

 

It seems to me that to argue that a woman who has had her 

most private and intimate personal images distributed 

electronically to every friend, relative, and 

church-attending associate has not necessarily suffered a 

grave and serious fear-inducing harm is to ignore the 

perspective of women. The non-consensual sharing of 

embarrassing pornographic images with a parent, 

grandparent, [or] close friends . . . must have constituted a 

profound interference with her physical integrity and a 

devastating blow to her reputation and self-esteem. As 

well, the effect of these actions was to deny this victim the 

right to exercise freedom of choice as to her privacy and 

sexual integrity. 

 

The publication and wide distribution of these images 

constituted an action of such catastrophic significance 

that, in my view, impacted heavily on the life and health 

of the victim and would have had the same effect on any 

woman who found herself in the same position. The 

inevitable conclusion in the mind of the recipient of this 

devastating psychological injury (and I emphasize the 

word injury) [Mr. Speaker] would be that the perpetrator 

would be someone capable of great harm and would 

reasonably be a person to be feared. 

 

Mr. Speaker, victims of such abuse suffer a harm that is 

inconceivable to most of us. It is therefore understandable when 

such harm is inflicted, self-esteem can be so badly affected that 

some see only one way out. Some say that further acts of 

desperation, as was seen in Nova Scotia, are inevitable. That, 

Mr. Speaker, is all the more reason why we need to act as 

quickly as possible with all the tools that we have available 

with the hope of preventing further tragedy. 

 

As I have said, Mr. Speaker, this is a national issue which 

requires a national response. But this call is only one piece of 

the puzzle. Public awareness aimed at prevention is also very 

important. We need to continue to work with our community 

partners and to educate our youth. 

 

We need to work with our government colleagues as well, and 

in that regard, we are looking forward to the results of the work 

that the Legislative Secretary that was appointed by the Premier 

is undertaking. I have great confidence in her work, and her 

work will certainly inform this discussion. We look forward to 

sharing her work with our federal, provincial, and territorial 

colleagues. 

 

Cyberbullying and the distribution of intimate images without 

consent are issues that require an immediate response from all 

levels of government. For a national strategy to make the 

biggest impact, we must have an active partner and encourage 

our provincial counterparts to do the same. 

 

Due to unfortunate circumstance, Nova Scotia has taken the 

lead, but our government is taking up this cause and will stand 

as a strong ally and partner. The work has already begun, and 

we must ensure that it continues with the same determination I 

saw in the provincial, territorial, and federal meetings 

yesterday. 

 

And so I call on all members of the legislature to stand with the 

federal, provincial, and territorial ministers of Justice and 

unanimously pass the motion before you. The collective voice 

of this legislature will send a strong message, not only to our 

legislative colleagues across Canada, but it will be a clarion 

voice to the people of Saskatchewan that we will no longer 

tolerate these kinds of assaults on our citizens and particularly 

our youth. We do this with our full and undivided resolve. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is an important issue for all of 

us in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and I think worldwide because 

the issue of how we treat each other in some of the most 

intimate situations that we’re in becomes very much a place 

where huge damage can be registered. The comments by the 

Minister of Justice out of the meeting yesterday reinforces my 



3380 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2013 

perspective as well, as a former minister of Justice, that when 

you can get the people of Canada in all of their legislative 

places to work together on a particular issue, we can move very 

quickly to address some of the gaps that are there. 

 

So I wanted to get up today to make sure I spoke in support of 

this work but also to tell a little bit about how this affects me 

personally, how this affects us in this province. About eight 

years ago, my daughter Ingrid, who’s an actor, portrayed a 

young high school student who was lured into exposing herself 

on a camera, on a webcam, on the Internet by an adult 

pornographer. 

 

And this half-hour show, which anybody could watch on 

renegadepress.com, was one of the most difficult things that I 

personally ever had to watch because I could see my daughter 

. . . I knew what was going to happen, but I couldn’t stop what 

was there. But what ended up happening is that she was caught 

in this web as a young person, very similar to the unfortunate 

story of Amanda Todd in British Columbia. 

 

We in Saskatchewan had and have this incredible resource of a 

show like renegadepress.com that was created by Vérité Films, 

Virginia Thompson and Rob de Lint, that tackles a whole 

number of these very serious issues that our young people get 

into. And I think that when we look at making changes to the 

Criminal Code, which I support, we also need to look at all the 

other places where we can work with our children, our families, 

our teachers, to make sure that the whole of our community 

also has the sanction that may show up — or will show up, I 

think would be a better way to put it — in the Criminal Code. 

 

One of the most difficult things for the Criminal Code to deal 

with is the relationships that are closest, and how you try to 

repair those or restore them or deal with them. We know that in 

the family violence cases. We know it in the cases of sexual 

abuse in schools or in residential school situations. And we 

know how much damage that’s caused for generations, but also 

how much it costs our community. 

 

And the Criminal Code has a blunt force kind of instrument to 

deal with those things, but it doesn’t necessarily always have 

the ability to try to restore the community, to rebuild the 

community. And I think what I see and what I hear is a resolve 

from the Prime Minister to the premiers, to the ministers of 

Justice, to all of us as legislators across the country to take 

some steps that we can take in legislatures or in parliament 

around fixing the laws. But I also see, when I look at the plan 

that comes from Nova Scotia which they call their Speak Up: 

An Action Plan To Address Bullying and Cyberbullying 

Behaviour, an attempt to take those next steps and look at the 

whole community and all of the different places where changes 

need to be made. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a big part where we as 

legislators — not ministers of Justice, but as legislators — can 

work in our communities to make sure that we support those 

groups which work in these situations. And it’s everything from 

the transition houses, from the family service bureaus, from our 

civil servants working in Social Services, in Justice, and in the 

school system to make sure that they have the tools but also the 

support from us as leaders in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we can take some of these broader, 

symbolic national law changes in the Criminal Code, but they 

need to be supported with examples like the 40 action points 

that are in the Nova Scotia Speak Up document. And when we 

as legislators can also support all of the people in the 

community that deal with these things, we will then also allow 

for the conversation that we know needs to take place to deal 

with some of these specific problems. 

 

The story of Amanda Todd and Rehtaeh Parsons are both just 

awful. I mean they just rip at you. But they also are a sign that 

when something goes too far, that all of us will come together 

to try to make things better. And my plea is that we can do that, 

using what we’re going to start today on a national level. But 

let’s also go back and look at the kinds of things that we can do 

in the school system, the things that we can do around 

supporting those people who have been damaged in some other 

situations like the residential school situation, like sexual abuse 

situations, and all of those kinds of things because they’re all 

related to this same kind of destruction of our fundamental 

relationships with those people who are closest to us. 

 

The sad fact is that the bullying and the cyberbullying issue 

does affect those people who are your close community. It 

happens in the school, in the classroom. It happens 

unfortunately sometimes even in families. And it happens in the 

other communities that you may be involved with, whether it’s 

a sports team, whether it’s some other group that you’re 

involved with. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m very much in favour of working and 

making sure that we do the things we need to do on the national 

level as it relates to the Criminal Code and continue to work at 

that. But we also need to look right across government, right 

across our communities to make sure that we support activities 

that educate and make sure that people understand the 

devastating effect that bullying and cyberbullying can have in 

our community. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Appreciate the opportunity to speak to this 

motion. I just want to . . . I guess, you know, the story of 

Rehtaeh Parsons and Amanda Todd have already been relayed 

and are on record. And I wanted to talk a little bit about 

bullying and also in support of the motion and just, you know, 

kind of reiterate that our government is committed to ensuring 

that every student feels safe and respected when they attend our 

schools. And just that bullying is a community issue. It affects 

not only the person being bullied but it affects their families, 

their peers, and the greater community. And it is up to us as a 

community to contribute ideas to the future proposed action 

plan that will result from the consultations and the research and 

that we need to have a system in place that addresses 

cyberbullying to protect our children. 

 

And you know, we talked a little bit about Nova Scotia earlier, 

but they’re introducing a new cybersafety Act and it will create 

the country’s first cyberinvestigative unit and, you know, the 

cyberscan investigative unit is going to be within the Justice 

department. And the legislation will also allow victims and 

their families to seek a court protection order similar to an order 



April 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3381 

that can be sought by the cyberinvestigative unit, and it can ban 

a person from contacting the victim, talking about them online, 

or using any means of electronic communication. Courts could 

also order computers, smart phones, or tablets to be confiscated. 

And this is quite imperative, Mr. Speaker. And victims will also 

be able to file legal action against cyberbullies and, if the 

cyberbully is a minor, their parents could be liable for damages. 

 

So what we’re doing at the ministry and it is my role as the 

Legislative Secretary, while currently in Saskatchewan, health 

and safety issues of children and youth are addressed through 

what they call a comprehensive school-community health 

approach, and this approach engages schools, families, and 

community partners to improve student achievement and 

well-being and caring and respectful schools, provides the 

conceptual framework for strengthening schools and 

communities as caring, respectful, and safe learning 

environments where all children and youth have the right to an 

education free from all forms of bullying and violence. 

 

So what I will be doing is I’m going to be, within the next few 

months, travelling around the province and hosting public 

consultations and meetings with interest groups and individuals 

to discuss anti-bullying initiatives and strategies and gathering 

cross-jurisdictional information that will aid the development of 

an anti-bullying strategy. 

 

In March a draft was put forth by the Ministry of Education. 

And it was an interjurisdictional review, and it was looking at 

the provincial actions and approaches of creating safe and 

secure schools. So you know, work has already been done by 

the ministry for over a year now so I’m just kind of stepping 

into this role where the ministry has already laid a firm 

foundation, and we could just build on that. 

 

So what we’ll be doing is providing recommendations to the 

Minister of Education that will assist in the development of an 

anti-bullying strategy for the Government of Saskatchewan. 

And we’re also going to be enhancing the website, and I think 

that’s going be up either today or the next few days where, you 

know, information on caring and respectful schools and 

anti-bullying information will be there as well for youth and 

educators as well as families. And we will be adding quite a 

few new tabs. And also, you know, somewhere where children 

can go and they can get the information and, you know, if they 

don’t feel comfortable talking to anybody within their school, 

where they can get information and numbers to call if they need 

to speak to somebody. Or just kind of reviewing the processes 

they can go through and what’s in place already to protect 

them. 

 

So you know, this motion going forward that we support the 

FPT [federal-provincial-territorial] Justice ministers to better 

protect children, you know, it’s first and foremost, and it’s a 

very important part of our government initiatives. And most of 

us in this Assembly are parents and grandparents, and we see 

what our kids are going through, you know. And this generation 

is very different from our generations where, you know, if we 

were bullied and we got home . . . And those of us who didn’t 

have computers yet when we were younger, you know, we had 

a safe haven to go to. But these kids, they don’t have that. 

 

Once they get on their phones or, you know, they get home and 

they go on Facebook or into chat rooms or go in to chat, you 

know, it continues. So these kids aren’t able to turn if off like 

we were able to in the past. So as a result, you know, it’s 

escalated. I can’t even imagine or try and put myself in the 

place of a child that’s being bullied or what they’re going 

through. And being the mother of a teenage girl and, you know, 

the dynamics of a clique in school, and how important that is 

and how, you know, that’s first and foremost in their world and 

if they’re outside of any clique and they’re the target of 

bullying by multiple people, you know, I couldn’t even imagine 

what they go through or what they feel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken to a few people and — well actually 

quite a few people — and heard their stories about . . . You 

know, I’ve spoken to parents and I’ve spoken to a couple of, 

you know, a few students. And they’ve relayed their stories and 

what their families go through. There was one mother I talked 

to where she pulled her daughter out of school, put her in 

another school. But that was the only school that, you know, 

was in their town when they all went to high school; you know, 

there was a couple of elementary schools. But you know, she 

was still facing her bully when she started high school, so now 

they’re talking about moving towns. 

 

So you know, when we think of bullying, it’s not just about 

somebody being picked on in the playground. It affects the 

greater community as well as families, and it also affects the 

well-being of these children. And you know, one family talked 

about how their son, you know, he was very well-adjusted until 

he started being bullied in school. So as a result, their son has, 

you know, dealt with depression and difficulties at home now 

and they don’t know what to do about it. 

 

So I think it, my work and the work of the ministry, is quite 

important and integral to these kids and their families and our 

greater community, and especially very timely in what’s 

happening now. And these two cases have just highlighted 

issues that have been under the surface and that have gone on. 

And there are many other young people who have, you know, 

resorted to suicide. And I just want to kind of reiterate that there 

are other families out there who are dealing with this and 

dealing with a child that they have to bury, which I wouldn’t 

even be able to imagine. I don’t even want to think about it. So 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly, moved by 

the Premier, is: 

 

That this Assembly supports the efforts of the federal, 

provincial, and territorial Justice ministers to better protect 

children by combatting cyberbullying, including but not 

limited to changes to the Criminal Code of Canada that 

would make it a specific criminal offence to share intimate 

images without consent. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



3382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 

that the motion be deemed passed nemine contradicente. 

 

The Speaker: — This motion is carried nemine contradicente. 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 

for leave to move a motion regarding transmittal. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

a leave to move a motion regarding transmittal. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

move: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit verbatim transcripts of the motion regarding 

cyberbullying to the Prime Minister of Canada, the federal 

opposition leaders, the federal Minister of Justice, and 

Justice ministers from all the provinces and territories 

across Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit verbatim transcripts of the motion regarding 

cyberbullying to the Prime Minister of Canada, the federal 

opposition leaders, the federal Minister of Justice, and 

Justice ministers from all the provinces and territories 

across Canada. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:48.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 

 National Day of Mourning 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3365 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3365 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3366 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3366 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3366 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3366 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3366 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3366 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3367 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3367 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3367 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 School Recognized for Use of Technology 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3367 

 National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3367 

 Parkinson’s Awareness Month 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3368 

 Prince Albert Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3368 

 Yorkton Technician Receives Safe Worker Award 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3368 

 Awards of Excellence 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3368 

 Soccer Team Named Team of the Week 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3369 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Pediatric Health Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3369 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3369 

 Technology Company and University 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3371 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3371 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3371 

 Future of Tree Nursery 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3372 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3372 

 Health Care for Seniors 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3372 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3372 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3374 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Combatting Cyberbullying 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3374 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3376 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3378 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3379 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3380 

  Harrison (transmittal motion) ............................................................................................................................................... 3382 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


