




















































Hansard: November 13, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 12A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3963 

 November 13, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. My voice is 

going, so I’ll do this as fast as I can. It’s with great pleasure 

today . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, nothing like having 

your friends on your side, right? It’s a great pleasure I get to 

introduce today to all members of the Legislative Assembly my 

good friend and the MP [Member of Parliament] for the riding 

of Prince Albert, Mr. Randy Hoback who’s joined us today in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe Mr. Hoback represents the best riding in Canada, 

notwithstanding his boss might think otherwise for one in 

Calgary. But Mr. Hoback has been an MP for five years. He’s 

the Chair of the Parliamentarians for the Americas, which is an 

independent network composed of national legislatures of 35 

states from North America, Central America, South America, 

and the Caribbean islands. 

 

Recently he’s been appointed by the Prime Minister as the 

Chair of the Saskatchewan Conservative caucus. And I noticed 

a few more grey hairs on the side there, Randy, from that 

appointment, but we want to thank you for your work, and your 

Conservative caucus members of Saskatchewan work, on the 

CETA [Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and 

Trade Agreement] agreement. It’s going to be great for our 

province, and thank you for doing that. 

 

And I’m going to try something in Mr. Hoback’s second 

language, if I can, so I apologize to any Spanish-speaking 

people out there listening today. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Spanish.] 

 

Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Leave, Mr. Speaker, for an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture requests leave for 

an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you I would like to introduce guests seated 

in your gallery from the Canadian Cowboys’ Association. The 

Canadian Cowboys’ Association has been celebrating their 50th 

anniversary of rodeo competition throughout the 2013 season. 

This includes over 50 rodeos in Saskatchewan, Alberta, 

Manitoba, and Ontario. The season culminates with the 

Canadian Cowboys’ Association Finals Rodeo at Canadian 

Western Agribition, featuring rodeo performances every 

evening from Tuesday through Saturday. The top 11 money 

earners each season qualify for the finals. 

 

Today we have in the gallery Katie Crossman, ladies barrel 

racing season leader, and . . . Thank you. And Brady Bertram, 

bareback riding season leader; Scott Sigfusson, tie-down roping 

season leader and steer wrestling finals qualifier; Shylo 

Claypool, Canadian Cowboys’ Association president; and Mark 

Bencze, Canadian Cowboys’ Association general manager. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will have the honour later this week of attending 

a Canadian Cowboys’ Association banquet at Agribition and I 

expect to find some time to attend the rodeo as well. I ask all 

members to join me in wishing the best of luck to all the 

competitors at the CCA [Canadian Cowboys’ Association] 

Finals Rodeo and welcome these cowboys and cowgirl to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I too 

would like to welcome these guests to our Legislative Assembly 

on behalf of the official opposition, and particularly want to 

wish you congratulations for all your efforts in the rodeo circuit 

in Saskatchewan and in Canada. And certainly I grew up near 

the Wood Mountain rodeo, which is I think the longest running 

rodeo in the history of Canada. And I used to hang out with 

some of the boys from Glentworth back in my day. So I want to 

congratulate you, all that you do, and would like to welcome 

you to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you I’d like to make a couple of 

introductions, if I could. First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce, in your gallery, Dr. Terrence Downey, the 

president of St. Thomas More College at the University of 

Saskatchewan. Dr. Downey is the 11th president of St. Thomas 

More and he’s making a number of improvements to the 

college. In fact, just a quick drive down College Avenue for 

anyone that’s interested allows everyone passing by to see that 

beautiful new building that’s under way and under construction. 

 

Dr. Downey is a remarkable political scientist in his own right 

with a very, very impressive CV [curriculum vitae] and resumé. 

He’s the past Chair of the department of political science at the 

University of Waterloo. He’s the president emeritus of St. 

Mary’s University College in Calgary where he served for a 

12-year term. With his work we’ll be hearing from the member 

from Saskatoon Sutherland a little bit later as far as the 

modernization of the Act. We’re delighted to help welcome Dr. 

Downey to his Legislative Assembly, and we appreciate and 

thank him for all his work. 

 

If I could, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to draw the attention to 



3964 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

members to the west gallery where Ms. Katie Konkin is present 

today. Katie grew up in the heart of Saskatoon Greystone. Upon 

graduating from high school, she went to Queen’s where she’s 

recently graduated with a degree in science. We’re delighted to 

help welcome her back to Saskatchewan where she’s rolling up 

her sleeves and helping to contribute to our community and to 

our province in numerous ways. 

 

She also has the heavy burden of trying to keep me on time and 

on track, Mr. Speaker, and we know how heavy that burden is. 

Katie is running my constituency office, and she’s doing 

wonderful work on behalf of the people of Saskatoon 

Greystone. So I’ll ask all members to help me welcome Katie to 

her Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming Dr. Terrence Downey from 

St. Thomas More to the Legislative Assembly, and to 

compliment the doctor on all the great work that’s done at St. 

Thomas More. And along with the minister I look forward to 

the modernization of the Act that will be coming forward here 

today. So welcome to your Legislative Assembly, Dr. Downey. 

 

And to Ms. Konkin, I guess on behalf of the official opposition, 

we wish you all the luck with your mission as stated by the 

member. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, welcome these guests to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you I’d like to introduce a very special friend of 

mine. Seated in your gallery is Al Brigden. Al has a large 

farming operation in the Kisbey area, which is in your 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. It’s a large operation, as I said, and a 

very impressive operation. But Al is no stranger to provincial 

politics or municipal politics, and he’s also very active in his 

community. And he’s a fabulous cook as well. So I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming Al to his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it would be wrong for me 

not to give a personal welcome to a long-time good friend, that 

being the president of the Canadian Cowboys’ Association, Mr. 

Shylo Claypool. You’ll see Shylo in the gallery here today. 

He’s not a real big guy, you’ll see, Mr. Speaker, but I can attest 

through playing an awful lot of hockey with Shylo over a lot of 

years that he’s tough as nails. He was always an agitator on the 

ice, elbows up in the corner, and I know that certainly he 

provides a lot of that same sort of dedication and leadership to 

the association here today. So I ask all members to welcome 

Shylo Claypool to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I want to join my 

colleagues in welcoming the cowboys here. I want to welcome 

my cousin Mark Bencze. I’ve known Mark all my life, and I 

know that he’s very passionate and he argues very good for the 

cowboys and he represents them very well across the rodeos of 

Canada. I also want to welcome Scott Sigfusson here today. I 

know he’s a great competitor and I wish him the best in the 

rodeo coming up. And I just want to welcome them to their 

legislature and wish them the best of luck. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition supporting the replacement of the gym at 

Sacred Heart Community School. The petitioners point out that 

the gym at Sacred Heart Community School in North Central 

Regina started falling apart in an unsafe way this past spring 

and has been closed since. They point out this is in a context of 

a temporary solution being provided in terms of refurbishing the 

former sanctuary of the old Sacred Heart Church, but that that is 

not a permanent solution. They point out that Sacred Heart 

Community School is the largest school in North Central, with 

450-plus students, 75 per cent of whom are First Nations and 

Métis. They point out that enrolment has increased by 100 

students over the past four years and that attendance and 

learning outcomes are steadily improving. And they point out 

that as a matter of basic fairness and common sense, Sacred 

Heart Community School needs a gym. In the prayer that reads 

as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to 

immediately commit to the replacement of the gymnasium 

of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

This petition is signed by citizens from the good city of Regina. 

I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Home First/Quick Response Pilot Program 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 

following through on our Throne Speech commitment to 

improve the quality of life for our Saskatchewan seniors by 

helping them remain in their homes longer. Yesterday we 

announced a $2 million investment into the Home First/Quick 

Response pilot project in Saskatoon Eastview. This initiative 

builds on the government’s previous $2 million investment in 

Home First/Quick Response pilot project launched in Regina 

this summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that seniors want to maintain their 

independence and live in their homes, where they are the most 

comfortable, for as long as possible. The Home First/Quick 

Response project provides them with services and support to 

help them remain safely in their homes longer. The Saskatoon 

pilot will enhance home care’s response to crisis and intense 

short-term service needs, encourage early discharge from acute 

care to community options, prevent unnecessary admissions to 

emergency departments, and engage additional service 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3965 

providers to support seniors in their homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Home First/Quick Response initiative reflects 

our government’s commitment to patient- and family-centred 

care. It speaks to our goal to ensure safe, accessible, and quality 

living for seniors in our province. We will continue working to 

ensure the best possible care for all people in our growing 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Community Supports Refugees 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is little 

more inspiring than community members rallying together for a 

good cause. This was on full display by a church and a school 

in my constituency as they came together to support a refugee 

family in need. 

 

In early 2011, a decision was made by St. Cecilia parish to 

sponsor a family. The church committed to raise $25,000 to 

support a mother and her daughters for the first year here in 

Regina. Organizers worked to raise funds through donations, 

special functions, and the efforts of the St. Cecilia sponsor 

refugee committee. Stephanie and I were pleased to attend and 

support one of the committee’s functions held at St. Cecilia 

Church where Brad Johner and The Johner Boys put on a great 

show for a great cause. 

 

With the help of St. Cecilia parishioners, St. Cecilia social 

justice, St. Cecilia CWL [Catholic Women’s League], St. 

Cecilia Knights of Columbus, St. Cecilia Men’s Club, and the 

students and staff of St. Francis School, the committee has 

proudly announced they have reached their $25,000 goal. 

 

I would like members of this Assembly to extend a special 

thanks to the members of the committee, headed by the 

leadership of Al and Dianna Jelinski and Father John Weckend. 

I call on members of this Assembly to recognize the impressive 

efforts of this faith community, the students, and the incredible 

leadership of so many at St. Cecilia parish. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Groundbreaking for New Saskatoon Mosque 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise in 

this House today to recognize an event I attended in Saskatoon 

on October 5th, along with the ministers of Justice, Education, 

and Environment. Mr. Speaker, we and over 400 others proudly 

attended the groundbreaking for the $6 million, 

27,000-square-foot Darul Rahmat Mosque on Saskatoon’s 

eastern edge. A new mosque is being built at the intersection of 

Highway 16 and Boychuk Drive and should be complete by 

2015. Mr. Speaker, the mosque will contain a prayer space, 

gymnasium, library, offices, and classroom space. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as many communities are across this great 

province, Saskatoon is diverse and growing. This mosque will 

be a place of worship for some of Saskatoon’s rising numbers 

of Muslims. The mosque currently has 1,000 members and 

conducts services at a much smaller location on McKercher and 

Boychuk Drive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was truly incredible to attend this 

groundbreaking event and to see this project because it is an 

indication of a growing community and Saskatchewan moving 

forward. I ask that all members join me in recognizing this 

important new project and all its members in the vibrant and 

diverse city of Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Seniors Awards Presented at Gala 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to congratulate 

this year’s Seniors Mechanism award winners, announced in 

October. 

 

The Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism has been operating since 

1990, representing the interests of over 100,000 Saskatchewan 

seniors in 16 organizations. The non-profit organization brings 

seniors’ organizations together to collaborate and create a 

stronger voice for Saskatchewan’s older residents. 

 

I would like to recognize the hard work of those who took home 

awards from the October 6th gala, in particular two very special 

constituents of mine, Jessie and Gary Carlson. I know first-hand 

of the community service and leadership of the Carlsons, and I 

was thrilled to hear of their joint award for Seniors Community 

Involvement. Our leader and deputy leader attended the event 

and celebrated the evening along with the Carlsons and other 

deserving award winners. 

 

Guests were impressed by Lloyd Robertson’s keynote speech. 

He contributed great tales, good laughs, and genuine 

appreciation of the hard work of seniors in our communities. 

 

I ask members to recognize the important work of 

Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism for their leadership in 

organizing events like this year’s award gala. I would also ask 

members of the Assembly to take a moment to recognize the 

important contribution of Saskatchewan seniors who helped 

build our great province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Progress Made in Housing Program 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise in the House to talk about a new condominium 

development in Saskatoon that will allow 12 individuals and 

families to have a home to call their own. I’m pleased that our 

government provided $1.98 million, Mr. Speaker, in financing 

assistance to build the Mosaic through the Headstart on a Home 

program. 

 

The goal of Headstart is to increase the availability of 

entry-level housing across Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, we 

are making progress. When we started the Headstart 

partnership, we expected about 1,000 new entry-level homes 



3966 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

would be built throughout the province. But with over three 

years to go, Mr. Speaker, the program has already approved 

construction financing for 1,159 homes across this province. 

Further, as noted in the October 23rd Throne Speech, our 

government will broaden Headstart to encourage the 

construction of rental properties in Saskatchewan to help more 

people access homes that are affordable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a key part of Saskatchewan’s plan for growth is to 

capture the opportunities and meet the challenges of a growing 

province. Housing is a key part of the plan, and our government 

will continue to work very hard to facilitate that. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

First Nations and Potash Company Sign 

Opportunities Agreement 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would take this 

opportunity to congratulate BHP Billiton and the Kawacatoose, 

Day Star, Muskowekwan First Nations for signing an 

opportunities agreement for the Jansen potash project. 

 

This is the first agreement of its kind in southern Saskatchewan. 

I’m pleased to note that the First Nations involved will have an 

opportunity to work with BHP Billiton to increase 

community-based economic development, create jobs, and 

manage local environmental issues. The agreement includes 

mutual management on the environmental impact of the potash 

mine as well initiatives for training, education, and labour force 

development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, First Nation leaders are supporting this agreement 

because it creates opportunities for First Nations and business. 

As we know, First Nations and Métis people are a great source 

of untapped workforce in Saskatchewan, both now and into the 

future. It is imperative that we all do our part to bridge a gap in 

Aboriginal employment that can only occur through a greater 

focus on education, training, and labour force development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

BHP Billiton and the Kawacatoose, Day Star, Muskowekwan 

First Nations for working together to build prosperous, healthy, 

environmentally safe communities through meaningful 

economic partnerships. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Treatment of Issues 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, we have an infestation issue here 

in the legislature, and it’s quickly spreading. It started with the 

Leader of the Opposition when he popped up in the spring 

session and couldn’t get his facts straight about hospital care in 

Saskatoon. He made irresponsible statements in this House to 

incite fear about our province’s health care system. 

 

We know it’s still infected. Yesterday he tried to spread more 

fear, this time about schools turning down the heat on students 

and teachers. 

Luckily there is a cure for this infestation, Mr. Speaker. This 

cure is called the facts. We tried to administer it yesterday when 

our Premier read into the record a statement by the director of 

education for the school board saying, “This is not the case.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this infestation is now spreading amongst the NDP 

MLAs. Yesterday the member for Saskatoon Riversdale 

claimed there was an infestation of mice and referenced a memo 

from the cancer clinic, then tried to tie this to health staffing 

levels. But according to Scott Livingstone, Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency CEO [chief executive officer] and printed in the 

Leader-Post today, which the members opposite should take a 

look at, the mouse issue is not an illustration of staffing 

shortages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly have a responsibility to 

bring forward issues facing Saskatchewan people, and ministers 

have a responsibility with those concerns. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we also have a duty to tell the whole story 

with all the facts, not torquing issues strictly for political gain. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — It’s question time. I recognize the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

Health Care Conditions and Staffing 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. John Paul contacted 

me recently with significant concerns related to seniors’ care. 

Due to his own health concerns, John was no longer able to care 

for his wife, Marjorie, in their home. So she moved into the 

convalescent home about four months ago. John spends 

between seven to eight hours every day at the facility just to 

ensure that his wife receives minimal care. So I guess, Mr. 

Speaker, it is fair to say that Marjorie is receiving personalized 

care, which supposedly is the goal of this government. But I 

know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the kind of care that Marjorie and 

John expect nor the type of care that they deserve.  

 

My question to the Premier: when can John and Marjorie expect 

anything close to personalized care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, long-term care improvements 

have been a priority of this government since 2007. Mr. 

Speaker, when we took over from an administration that had 

closed long-term care beds, we sought first to rebuild some 

facilities and actually to add new beds in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very recently in the last session the NDP, to their 

credit, raised concerns around long-term care. The response 

from the minister was to engage all of our CEOs [chief 

executive officer] in a very detailed tour and then a very 

transparent report out of the tour where, Mr. Speaker, CEOs 

were to report some highlights in terms of excellent care 

provided to seniors and also some challenges that exist in the 

system that are important for all of us who care about seniors 

and anyone who is in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s why we’ve taken the action of an emergent fund of $10 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3967 

million. That’s why we’ve added to the pilots in terms of home 

care, Mr. Speaker, why we have a long-term plan to improve 

that care. Also, Mr. Speaker, it’s why early on in our mandate, 

we began refilling the gap of personnel on the front lines to 

provide better care: 1,000 more nurses practising now, Mr. 

Speaker, a promise exceeded actually by our government; more 

health care workers, Mr. Speaker, on the front lines as well to 

deal with some of these issues.  

 

And we know there will always be challenges, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ll look into this particular case as well; I’m sure the 

minister would. Our commitment is to the seniors who need that 

care, to all people who need long-term care, and our actions 

would back that up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question was, when can John 

and Marjorie expect the personalized care that this government 

uses in its answers when they’re faced with these concerns 

raised by Saskatchewan people? 

 

John Paul says the convalescent home is unbelievably 

short-staffed. And he talks about a lot of the major concerns 

that he’s seen: a call system that is broken and a temporary call 

system that is ineffective; two staff looking after 30 residents on 

the evening shift; residents laying for long periods of time in 

bed in soiled underwear; residents being left unattended on 

toilets for half an hour; and residents, Mr. Speaker, begging to 

be put to bed. So it’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that John spends 

eight hours a day at the facility simply to ensure that his wife 

receives the care and the dignity that she deserves. 

 

My question to the Premier: this government’s excuse for 

getting rid of minimum care standards has said that it wants to 

have personalized care. So my question: for John and Marjorie, 

when can they expect this personalized care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to be very clear that we do still require 

minimum basic standards that aim to promote the health and 

safety and comfort of each resident, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the specifics of the questions, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

know this particular case, Mr. Speaker. What I would say is at 

any time that somebody is admitted to long-term care, that 

within 14 days the first assessment would take place, determine 

the care needs, and that that would be updated every three 

months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry also receives updates from all of the 

health regions, all of the facilities, as we track certain indicators 

around pressure sores and other indicators that we do track, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we are working to address, through 

the Urgent Issues Action Fund for example, call bells that don’t 

work. That would be something that we would look at through 

the Urgent Issues Action Fund and look to see proposals, Mr. 

Speaker. The deadline has closed for those proposals to be 

submitted, and so we look to evaluate over this next month and 

for those dollars and those additional funds, $10 million in the 

next month. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is the government that has 

watered down the quality of care that seniors can expect. This is 

a government that removed the reference of two hours per day 

per resident for minimum care. This is the government that 

removed any reference to sufficient staffing with respect to care 

facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, John is not alone in having huge concerns about 

the quality of care being provided. And here’s some quotes 

from the resident family council minutes from their September 

meeting. “It was total chaos.” “There was no assistance in the 

main floor dining area and call bells were ringing constantly on 

the units.” “Care being provided is both shocking and horrible.” 

 

To the Premier: when he hears words like chaos, like shocking, 

like horrible, does he realize how far away we really are from 

having personalized care and the dignity and the respect that 

Saskatchewan seniors deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this government is working 

to address a number of areas within long-term care as we have 

talked about over the last number of months, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why we instigated the first review of every single 

long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker. This summer that will 

continue each and every year, Mr. Speaker. We will have a 

survey that resident family council members can forward 

directly to the minister, Mr. Speaker, should they feel that their 

concerns have not been raised adequately. 

 

We also know that we needed to address the issues around 

staffing. Mr. Speaker, from the end of the last fiscal year to the 

last year of the previous government, Mr. Speaker, the health 

providers, many of them that work in long-term care, Mr. 

Speaker, their numbers in terms of full-time equivalents are up 

eight and a half per cent. We know in some circumstances, it’s 

up 10 per cent overall, Mr. Speaker. And when you look at 

nurses within long-term care, Mr. Speaker, it’s up nearly 14 per 

cent, dealing with the same, roughly the same number of beds, 

Mr. Speaker. So we’re working hard to address the staffing 

issues. 

 

We’re also working hard to address the aging infrastructure that 

we do have, Mr. Speaker. Thirteen long-term care facilities that 

were long overdue to be replaced, Mr. Speaker, we’re working 

on those. We’re working on three in Swift Current, one new one 

in Saskatoon which the members opposed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this story, this rationale that the 

government is using does not add up. The government removed 

the minimum care standards, removed the two-hour 

requirement that was on the books. They removed any reference 

to sufficient staffing, and as their rationale they said, we want to 

have personalized care. And we hear from families, Mr. 

Speaker, talking about shocking situations, talking about loved 

ones being left on toilets for half an hour, about being left in 

dirty underwear in their beds, Mr. Speaker. So clearly that 

personalized care is not happening because even the minimum 



3968 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

care is not happening. 

 

Here’s a quote from the resident family council minutes: “Staff 

morale is very low. Staff is overworked.” And this has been a 

constant theme, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve raised the issue of how 

seniors care is getting worse and how the quality is not there. 

Many front-line staff have told me, Mr. Speaker, that they want 

to provide better care but that they’re simply run off their feet. 

 

Last year, last sitting, Mr. Speaker, the minister said that he 

receives reports on staffing levels and that there was no cause 

for alarm. We have the CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region 

talking about the one-time payment program and saying that it 

won’t actually address the short-staffing crisis that is faced and 

that is affecting seniors here in the province. 

 

My question to the Premier: has he heard enough? Does he 

recognize that there is not sufficient staff in place? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, while we look to ensure 

that we have the proper complement of staff within all of our 

health care facilities — whether they be long-term or acute care 

facilities, Mr. Speaker — I would think that the member 

opposite, the Leader of the Opposition would acknowledge that 

the fact that there are 700 more full-time equivalents working in 

long-term care alone, Mr. Speaker. That would indicate that this 

government has done more than just talk about sufficient staff 

levels, Mr. Speaker. We’ve actually invested the dollars to 

ensure the health regions can do a better job to have the 

sufficient level of staff, Mr. Speaker, in long-term care. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition will also know that staffing levels 

were not the case in the majority of the reports that came out 

this summer, Mr. Speaker. While some facilities do talk about 

staffing issues — and we’ll look to address those either through 

the action fund or in next year’s budget, Mr. Speaker — not all 

of the issues that related to long-term care were around staffing, 

Mr. Speaker. We need to look at this through a broader lens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister just said that the fund 

was going to address the staffing levels. That is contradicted by 

the CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region who says the one-time 

payment fund isn’t actually going to address the short-staffing 

crisis that we have. Mr. Speaker, all of this flies in the face of 

the government’s rhetoric on this issue. We see that this 

government has watered down the standards of care for seniors 

here in the province. As its rationale, it has said that they need 

personalized care. We agree there needs to be personalized care, 

Mr. Speaker, but there needs to be a basic level. 

 

When John, who is in his late 70s, has to go to the care facility 

every day for seven to eight hours just to ensure that his wife’s 

basic needs are met, Mr. Speaker, personalized care is not 

happening. My question . . . Here’s a quote that John said about 

the situation: 

 

Long-term care residents and seniors deserve much better 

care than they are presently getting. I’m asking you to 

please stand and fight for the seniors who helped make 

this such a great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the stories that come forward here in the 

legislature from Saskatchewan families are real and they 

deserve our attention. They deserve our concern. Mr. Speaker, 

my question to the Premier: at a time when our province’s 

economy is doing so well, why are we hearing seniors’ care 

described as chaotic, shocking, and horrible? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re working hard to 

address issues within long-term care that we acknowledge, Mr. 

Speaker, and that we have made significant efforts over the last 

number of years as this government has been in office. And 

we’ll continue to do that, Mr. Speaker.  

 

But to hear from the NDP that they will somehow become the 

champions of seniors, Mr. Speaker, they ought to look at the 

history of their government, Mr. Speaker. I know the Leader of 

the Opposition received this email because I did as well on 

October 2nd, and I’ll quote from it. I’ll quote from the middle: 

 

The increase proposed by your then NDP government 

would have meant that my father would have been about 

$300 overspent per month on his pensions. As I requested 

Mr. Nilson, the then Health minister, he would have had to 

go on welfare at 82 years old with a full chest of medals 

from the war. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the action of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s how they were going to stand up for seniors in our 

province, Mr. Speaker, when they were government. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not what we’re going to do to seniors in this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company Bus Routes 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, even as the province economy 

does well, this government is choosing to cut STC 

[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] routes. People rely on 

STC to travel our province to get to appointments and to visit 

with family. Mr. Speaker, residents from the southwest of our 

province are here in the gallery today. They’ve travelled here on 

an STC bus. They hope this isn’t one of the last trips of this 

route. They are here because they want the government to admit 

cutting this route is wrong. 

 

To the minister: will this government admit their mistake and 

reverse their cuts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, these decisions aren’t made easily at all by this 

government. We do look at the track record of STC over the last 

10 years. For example, in 2002 the operating subsidy was about 

$2.4 million. Last year it was 9.2 — an increase of about 400 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3969 

times in the operating subsidy. That cannot continue to go on at 

that rate. We need to look at the routes that are in the province 

that are being used very lowly, a low level of ridership, Mr. 

Speaker. We have chose three at this point to try and reduce that 

subsidy, to hold that subsidy in check. 

 

It’s a very difficult decision, Mr. Speaker. But we do know that 

half the communities in the province are not serviced by STC. 

These communities will lose their service into the future, but we 

feel that there will be other services that will fill the gap such as 

private delivery, a courier service, Mr. Speaker, and other 

options. I’ve met with a number of representatives, I know a 

couple of them are here today, in my office about two or three 

weeks ago. It’s a difficult decision, but it’s a decision that we 

have to make in order to ensure the long-term viability of STC. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just people who will 

suffer from these cuts. Small businesses in rural Saskatchewan 

rely on affordable and reliable freight service. Farmers use this 

service to ship parts. Mechanics get the supplies they need 

without a trip to the city. Even the hospital in Gravelbourg uses 

STC to ship blood samples. However all of these services will 

be cut because this government is stubborn and dismissive. 

 

To the minister: why won’t this government recognize that rural 

business and services rely on STC for affordable freight 

service? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I already 

answered that question regarding the courier piece, Mr. 

Speaker. There are roughly about 250 communities in 

Saskatchewan that don’t have STC service but do have parcel 

delivery through private courier service, Mr. Speaker. We 

would expect that to be the case in these communities as we 

move on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I said, it’s not an easy decision to make. But when you have 

a bus going to these communities and the average ridership is 

two people per trip, Mr. Speaker, it is a very difficult decision. 

But it is a decision that has to be made so that the community 

can move on and find other services such as private delivery of 

parcels to their community. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, this group has travelled a long 

way. They paid out-of-pocket money to come to Regina and 

they want to hear this government admit their mistake. Instead 

now they know that this government doesn’t respect the rural 

Saskatchewan needs when it comes to safe, reliable public 

transit. 

 

To the minister: what does this government say to citizens who 

join us today? They cut the very important services that the 

rural communities rely on. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 

we are seeing the subsidy increase significantly over the last 10 

years. We’re seeing on some routes the ridership dropped 

significantly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I heard the 

member from Athabasca and his seatmate from Cumberland 

House say it’s a good investment. It’s a good investment. So 

then why, when you guys were the government, did you close 

13 routes under your watch? You closed 13 routes across the 

province and it was . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind both sides of the 

House to direct their questions and responses through the Chair. 

I recognize the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when the NDP were in power, it was perfectly fine to 

close 13 routes throughout rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

because when they do it, it’s perfectly fine. When any other 

government does it, it’s a travesty, Mr. Speaker. These are 

difficult decisions. We wish we didn’t have to make them, but 

we can also realize that it’s not sustainable into the future at the 

increase that we are seeing for the operating grant. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Funding for Francophone Education 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Monsieur le président, le Conseil des écoles 

fransaskoises travail très fort pour satisfaire sa résponsabilité 

constitutionnel d’assurer que les enfants qui vont à l’école 

française reçoivent un traitement égale. Mais ce gouvernement 

refuse obstinément de fournir ces écoles le soutien financier 

dont ils ont besoin. Au ministre: quand est-ce que ce 

gouvernement va soutenir adéquatement l’éducation 

francophone en Saskatchewan? 

 

[Translation: Mr. Speaker, the Conseil des écoles fransaskoises 

works very hard to satisfy its constitutional responsibility to 

ensure that children who attend French school receive equal 

treatment. But this government stubbornly refuses to provide 

these schools with the financial support they need. To the 

minister: when will this government adequately support 

francophone education in Saskatchewan?] 

 

When will this government adequately support francophone 

education in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member opposite for the question and for her obvious skill in 

the French language. She is to be commended. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to advise the members and advise the 

House that we are required under our Charter and under 

Canadian law to fund the French schools in our province. We 

have had some difficulties in working out what those funding 

arrangements will be. But I can advise, Mr. Speaker, that the 

requirement under Canadian law is that they not necessarily be 

funded at the same dollar level; it is that they be funded for the 



3970 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

same general equivalent level of services. 

 

We believe that we have funded at or above that level, as well 

as having made significant contributions to the francophone 

community by way of other community supports. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to continue to do that. We’ve had some 

discussions with them earlier this year since I’ve taken this 

position, and I’ll look forward to continuing that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Merci, monsieur le président. Le Conseil des 

écoles fransaskoises ont du recourir un action en justice cinq 

fois au cours des quatre derniers années, et n’ont toujours pas 

été en mesure de présenter leur cas à un juge. La semaine 

dernière, le gouvernement a été critiqué par le juge pour traîner 

les pieds. 

 

[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Conseil des écoles 

fransaskoises had to resort to a lawsuit five times in the course 

of the last four years and have still been unable to present their 

case to a judge. Last week the government was criticized by the 

judge for dragging its feet.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, they shouldn’t even be in court. This should have 

been settled a long time ago. Why is this government forcing le 

Conseil des écoles fransaskoises to spend money in court 

instead of on our children’s education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the expenditure that’s 

made for French students in our province is several times as 

much as it is for students in the regular stream. We believe that 

we are funding them at, not just an adequate level, but at a very 

good level compared to other students in the province. Mr. 

Speaker, we look forward to continuing to work with them. 

Unfortunately, where we can’t work things out, we have no 

alternative but to work through the courts to get a resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my discussions with the francophone community 

this year were to the effect that we would rather do some 

negotiation, have some discussions, and look what their broader 

needs are rather than resorting to litigation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Provision of Educational Facilities 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of 

frustration being expressed yesterday at the annual assembly for 

the Saskatchewan school boards because this government’s 

approach to education is a mess, because of the disrespect 

towards our teachers, and because of the disrespect and 

dismissal of the role of elected school boards. 

 

We heard of one situation here yesterday in the House. Prairie 

Spirit School Division is frustrated with this government’s 

approach and, in particular, they’re frustrated with this 

government’s stubborn dismissal of their innovative proposal to 

address the overcrowding crisis. The Premier’s response was to 

ignore questions and give his usual torqued-up rhetoric, so 

maybe the minister will have an answer for us here today. To 

the minister: why is this government rejecting innovative 

solutions by local elected school boards? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what we share in 

common with the school board in question. We believe there 

needs to be additional school capacity. It’s why a new middle 

school will be opened later this month by the minister and the 

member for the area. It’s why there’s been an expansion at a 

high school, and it’s why we’ve announced a brand new joint 

school, two brand new joint schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so the question that was about the proposal that came, it 

was rejected by the ministry, Mr. Speaker, because it would be 

about a $1 million dollar temporary facility is my 

understanding. If you go to their website, they note that the 

buildings are fabric buildings. Mr. Speaker, we prefer concrete, 

steel, and wood for our schools. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we know exactly why this 

government rejected the proposal or even a discussion with the 

school board about the proposal, is because they have no 

interest in listening, and they simply plow ahead with their own 

agenda, Mr. Speaker. We saw that in this government’s grand 

scheme to bulk buy cookie-cutter portable classrooms — a 

takeover of school board responsibility and control, and it was a 

total mess. To the minister: will this government admit it has 

botched the portable classroom file? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again it’s very important 

that the record be corrected when hon. members are on their 

feet. The premise of the member’s question — we’ll get to 

portable schools, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure — the premise of the 

member’s question is why this government would refuse this 

innovative proposal from the school board, from the Chair, as 

he’s referenced it. Mr. Speaker, with great respect to the board, 

we do have a fundamental disagreement. 

 

The proposal that the NDP are advocating for students in that 

community is for basically a fabric, a cover-all school, a $1 

million temporary school. If the NDP are comfortable with that 

position as appropriate schooling, as an appropriate facility for 

the children in this province, so be it. On this side of the House, 

we’ll build modern schools, Mr. Speaker, joint-use schools of 

steel and concrete, the way they should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, what this side of the 

Assembly is simply advocating is that that government start 

listening to the school boards across this province, start 

listening to the teachers of this province, and quit plowing 

ahead in stubborn ways without any conversation with the 

educational partners in this province. 

 

This government’s scheme to take over and bulk buy 

cookie-cutter portable classrooms was a total mess. All of the 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3971 

schools received the portables late, and some of the schools 

even received the wrong portables. And the Minister of Finance 

should be listening. So yesterday 92 per cent of SSBA 

[Saskatchewan School Boards Association] delegates voted in 

favour of a resolution to take back the power to choose who 

builds and installs their modular classrooms, a resolution 

brought forward by Regina Public Schools. 

 

To the minister: will this government recognize that it couldn’t 

manage the portable file? Will it return this power to local 

elected school boards? And will they finally stop dismissing 

and disrespecting the locally elected school boards across this 

province? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve allocated $7.8 million for the most 

relocatables ever. Relocatable classrooms are a viable 

short-term solution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The better longer term solution is new schools. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve announced nine joint-use facilities. We’ve built 20 

schools since we’ve been in this government. Mr. Speaker, we 

will continue to provide and fund schools very well in this 

province. We value our school systems. We were able to bulk 

purchase 36 relocatable classrooms. Some of them were 

diverted because of the flooding crisis in Alberta. We will live 

with that situation and work our way through it, and I’m sure 

the school divisions want to as well. We’ve met with them, and 

we are going to continue working with them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Private Bills 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills to report private Bill No. 

903, St. Thomas More College Amendment Act, 2013 without 

amendment, and to present its fourth report. I move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question, or do they wish to 

continue debating each other? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Okay, enough. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 

waive consideration in the Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

903, St. Thomas More College Amendment Act, 2013 and that 

the bill be read for the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 903, St. 

Thomas More College Amendment Act, 2013 and that the bill be 

now read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed with third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 903 — St. Thomas More College 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

bill be now read for the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member that Bill 

No. 903, St. Thomas More College Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Support for Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I think this legislature had a great debate last week 

with respect to the future of the Senate, and there were a 

number of different views expressed eloquently, I think, on both 

sides of the House. Mr. Speaker, I think we saw this facility, 

this room being used for its purpose. And it has many intended 

purposes, but certainly that kind of debate is one of them. And 

we came to a conclusion, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that debate, 

and were able to send a message not only on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan and to the people of Saskatchewan but 



3972 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

indeed to the rest of the country, as Canada was a little bit 

interested at least in what we had to say that day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the chance to do that again. And I want to 

urge members . . . I’m going to move a motion at the end of my 

brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the proposed trade 

deal between our country and the European Union. I’m going to 

urge that this House strongly support in principle the 

comprehensive economic and trade agreement reached by the 

Government of Canada and the European Union, Mr. Speaker. 

And the motion will be . . . There’s a bit more detail, but not 

much to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last month we were very pleased, certainly on this 

side of the House, and I hope — I’m guessing — also members 

on that side of the House were very pleased to hear that the 

federal government had successfully concluded the negotiations 

on a trade agreement with the European Union, known as 

CETA. Mr. Speaker, on this occasion it’s worth thanking the 

Prime Minister. He was very much hands-on on this particular 

file, as was Minister Ed Fast, who I think has worked the trade 

file very well on behalf of the Dominion of Canada, on behalf 

of our economic interest. And I think they both deserve some 

congratulations because it’s no easy proposition, Mr. Speaker, 

for a federation to negotiate a trade deal with a European Union. 

There’s a lot of moving parts there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, within our country, we had the federal 

government checking with the provincial governments on our 

position on certain issues. And some governments were at times 

less excited about certain parts of the trade deal than other parts. 

And, Mr. Speaker, for our part, I would like to put it on the 

record: the province of Saskatchewan worked to be a force for 

good, worked to be very constructive. We in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

were encouraging other provinces, and there would be a mutual 

encouragement on either side. But it was a difficult thing to 

herd all of us cats, so to speak, for a federal government. The 

same I’m sure would be true for the negotiators on the 

European Union side. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s no small feat at all that we would now 

be debating the agreement in principle that has been reached 

between Canada and between the European Union. And we 

acknowledge the leadership on both sides of that and our 

Canadian leadership, Mr. Speaker, in this regard. 

 

It was interesting to see the response in our country to the 

agreement in principle, especially for those of us who followed 

closely the free trade debate of 1988 and then the subsequent 

debate around NAFTA [North American Free Trade 

Agreement] which moved to take the Canada-US [United 

States] free trade deal to the rest of North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember I was involved in that debate. As a 

young person we — a number of us who believed that this free 

trade agreement would be good, Mr. Speaker, based on some 

research we had done — decided to form something called the 

Alliance for the Future of Young Canadians. And I was happy 

and honoured to be the western Co-Chair of that. And we tried 

to insert ourselves into the debate. We noted that both sides — 

those who opposed free trade with the United States, those who 

were in favour of free trade — were invoking young people. 

They invoked the next generation for their position. And so we 

thought maybe the country should hear from the next 

generation, from younger people in the debate, and that’s why 

we formed this particular alliance. 

 

But I also remember actually my first occasion to meet Glenn 

Anderson actually, from the Edmonton Oilers, because he 

turned out to be a free trader and joined us at a press event we 

had in Toronto. And so there was a little bit of talk about free 

trade but mostly a lot of questions about Wayne Gretzky, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There were other highlights that I recall during that debate, 

including the vitriol on the side of the debate opposing free 

trade. Mr. Speaker, the scenarios that were painted by those on 

the left, principally, in the country — and they would have been 

the New Democratic Party here provincially and federally and 

unions and Maude Barlow and the Council of Canadians and 

any number of folks that you can think of — the vitriol, the 

opposition to free trade, Mr. Speaker, was borderline 

hyperbolic. There was no question about it. They said we would 

lose our culture if we free traded with the Americans — later 

the Mexicans as well — that we would lose our national 

identity. Maybe the rules for hockey would change, Mr. 

Speaker. I remember the commercial that was run in the 

campaign on free trade where — I think we all remember it — 

where that hand erases the border between the United States and 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, the fearmongering was at an epic level. 

People were scaring Canadians that we would lose our country, 

that we would lose our identity if we were to enter into this 

agreement. 

 

Those who supported free trade thought a little differently. 

Those who supported free trade believed in the ability of our 

farmers and our business people and Canadians in general to 

compete with anyone in the world if the level playing field was 

right. And moreover, those who supported free trade understood 

with some clarity that a country of then probably about 26, 27 

million people, as vast as Canada is, with all of its natural 

resources needed to trade. That our country, maybe more than 

most on the earth, needs to trade and needs to methodically 

remove barriers to our trade, needs to move to freer trade. And 

so there was quite a debate that shaped up between both sides, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well what happened? Now I think we’re some distance away 

from 1988. At least it feels like that for me, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think it’s probably a good time to pause then and evaluate the 

free trade agreement we had in North America as we evaluate 

the agreement in principle we have with the European Union. 

 

Well as near as I can tell, the Canadian identity is as strong as it 

ever was, Mr. Speaker. And frankly, I think the Canadian 

culture is stronger than it was before, in part at least because our 

economy is stronger than it was prior to free trade. 

 

That’s not to say that the agreement is perfect. These 

agreements are simply not. They’re imperfect instruments. It’s 

why you have to spell out binding dispute mechanisms within 

an agreement. It’s why that BDM [binding dispute mechanism] 

was linchpin in that particular agreement in the first place, Mr. 

Speaker. And sometimes the binding dispute mechanism 

doesn’t even work and then you go to the World Trade 

Organization. And the Minister of Agriculture will know this 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3973 

well, as we’ve done that as a country over the country of origin 

labelling in agriculture. And sometimes you lose at, or you win 

at the WTO [World Trade Organization] and the country that 

has lost, the United States in this case, continues on with this 

non-tariff trade barrier. And so, Mr. Speaker, then the federal 

government, with the support of our province and others, has to 

consider retaliation. It doesn’t . . . Free trade agreements do not 

mean that the relationship’s going to be perfect, that there are 

not going to be these disputes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, here are the economic results of free trade in 

North America. Since the free trade agreement, Canada’s GDP 

[gross domestic product] has risen by more than $1 trillion. 

Two-way trade with the United States has more than tripled. 

Two-way trade with the United States has now surpassed 740 

billion, equivalent to 41 per cent of the GDP of our country. 

 

Saskatchewan’s two-way trade with the United States has 

jumped more than 900 per cent since 1988, from 3.2 billion to 

$29.5 billion. Foreign direct investment in Canada by US 

investors has more than tripled, Mr. Speaker. And all the while 

our identity’s intact, our culture’s strong, and the rules for 

hockey haven’t changed. Well they’ve changed, but not because 

of free trade, Mr. Speaker. I think they’ve changed because of 

the trap, probably, more so than free trade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an important context then for us to consider 

CETA, for us to consider why the response to CETA has been 

as positive as it has been with the Liberal Party of Canada 

supporting in principle CETA, with the NDP, the official 

opposition in Ottawa not really supporting CETA but not 

opposing it as they would have in 1988, certainly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s the good news. And we can debate this in 

principle motion today because there’s a lot of specifics 

available to all of us about what CETA will mean to Canada 

and specifically to our province. Under CETA, approximately 

98 per cent of all tariffs will be eliminated, opening up new 

opportunities for our exporters — new opportunities in a large, 

lucrative market, Mr. Speaker. The EU [European Union] has a 

population of 500 million and a GDP of $17 trillion. Mr. 

Speaker, right now the EU is not Canada’s number one 

customer, even combined as all those countries. That’s the 

United States, quite clearly. But it is the second largest 

customer for Canada, and the third largest customer for our 

province, though it only accounts for 4 per cent of exports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is though the world’s largest importer of 

agricultural and agri-food products. That should get our 

attention here in Saskatchewan. The EU imported 130 billion of 

these products in 2012. So, Mr. Speaker, what does it mean to 

Saskatchewan farmers? 

 

What would the EU mean to agriculture in the province? It 

means EU tariffs will be eliminated on oats, where the EU tariff 

can be up to 114 bucks a tonne; eliminated on barley and rye 

where tariffs of up to $120 a tonne can exist; eliminated on 

spring wheat where tariffs of up to 122 bucks a tonne will 

receive now permanent duty-free access, Mr. Speaker; also 

permanent duty-free access for durum where tariffs can exist up 

to $190 a tonne; processed goods and processed pulses and 

grains, Mr. Speaker, the tariff is eliminated under this deal. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, 100 000 tonnes of low- to 

medium-quality Canadian wheat will receive immediate 

duty-free and quota market access. CETA will mean better 

market access for livestock producers. I think the Canadian 

Cattlemen’s Association have estimated about a $600 million 

additional market now for Canadian beef as a result of this 

particular deal. 

 

Annual duty-free access will now be available because of the 

deal for up to 80 000 tonnes of pork from our country, for up to 

50 000 tonnes of beef — remember we have the second largest 

beef herd in the country, Mr. Speaker, in our province — 

300 000 tonnes of bison, Mr. Speaker, and 15 000 tonnes of 

high-quality beef. Under the existing Hilton quota, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s worth noting that Americans will still face a 20 per cent 

duty with respect to this product. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $1.3 billion in additional sales of agricultural 

product from our country into the EU — that’s going to be good 

for our province because we have about 40 per cent of the 

arable acres in the country. We do have the second largest beef 

herd in Canada. We have, Mr. Speaker, agricultural production 

— pick a crop that is prodigious, that is prolific, Mr. Speaker, 

and that actually has world standing. 

 

[14:30] 

 

When we talk about our exports in any given agricultural 

product — it could be pulses, it could be its grains and oilseeds 

— we’ll get a large percentage. You’ll hear me do it and others 

will speak about this. It will be 17 per cent, 30 per cent, 35 per 

cent. When we do that, Mr. Speaker, in this province about an 

agricultural commodity, we’re talking about a percentage of 

world exports, not of Canadian exports. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as a province whose economy is increasingly 

and happily looking to agriculture to drive consistent growth — 

a third of our exports last year were agricultural exports, and 

remember our exports broke a record — in a province like that, 

more access, better access is important. And so I noted in the 

introduction that Mr. Hoback, one of the members of 

parliament, is here and was thanked as were members of our 

caucus. That’s why the Conservative caucus members I think 

were working so hard to encourage this deal. That’s why our 

government was working hard for it as well. 

 

If all that CETA offered to our province was its agricultural 

access, it would be worth a hearty endorsement from this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. But there’s more because we talk 

about a reduction in 98 per cent of the tariffs that Canadian 

goods face. And certainly we move shortline equipment; we 

move other products into that particular market that will benefit 

from CETA. 

 

But here’s one more thing that has not got a lot of attention and 

that should have ours, in terms of a benefit of CETA. It’s 

something we actually as a province put on the table together 

with our federal colleagues. We thought it might be of interest 

to Europe, Mr. Speaker. And what I’m talking about is the 

non-resident ownership provisions which are really restrictions 

imposed by the federal government — as they have been for 

years by successive governments — on foreign investment into 

the uranium industry. It is true today that foreign companies can 



3974 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

invest in uranium industry in Saskatchewan but they cannot 

own more than a 50 per cent share in a mine. They need a 

majority partner that is Canadian. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have asked the federal government for some 

relief on this because we know there’s interest out there. In our 

province today, we have a good corporate citizen; it’s actually a 

state-owned company from France called Areva. I think that 

they’ve long advocated for this change in the event that one day 

they’d like to own more than 50 per cent of a mine, that they’d 

like to have a majority interest or maybe an outright ownership 

on a greenfield project down the road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other companies that are interested that 

would be affected by this who are EU members or most 

favoured nation status of the EU and they would get some 

reprieve here as well, like Rio Tinto. Rio Tinto has invested 

heavily in the province when they bought out a play known . . . 

We call it the Roughrider play. I’m sure it has a more technical 

term. It’s one of the richest uranium plays in the world. Rio 

Tinto is not yet developing it and has told our government when 

we’ve been to London to see them, when they’ve been here to 

meet with us, that they’d like to pursue a new mine but they’re 

not interested in a partner. Why wouldn’t we want a company 

like . . . If Rio Tinto can invest in a potash mine here, which 

they could certainly do and own it outright, why in the world 

would we want to stop them from investing in uranium? 

 

Why would we want to stop investment dollars in uranium, Mr. 

Speaker, when we know it’s a unique advantage here in 

Saskatchewan, a province that produces about 17 per cent of the 

world’s uranium and has this great resource? So we said to our 

federal government, we would like this to be gone. Maybe this 

could be part of the agreement. And again to the credit of the 

federal government, they did include it in the agreement. The 

non-resident ownership provisions as regards companies who 

are headquartered in EU countries, or my understanding is who 

have, in countries that have most favoured nation status, Mr. 

Speaker, are now going to be eligible to invest in uranium 

mining in the province and own a project outright. 

 

When you combine that, Mr. Speaker, with now new market 

access in China because of the nuclear co-operation agreement 

the federal government has negotiated there, nuclear 

co-operation agreement in India, the two most robust civilian 

nuclear power markets in the world, when you combine the 

NROP [non-resident ownership policy] removal for European 

countries anyway, the NCAs [nuclear co-operation agreement] 

in both China and India and, Mr. Speaker, royalty reductions in 

the Minister of Finance’s last budget so that our uranium 

royalties are competitive with the rest of the world, I think the 

long-term future is very bright for the uranium industry. 

 

And here’s why that should matter to us in the legislature. 

There are jobs involved, obviously. There’s investment at stake, 

obviously. But, Mr. Speaker, we also know this. That Cameco, 

for example, other uranium mining operations in this province, 

have one of the best records — not perfect — but one of the 

best records in terms of hiring First Nations and Métis people. I 

think over 40 per cent of the largest uranium mining company 

in the world, 40 per cent of their front-line workforce, good 

careers in mining, Mr. Speaker, good paying jobs, difficult 

work but good paying jobs and careers, indeed over 40 per cent 

are First Nations and Métis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So others want to speak and I want to make room for them but, 

Mr. Speaker, for these two reasons alone, and there are others, 

for agriculture and for mining, we are strongly supportive of 

what the federal government has done here. And we encourage 

the provincial opposition who have had courage actually to 

stand up to their federal counterparts, and I credit them for 

doing this on a number of issues. On Keystone is one of them, 

and very recently, based on the member for Athabasca’s speech, 

on fracking for example. We encourage them to take another 

opportunity to do this, because there’s a bit of ambivalence or at 

least confusion on the part of the official opposition in Ottawa 

on their position with respect to the CETA deal. 

 

You know, there’s been MPs from Newfoundland and Labrador 

say they basically are very concerned about what it’ll do to the 

Newfoundland fishery even though the unions in the fishery 

have been supportive. We’ve heard their position on Keystone, 

for example, which is not related directly to the CETA, 

obviously, but it’s about energy trade certainly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would note this. Linda McQuaig, who’s the 

NDP’s candidate in the November 25th Toronto Centre 

by-election, said this a few years back. She wrote that it is 

“mythology” that Canada has benefited from NAFTA. She went 

on to say, “NAFTA has done much to erode our sovereignty 

. . .” That same old song, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t true in 1988. 

It’s not true today. 

 

She says, “. . . denying us control over our own energy 

resources . . .” Mr. Speaker, take a look at what happened in the 

potash takeover. I think we do have control over our resources 

in this province. She said, “. . . creating a wide-ranging set of 

rights for corporations and limiting our power to protect the 

environment and shape public programs.” Wrong, wrong, 

wrong. But now, Mr. Speaker, this is a star candidate for the 

New Democratic Party. 

 

So I am concerned about the position of our federal New 

Democratic Party, and I encourage all of us to send a strong 

message from this legislature. I encourage the Leader of the 

Opposition and members opposite to say, there is lots of 

specificity here in terms of agriculture, in terms of uranium 

mining. Surely enough for this legislature to stand up and say, 

we support, in principle, CETA. We know that Saskatchewan, 

when we have a chance to trade freely and without barriers that 

are non-tariff barriers, we know that our farmers and our 

businesses will succeed. We’ll compete effectively with anyone 

else in the world given that level playing field, Mr. Speaker. We 

have a chance to level it for the first time with the European 

Union nations. Let’s send a message from this legislature, a 

unanimous message that it should be levelled and that we 

support CETA and its conclusion, Mr. Speaker, to the benefit of 

the country. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this House supports the agreement in principle for the 

comprehensive economic and trade agreement reached by 

the Government of Canada and European Union and calls 

on all federal parties to support the swift implementation 

of the agreement. 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3975 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this House supports the agreement in principle for the 

comprehensive economic and trade agreement, CETA, 

reached by the Government of Canada and the European 

Union and calls on all federal parties to support the swift 

implementation of the agreement. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased this 

afternoon to enter in on the debate on the comprehensive 

economic and trade agreement or more commonly referred to as 

CETA. 

 

I think that progress on the trade agreement with Europe is a 

good thing, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s New Democrats 

welcome that progress, and I know that Canada’s New 

Democrats have been clear about welcoming this progress as 

well. We think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s simply good common 

sense to have stronger economic relations with the European 

Union. These are democratic countries, Mr. Speaker, with some 

of the highest environmental and labour standards in the world. 

To put it in other ways, Mr. Speaker, these are good trading 

partners to have within the EU. 

 

It’s also just common sense to strengthen our economic 

relations with the European Union from an eggs-and-baskets 

perspective. We trade heavily with the United States, and that’s 

a good thing, but as a trading province it’s vital for us to have 

access to the broader world markets in a bigger way. It’s 

important to have more eggs and more baskets when it comes to 

our trading partners. 

 

Saskatchewan people and businesses produce world-class 

products including some of the best agricultural exports in the 

world, and it’s good for us to seek to open up new markets for 

what Saskatchewan is selling. So that’s why New Democrats 

welcome the agreement in principle that has been reached 

between Canada and the European Union, because we support 

expanding and diversifying our trade relationships, and because 

we think the countries of the European Union make good 

trading partners. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that the devil is always in the details, as 

the expression says, when it comes to complex negotiations and 

agreements. And we know that there are always both 

advantages and compromises in every negotiation. As a result, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s incumbent on legislators to determine if the 

deal is, on balance, a good deal for Saskatchewan and a good 

deal for Canada. 

 

We know that the federal government and the provincial 

governments already have a lot of details on this tentative 

agreement, because they have been at the negotiating table and 

in the various back rooms trying to hammer out this agreement. 

But opposition parties, Mr. Speaker, don’t have the benefit of 

that information and neither do Saskatchewan people nor 

Canadians. 

 

So while we absolutely welcome progress on this trade 

agreement and while we support free trade with the European 

Union, we definitely have questions to ask as legislators in 

order to confirm that on balance this is a good deal for 

Saskatchewan and a good deal for Canada. That’s our job as 

legislators and that’s the job of federal parliamentarians as well. 

We will not be obstructionist. We will not be ideological, and 

we will not write a blank cheque either. The job of legislators is 

to undertake the necessary due diligence to determine if the deal 

is, on balance, a good deal for Saskatchewan and a good deal 

for Canada. 

 

We think it probably is a good deal. The news that we’ve heard 

is generally quite promising. We certainly have questions about 

what compromises have been reached in several areas, 

including the ability of local governments to pursue economic 

development and about what kinds of increases we’ll see in the 

cost of prescription drugs. We don’t know those answers, Mr. 

Speaker, because we haven’t been at the table or privy to the 

information in the same way that the federal and provincial 

governments have been. But again, based on what we’ve been 

hearing, we think this is promising and we welcome news of the 

tentative agreement. 

 

Now it’s time for a good and meaningful discussion about the 

actual details of this tentative agreement. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

move an amendment that I think the government members will 

surely support, and my motion reads as follows: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting all words after 

the words “European Union” and the following be 

substituted therefor: 

 

and calls on all legislators to undertake the appropriate due 

diligence to review and assess the agreement and support 

its swift implementation if it is confirmed to be in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

I so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — An amendment has been moved by the 

Leader of the Opposition: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting all words after 

the words “European Union” and the following be 

substituted therefor: 

 

and calls on all legislators to undertake the appropriate due 

diligence to review and assess the agreement and support 

its swift implementation if it is confirmed to be in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Minister 

of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to rise in strong support of this, of the motion. Our 

government has worked with the federal government’s very, 

very strong efforts to acquire this deal over the last I think four 

years. It’s been quite a process, Mr. Speaker. These deals don’t 

just happen. This one was hard fought, and it is an agreement in 

principle, Mr. Speaker, and hence I don’t really understand the 

amendment. But in any event we’ll deal with it. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, this deal is worth the effort that it’s taken on 



3976 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

behalf of our federal government and provincial governments in 

support, Mr. Speaker. The deal is quite simply historic for our 

country and particularly this province. 

 

[14:45] 

 

It’s also very important from an historic perspective, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m of the vintage where I think I can offer, sadly, 

a bit of an historic perspective. I’ve been farming now for some 

time. I think I figured out this morning that I’ve farmed in five 

decades. And I haven’t farmed five decades, but I’ve farmed in 

five decades, so that’s plenty scary enough. 

 

But I can tell you from experience out there on my farm, 

through some times that weren’t very prosperous always — you 

know, the ’80s were tough, very tough — and I remember 

working away every day and we’d hear . . . I’ve seen two or 

three of these deals come and go. We’d hear a lot of media 

reports about these pending deals. And I remember I’d quite 

regularly, on two or three times at least, I got my hopes up and 

thought that this was going to be the deal, and it’s going to be 

the deal that’d change our trading relationship with the EU. And 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, until this deal, it never happened. It 

didn’t happen at all. Every single one of those previous trade 

arrangements or attempted arrangements with the EU were a 

failure. 

 

But this deal is very different, Mr. Speaker, and it’s extremely 

important to Saskatchewan, particularly in agriculture but, as 

the Premier so eloquently stated, not only for agriculture. But 

I’m going to deal specifically with agriculture today. 

 

In this province, last year we exported $11.2 billion in agri-food 

exports, where it makes us the largest agri-food exporter in the 

country, Mr. Speaker. We’ve overtaken Ontario and Alberta to 

win that first spot. And we are traders. We’re traders, Mr. 

Speaker. We depend on exports. We have over — well over, I 

think — I think it’s 43 or 45 per cent of all of the arable farm 

land in this great nation of Canada right here in Saskatchewan. 

We grow what the world needs. We have a reputation as a 

reliable provider of safe, high-quality agricultural products, and 

these include such things, but are not limited to, pulses, grains, 

oilseed, livestock, and value-added products. The dedication of 

our farmers and ranchers has created this reputation as a reliable 

supplier of safe food products to the world, and our farmers and 

ranchers are the most innovative and productive in the world. 

 

In Canada, Saskatchewan is the agricultural leader. We produce 

96 per cent of Canada’s lentils, 90 per cent of Canada’s 

chickpeas, 84 per cent of Canada’s durum, 70 per cent of 

Canada’s mustard seed, 63 per cent of Canada’s dry peas, 78 

per cent of Canada’s flax seed, 46 per cent of Canada’s canola, 

and 46 per cent of Canada’s oats. And we’re working, Mr. 

Speaker, our producers are working every year to build on those 

numbers. 

 

We expect that this harvest, Mr. Speaker . . . The numbers 

aren’t all in yet, but we expect that this will be a record harvest, 

the largest ever in the province. StatsCan is projecting over 34 

million tonnes. Just a very short time ago we set a target to 

produce 36 million tonnes by the year 2020. Mr. Speaker, if 

StatsCan is in the ballpark, this year we came very close to it 

already. 

Also Canada is the leading agri-food exporter. We overtook, as 

I said, Alberta and Ontario in 2011, and in 2012 we built on 

that, creating a wider margin between us and them. 

 

Canola seed is our top export product. That increased to $2.7 

billion last year. That’s a 215 per cent increase since 2007 and 

25 per cent just since 2011. Other top exports include 

non-durum wheats at $2 billion a year; canola oil, 1.7 billion; 

durum wheat, 1.2 billion; lentils, 673 million; peas, 626 million; 

and the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. Our current top markets are 

the United States of course, China, Japan, India, Mexico. 

There’s one huge importer of agricultural and food products 

that’s not in that list, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the EU. 

 

The EU is the world’s largest importer of agriculture and 

agri-food products and, Mr. Speaker, they imported more than 

$130 billion worth of agri-food products in 2012. We need to 

add the European Union to our list of top export destinations, 

Mr. Speaker, and this deal, this deal can do that for us. 

 

CETA could generate 1.3 billion in benefits for Canada and will 

create substantial benefits in Saskatchewan. In fact, because of 

the massive scope and scale of our agricultural industry, Mr. 

Speaker, as the percentage of the total Canadian industry, I 

think we could expect a substantial portion of that 1.3 billion in 

annual benefits to come to this province. 

 

CETA will help us to increase our total exports substantially. 

This is an agreement in principle, Mr. Speaker, and the details 

of the agreement in principle include EU tariffs will be 

eliminated completely on oats, barley, rye, wheat, durum; oils 

including canola oil, which is huge for us, Mr. Speaker; process 

pulses and grains which include baked goods, pulse flour meal, 

and powder. 

 

Producers will have an annual duty-free access for 80 000 

tonnes of pork, 50 000 tonnes of beef — 35 000 tonnes of that 

fresh and about 15 000 tonnes frozen — 3000 tonnes of bison, 

Mr. Speaker. In addition, CETA will give farmers duty-free 

access for high-quality beef under the existing Hilton beef quota 

or Hilton formula of nearly another, an additional 15 000 

tonnes, and for processed beef, pork, and bison products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nobody should question that this is a 

phenomenally good deal for Saskatchewan. We have ambitious 

growth targets in this province that include increasing ag 

exports by 50 per cent by 2020 from 10 billion in 2011 to 15 

billion in 2020; increasing crop production by 10 million 

tonnes, which we may come very close to this year, Mr. 

Speaker; increasing value-added production; making 

Saskatchewan a world leader in biosciences; increasing our 

livestock herd; and increasing irrigation capacity in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, to further increase our agricultural 

production. We’ve been working on many fronts to reach these 

growth plan targets, Mr. Speaker, through research, through 

market development, through trade missions, and strategic 

programs, many of which we partner with with the federal 

government. CETA will help us achieve these goals as well. 

 

COOL in the United States, country of origin labelling, has 

caused significant damage to our livestock industry, Mr. 

Speaker, and the damage will increase dramatically over the 

next month or two when the new COOL rules are implemented 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3977 

in the United States, if indeed they are. We need new markets to 

overcome the hurt that’s been put on our producers by the 

United States of America in this COOL endeavour. CETA will 

increase our exports to the EU and increase demand for our 

animals. This is a good deal in Canada. And I don’t think any 

jurisdiction in Canada will benefit as much as will 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The NDP do not have a strong record on agriculture or in rural 

Saskatchewan. They closed 31 rural agricultural offices, cut 

extension services, eliminated the GRIP [gross revenue 

insurance program] program. That is, they didn’t just eliminate 

a program, Mr. Speaker, in the ordinary sense. Well into the 

season in I think it was 1991 or ’92 — I remember the situation 

very well — they discontinued the program after many 

producers had signed contracts to be engaged in the GRIP 

program for that particular growing season, leaving producers 

with no safety net program whatsoever. 

 

They’ve increased crop insurance premiums on more than one 

occasion without increasing coverage. They’ve refused, decade 

after decade, to address education property tax. They cut spot 

loss hail insurance, Mr. Speaker, twice. They ignored 

agricultural disasters, both floods and droughts; blamed the 

federal government for all of their shortcomings; lost taxpayers’ 

money in private investments — SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company], Navigata. Don’t get me 

started, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have time. We don’t have time 

to go through the entire list. They closed 52 rural hospitals, well 

in excess of 100 rural schools, ignored rural roads and 

highways, off-loaded costs to RMs [rural municipality] and 

farm families. 

 

We’re seeing the same old NDP these days, Mr. Speaker, same 

old NDP stuck in the past. Won’t stand up for Saskatchewan. 

Won’t stand up for farmers and ranchers. No plan for growth. 

No record of growth. Didn’t believe in growth. Didn’t believe 

growth was possible, which begs the question, did they want 

growth, Mr. Speaker? I think that’s a serious question. I think 

the smart guys in the NDP backrooms in those days decided 

that prosperous people don’t vote for the socialist party, Mr. 

Speaker, so they intentionally did not want growth. Not sure if 

they knew how to get it if they did want it, but they didn’t want 

it in any event. Supporting this motion, Mr. Speaker, will go a 

long ways to showing that they do support agriculture these 

days. 

 

Many industry stakeholders support this agreement in principle. 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

president, Dave Marit, says, and I quote, “This agreement is 

welcome news as it will open new markets for Saskatchewan 

agriculture, an industry that will be a key driver in the 

continued economic growth Saskatchewan is experiencing.” No 

reference in there, Mr. Speaker, to not knowing enough details 

about the deal. He understands that this is an agreement in 

principle. And it’s good for Saskatchewan, and his organization 

supports it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Harold Martens, president of the Saskatchewan 

Stock Growers Association, says this: “The Saskatchewan 

Stock Growers have consistently supported the expansion of 

export markets as a strategy for ensuring the sustainability of 

the Canadian beef industry,” said Martens. The EU deal 

announced today stands as the “. . . high point in industry and 

government efforts to expand beef exports in decades.” Mr. 

Speaker, no reference there to not knowing enough details. He 

understands that this is an agreement in principle. He 

understands that it’s good for Saskatchewan, and he knows that 

it’s good for the Saskatchewan cattle industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association Chair, 

Mark Elford, said this, and I quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Cattleman’s Association, the SCA is 

extremely pleased with the joint announcement by the 

Government of Canada and the European Union of an 

agreement in principle for CETA. This comprehensive 

economic and trade agreement is a game changer for the 

Saskatchewan beef industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he understands as well that this is good for 

Saskatchewan, good for the economy, great for the beef 

industry, and good for agriculture. And he knows enough 

details of the deal to put his name forward as an endorsement of 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Murad Al-Katib, president of Canadian Special 

Crops Association said this, and I quote: 

 

This trade agreement between Canada and the EU will 

give value-added Canadian pulse processors greatly 

improved access to this market, and give the European 

food sector access to suppliers from Canada who will 

compete on the basis of price and quality, not 

market-distorting tariffs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Al-Katib understands that this deal is good for 

Canada. It’s good for Saskatchewan. It’s good for the economy. 

It’s good for the pulse crop industry. And it’s good for 

agriculture. He knows enough details. Murad Al-Katib has 

travelled around the world. He knows the industry. He knows 

agriculture, and he certainly knows his business, Mr. Speaker. 

He doesn’t need more details to support this deal. He’s on the 

record. Mr. Speaker, he understands that this is an agreement in 

principle, and he is very strongly in support of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I am very pleased to support this 

motion, and I will not be supporting the amendment. This deal 

is good for our province, our farmers, our ranchers, our 

agricultural industry, and I encourage the NDP opposition to do 

the right thing regardless of the stance of their federal party and 

support farmers and ranchers in this province for a change by 

supporting this motion as well. Thank you. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to enter 

the debate here this afternoon. In fact I was listening to the 

minister’s speech and I enjoyed a significant portion of his 

speech. And then I was disappointed that when we’re talking 

about a rather historic trade agreement, one that certainly looks 

to benefit Saskatchewan in a significant way, that we got into 

the sort of silly political gamesmanship and nonsense that we 

heard from our agricultural minister here today. 



3978 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

But I am pleased to enter this debate, and I’m pleased to see the 

progress on the trade agreement with the European Union. 

Certainly that is a good thing and we, as the official opposition, 

Saskatchewan New Democrats, we welcome that progress. And 

frankly it’s common sense to have stronger economic relations 

with the European Union and to make sure that we’re allowing 

expansion of markets for Saskatchewan to broaden and 

diversify our trading partners, and certainly that’s where we 

arrive at, bringing agreement to principle of this tentative 

agreement. 

 

We recognize as well that trade with the European Union is . . . 

You know, when we’re looking at the European Union, we’re 

looking at democratic countries with some of the highest 

environmental and labour standards in the world. Certainly 

these are good trading partners to have and could be really 

important to the future of our province. It is only common sense 

that we’d be working to strengthen our economic relations with 

the European Union. 

 

Certainly we recognize that we’re quite reliant on trade with the 

United States, and we welcome that trade. We want to grow that 

trade, but it’s vital for our province and for our country to 

broaden our markets, to expand markets and opportunity for 

Saskatchewan, for our province. 

 

When we look at this actual, you know, deal, we have to 

recognize the opportunities it could present to Saskatchewan 

people and businesses who provide world-class products, who 

provide services second to none. And certainly that includes 

some of the best agricultural exports in the world, something 

that we are so proud of. And it’s a good thing for us to seek, to 

open up new markets for what Saskatchewan is selling to the 

world. 

 

And I think of the world-class show that’s going on right now 

here in Regina, being Agribition, a place that brings together 

our globe and comes together around agriculture and showcases 

in an impressive way at an international show what we have to 

offer to the world. And I think that’s one example of how we 

connect to a global economy. 

 

I look as well at many of the items that are mentioned, and 

certainly the importance of working to open up markets for beef 

producers and pork producers and bison producers, making sure 

that we’re expanding markets for our farmers and ranchers who 

are so important to this province, and certainly recognizing the 

size of that market is something that’s really, really important. 

 

So when we’re looking at this deal, it’s through that lens that 

we’re looking at, and certainly it looks to be a very good deal 

for Saskatchewan. What we need to make sure is that we apply 

the . . . and ensure that all the facts are on the table, that there’s 

appropriate due diligence, and certainly that’s our motion that 

we’ve . . . or amendment that we’ve put forward here. But we 

do support the tentative agreement in principle, are proud to do 

so, but want to make sure of course, which would be only 

responsible, that the facts be on the table to the public and to 

legislatures across the country and to the federal parliament, 

making sure that all the compromises and all of the detail of 

that deal are known and to ensure we understand the full 

balance. 

 

But certainly in chatting with many within our province and 

looking at what is purported out of the trade deal, we’re quite 

pleased to welcome the benefits that could be accrued here in 

Saskatchewan. But we want to make sure of course that we’re 

responsible to Saskatchewan people and to Canadians in 

making sure that due diligence is in place. That’s our job. We’re 

certainly, as I think the Leader of the Opposition said, we’re 

certainly not going to be obstructionist. We’re not going to be 

ideological, but we won’t be writing a blank cheque. We’ve put 

forward a very reasonable amendment to the motion here today 

that states support in principle for the tentative trade deal but 

then also calls upon this Assembly to ensure that the proper due 

diligence occurs for all Saskatchewan people and all Canadians. 

 

And that’s why I’m pleased to support our amended motion: 

 

That this House supports the agreement in principle for the 

Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) 

reached by the Government of Canada and European 

Union and calls on legislators to undertake the appropriate 

due diligence to review and assess the agreement and 

support its swift implementation if it’s confirmed to be in 

the best interests of Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, it has been my pleasure to enter 

into debate here this afternoon. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a pleasure to 

join the debate here today on the motion that’s put before us 

with regards to the recently signed agreement, the 

Canada-European Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think first of all it’s important just to frame Saskatchewan and 

where we are in the world, and our Premier had alluded to it a 

little bit with some of our volumes of trade in agriculture. But 

Saskatchewan does over $32 billion worth of exports, Mr. 

Speaker, as a province. And that alone makes CETA an 

extremely significant trade deal for our province. 

 

Increased access for Canada and more specifically, Mr. 

Speaker, for our province of Saskatchewan to roughly a half 

billion person market — that’s 500 million people in the 28 

countries in the European Union, Mr. Speaker — is a 

significant, significant move forward for trade for Canada, but 

again more specifically for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to put this in perspective, the North American 

Free Trade Agreement with the USA [United States of 

America] and Mexico represents about 440 million people, Mr. 

Speaker. So we’re in that same type of swimming pool with 

half a billion people in the European Union deal, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re in a similar environment as we are with the North 

American Free Trade Agreement, Mr. Speaker, and we’re very 

well aware as to the benefits that the North American free trade 

deal has had to not only Canada and the US and Mexico but 

also Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the European market, as was alluded to earlier, is 

also one of the largest importing markets in the world, with a 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3979 

gross domestic product of about $17 trillion, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

huge market of half a billion people. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to grant leave? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the Health 

minister. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you to all members for 

allowing leave to introduce a guest. Mr. Speaker, seated in your 

gallery we’re joined by my good friend Debra Button, the 

mayor of Weyburn. Debra is also the president of SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and is very 

involved both provincially as well as at a national level with 

FCM [Federation of Canadian Municipalities], Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members would join with me 

in welcoming Debra to her Legislative Assembly. This is I 

believe the second opportunity that I’ve had to introduce Debra, 

and so I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

Debra to the legislature. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the minister opposite, the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, and welcome Her Worship Mayor Deb 

Button to her Assembly here today. And certainly I echo the 

thanks, provided by the member opposite, for her leadership 

here in Saskatchewan, certainly within her own community but 

as president of SUMA and certainly on the national stage as 

well. So thank you, Mayor Button. Welcome to your Assembly 

on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Support for Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker, and welcome to 

Ms. Button to her Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I’d just 

like to just back up and restate again because I feel it’s very 

important to recognize the size of the market that is involved 

here that we’ve . . . as Canada, with the Canadian-European free 

trade agreement here, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s half a billion 

people in the 28 countries in the European Union, Mr. Speaker, 

half a billion people with an economy of $17 trillion, Mr. 

Speaker. Also, as was noted, it’s the largest agricultural 

importing economy in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an economy that we traditionally have not 

had access to. And on Canada’s perspective but also on 

Saskatchewan’s perspective, and more to come on that a little 

bit later, Mr. Speaker, but this is great strides for an exporting 

nation such as ours where we have $32 billion, Mr. Speaker, of 

product to sell to the rest of the world. 

 

I’d like to touch, as I go along here, Mr. Speaker, on . . . three 

points I’ll touch on with regards to the Canada-European Union 

Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, Mr. Speaker, 

starting with some of the changes in tariffs and non-tariff trade 

barriers with regards to manufactured products, a touch on 

forest products, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to also obviously go 

into some of the gains that we’ve made in the agricultural trade 

end, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To begin with, again in relation, our Saskatchewan 

manufacturing economy in the month of July, Mr. Speaker, we 

experienced a year-over-year increase of 6.3 per cent. Just in the 

month of July this last year, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had 

$1.3 billion, which was a record month in July of 

manufacturing, Mr. Speaker. So we do have manufacturing in 

this province, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to allude a little bit to 

some of the . . . somewhere where we’ve had success in 

manufacturing, and that’s in shortline agricultural equipment 

manufacturing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Saskatchewan’s top quality farm equipment can be 

found improving agricultural productivity in virtually all 

corners of the world, Mr. Speaker, as we do export to many 

countries in the world. I can think of numerous shortline 

manufacturers that are doing that, Mr. Speaker, countries such 

as the United States quite obviously — as I alluded, we had a 

North American Free Trade Agreement there — but also 

countries such as Australia, Mexico. And listen to this, Mr. 

Speaker, we also export to some degree manufactured shortline 

agricultural equipment to Western Europe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as it comes nearly 40 per cent, 40 per cent of 

Western Canada’s 11,000 farm and ranch implement 

manufacturing jobs, jobs, Mr. Speaker, are based in this 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, those are not in 

traditional. And when we say agriculture, that the CETA deal is 

good for agriculture, it’s not only good for what we traditionally 

think is the farmer in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, many of 

these jobs are in towns such as Langbank, Mr. Speaker, in cities 

like Regina, in towns of Yorkton . . . or cities of Yorkton, 

pardon me, Mr. Speaker, cities such as Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

Agriculture is much bigger than what has traditionally been the 

farmer in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s a big industry, 

and it’s one that affects many people that us in this Assembly 

represent all over on both sides, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also like to draw some attention to a major farm event 

that is taking place as we speak, Mr. Speaker, in Hanover, 

Germany called Agritechnica. And it’s this year, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have well in excess of 20 shortline manufacturers from 

this province of Saskatchewan that are showing their wares, as 

we speak, in Hanover, Germany. Mr. Speaker, this is the largest 



3980 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

farm show in the world, and we have a great representation by 

Saskatchewan’s manufacturers at that show, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

held every two years, and just two years ago, in 2011, there was 

2,700 exhibiters, 415,000 visitors from over 48 countries in the 

world, Mr. Speaker. And it’s quite expected that this mission 

here with the Saskatchewan manufacturers that are at that show 

— it was led by STEP or Saskatchewan Trade and Export 

Partnership — but it has the potential to secure up to $75 

million in sales agreements as well as over 300 new export 

leads, Mr. Speaker. And again I bring that that affects all 

communities in Saskatchewan, communities wherever you may 

see different manufacturing implement dealers in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. St. Brieux comes to mind with 

Bourgault, a great success story of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can think of one recent manufacturing company in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that since 2006 has had a lot of 

success in the North American market, with 700 per cent 

growth since 2006, Mr. Speaker. And as well now with this 

agreement, there’s obviously different companies that are 

looking into the Western European market, and its growth will 

be sure to continue. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was thinking about this motion here today, I 

also took the opportunity to just think a little bit of some of the 

travels that I undertook this last summer with the duties that I 

was so graciously asked to work on as my duties as Legislative 

Secretary to the Minister of Agriculture. In that, Mr. Speaker, I 

visited many, many, many different types of processing plants 

and value-added plants and agri-businesses across the province. 

As we toured these plants, I couldn’t help but notice the 

different types of equipment, very specialized equipment that 

they had in their respective plants, Mr. Speaker, whether it was 

an ethanol or a biofuel plant or feed processing plant or an oat 

processing plant or a meat processing plant. These are all the 

different eggs we have in our agricultural basket in this 

province, by the way. You have a meat processing plant, Mr. 

Speaker, a pea processing plant, or one of our greatest 

value-added success stories in this province is our great canola 

crush that happens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t help but look at the specialized 

equipment that they had and talk to them a little bit. And a lot of 

this equipment, Mr. Speaker, is not just available at Wal-Mart 

down the road or wherever you might go to get it. It’s available 

at one, maybe two places in the world, two factories specifically 

located wherever they are in the world, Mr. Speaker, many of 

them in Western Europe. And I couldn’t help but think that, Mr. 

Speaker, as with regards to agriculture, also free and open trade 

with as many countries, Mr. Speaker, is going to help not only 

the supply of these types of very specialized machines but also 

the ongoing parts access and maintenance and whatnot may 

come, again keeping in mind that these are not just available 

everywhere. They’re just available in very specific companies 

in specific parts of the world. 

 

I would like to touch just a little bit on some of what was 

mentioned with regards to forestry in the CETA deal, Mr. 

Speaker. First of all most of Canada’s and Saskatchewan’s 

wood is turned into value-added products, and quite often very 

near to the source of the harvest. And CETA lays out how it 

will eliminate financial tariffs on forestry products that are 

exported from Canada to the European Union. Items such as 

plywood, oriented strand board, particleboard, Mr. Speaker, 

these items face tariffs of seven to ten per cent, and those will 

be eliminated upon bringing in the forest CETA agreement, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And our forest industry will benefit from the increased volume 

that we have as Canada into this new market, as well as the 

competitive edge that CETA will provide for our entire forestry 

sector. And a larger sale market for our forestry products will 

enhance the industry — not just the company, but for the people 

that are employed within that company and live in those 

communities, Mr. Speaker, people that are employed in the mill 

or in the plant or in the yard site, in the forest or in the 

cutblocks themselves or in the transport of the industry, and 

whether that be of the raw product to the mill or the plant, Mr. 

Speaker, or the finished product out to a delivery port or 

wherever that may be. 

 

I’d also like to add that again in this industry, Mr. Speaker, it 

affects much more than the people that are directly involved in 

the work of those plants or in the cutblocks or in the yard. I 

think of the forestry equipment dealerships, Mr. Speaker, that 

are in the different, smaller city centres and also in our larger 

cities in Saskatchewan. I think of all their sales employment 

that they provide and all the people that work in their parts 

dealerships. These are professional careers, Mr. Speaker, that 

are valuable to our province. 

 

I think of the service managers and all the people that work in 

the service department of the forestry dealers, Mr. Speaker, as 

well as all of the administration jobs that come with that. And I 

think of all of those same varied careers, Mr. Speaker, in those 

same communities in the heavy truck industry and the trailer 

industry that provide equipment that work in the forestry sector. 

There’s no doubt that expanding our markets for forestry, Mr. 

Speaker, will benefit not just the people that live in the 

communities where forestry takes place but in all of our 

communities across Saskatchewan, and it would be a very, very 

big benefit for again the people that we represent in this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, lastly but definitely not least, I would like to enter 

a few comments with regards to agriculture and our 

comprehensive economic free trade agreement with the 

European Union. 

 

Again I back up, Mr. Speaker, to our in excess of $32 billion in 

exports that we have here in Saskatchewan. And again, as was 

mentioned earlier, a third of those are agricultural exports. Mr. 

Speaker, it has been no secret on the agricultural end — on the 

export piece altogether — but we support more open, more free, 

more free trade, and more trade in general with whoever is 

interested in our Saskatchewan products. And that definitely 

holds true with our agricultural industry. 

 

A little over a month ago, our Premier announced that 

Saskatchewan will host an agricultural trade summit. This is a 

great opportunity to bring together producers, businesses, trade 

experts, industry, and government officials to discuss 

international trade, to discuss market access, and to discuss how 

to increase Saskatchewan’s agricultural exports worldwide. 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3981 

In 2011 Saskatchewan was again Canada’s largest exporting 

province. And it was alluded to a little earlier, Mr. Speaker, 

with regards to when you talk percentages of agricultural 

exports in Saskatchewan, we talk about percentages of world 

market share. And, Mr. Speaker, I need to run through a couple 

of them; they have been entered in this House before, but it’s 

quite exciting when we get to do it. 

 

When we talk about lentils, Mr. Speaker, 61 per cent of the 

world’s lentils exports come from this province, Mr. Speaker. 

Fifty-seven per cent of pea exports in the world come from this 

province, 55 per cent of flax, 34 per cent of both durum and 

canola seed exports come from Saskatchewan, and 40 per cent 

of the world’s mustard exports. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is 

also a leading provincial Canadian exporter in wheat, canola 

seed, lentils, canola oil, peas, canola meal, flax seed, oats, 

barley, canary seed, mustard seed, and chickpeas. Our province 

leads the nation in those exports, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I just want to run through a couple of countries here. 

Saskatchewan itself exports over $100 million worth of 

agricultural products to each of these countries, Mr. Speaker: 

United States, China, Mexico, India, Bangladesh, the United 

Arab Emirates, Pakistan, Italy, Belgium — I’ll come back to 

Belgium — Sri Lanka, Turkey, Venezuela, Algeria, Colombia, 

Peru, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, and Morocco. 

 

What I notice about that listing of countries, Mr. Speaker, is 

there is one EU country on there, and that’s Belgium. Mr. 

Speaker, our upside potential of free trade with the European 

Union is great. We have 27 more that we can increase up to 

these levels, as well as increasing our trade with Belgium. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we are doing just over $100 million worth 

of trade with all of those countries. One of them is an EU 

country. And as I alluded to earlier, that market is 500 million 

people, $17 trillion, Mr. Speaker. The upside potential in that 

market is there — $17 trillion. 

 

One thing I would like to allude to as well that I see in the 

principle of the CETA deal, Mr. Speaker, is we talk about the 

financial trade tariffs that are there. And I think very much, in a 

very large way the CETA deal addresses those financial trade 

tariffs. But if you actually look into some of the print on there, 

there’s also — and just let me find it here — here’s where it is, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

CETA enhances the existing Canada-EU forum for 

discussion on biotechnology and emphasizes the 

promotion of efficient science-based approval processes 

[efficient science-based approval process, Mr. Speaker] 

and cooperation on low-level presence of genetically 

modified crops . . . 

 

CETA also includes provisions to address non-tariff 

barriers in the EU, such as those related to animal and 

plant health, and food safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so in addition to CETA addressing the financial 

tariffs that prevent us from trading in these markets, Mr. 

Speaker, CETA also puts a mechanism in place or a process in 

place to deal with the non-financial trade barriers, Mr. Speaker, 

that sometimes have a tendency to pop up here, there, and 

everywhere, complete with time limits, Mr. Speaker, time limits 

to find a resolution on those. And in closing, I’m going to talk 

about those just a little bit more. 

 

I think that, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the CETA deal, the 

fact that it does deal with these financial tariffs but it also has a 

second part of it that deals with the non-financial trade barriers, 

I think that may prove to be the real strength of the CETA deal, 

Mr. Speaker. Both are important, and I’m glad to see that both 

are included in there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this House supporting this agreement in principle, 

Mr. Speaker, is a common theme. It’s a common theme, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s one that industry has picked up with. The 

industry groups, industry organizations, Mr. Speaker, industry 

organizations that are not just related to agriculture as I alluded 

before, but industry organizations that we all represent in this 

House, Mr. Speaker — whether it be in the manufacturing 

industry, in the processing industry — all under the agricultural 

envelope but, Mr. Speaker, from all of our communities across 

Saskatchewan, and these industry groups are supporting this 

agreement in principle. 

 

And the Minister of Agriculture read a couple of news releases 

that came that were released with regards to CETA, and I just 

have a couple more quotes here that I’d like to read. I’d like to 

put them on the record because I feel they’re important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all from the Western Canadian Wheat 

Growers, Mr. Levi Wood is the president of the Western 

Canadian Wheat Growers, and in their news release, this was in 

their news release: “Western Canadian farmers currently export 

about 70% of their wheat.” Mr. Speaker, this fits with our $32 

billion, a third being agriculture. We export a lot of wheat. This 

should come as no surprise to anyone in this House. 

 

Another 15% is sold to Canadian livestock producers. The 

deal with Europe will expand market opportunities for 

grain and oilseed exports, but even more importantly will 

lead to the growth in sales of the domestic feed market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the wheat growers have faith that this is not only a 

good deal for them, but it’s a good deal for our cow-calf, our 

hog, and our bison industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and this is Mr. Levi Wood, 

president of the Western Canadian Wheat Growers: “Overall, 

the CETA deal is a tremendous win for prairie grain farmers,” 

Mr. Speaker. That’s the Western Canadian Wheat Growers. 

 

Go on to the Canola Council. I can stand here all day, but I’ll 

just do a few. Mr. Speaker, Canola Council of Canada, the 

president, Patti Miller: 

 

CETA provides for the elimination of tariffs on canola 

entering the EU immediately upon implementation of the 

agreement. The Canola Council estimates that this will 

provide the opportunity for exporters to increase sales by 

up to $90 million per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s 90 million in exports that we have not had, 

again going into this half billion person, $17 trillion market. Mr. 

Speaker, I had alluded before to the financial tariffs as well as 



3982 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

the non-financial trade barriers that are existent. The Canola 

Council has also made note of this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

CETA will also include a vehicle for cooperation on issues 

relating to biotechnology and trade. A biotechnology 

working group is tasked under the agreement to address 

the timeliness of approvals of genetically engineered 

products, science-based policy and regulation and 

development of low level presence policy. “This is a 

critically important area affecting our trade,” says Miller 

. . . 

 

“Canada is an exporting nation and when it comes to 

canola and canola products, we export over 85% of our 

production. So this agreement, which eliminates tariffs and 

creates mechanisms to resolve trade disputes, [Mr. 

Speaker] is a big step forward.” 

 

That’s the Canola Council of Canada. 

 

Rick White from the Canola Growers Association: 

 

CETA will improve market access for Canadian canola to 

one of the world’s largest markets. By lowering oil tariffs, 

the exports of Canadian . . . oil to Europe will increase 

[again, Mr. Speaker] by approximately $90 million, 

creating a new demand for canola seed to feed our [ever] 

expanding oilseed crushing capacity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the grain crops production end in Saskatchewan is 

excited about this. And I might add again that that does add 

back into the ag equipment dealership industry, Mr. Speaker, 

into the service industry, into the fertilizer industry, Mr. 

Speaker, of which people in work in all of those industries live 

in all of our communities across Canada. All of our crop 

associations, Mr. Speaker, these crop associations support this 

agreement in principle, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to ask 

everyone in this House to do the same shortly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, President Martin Unrau from the Canadian 

Cattlemen’s Association announced today that this is a game 

. . . or not today, Mr. Speaker, but the day of the press release, 

my apologies. President Martin Unrau from the Canadian 

Cattlemen’s Association announced that this: 

 

. . . is a game-changer for Canada’s beef industry . . . The 

removal of longstanding barriers in this agreement, such as 

high tariffs, finally enables Canadian beef producers to 

benefit from the high value that the European . . . market 

represents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and again, we talk about financial tariffs versus 

non-financial tariffs, Mr. Unrau goes on: 

 

As important as the new tariff conditions are, resolution of 

the technical barriers for exporting Canadian beef to 

Europe are also vital . . . for the first time, there’s a written 

commitment between Canada and the EU, including a 

timetable, to resolve such technical barriers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canadian Cattlemen’s Association is in support of 

principle of this agreement. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Stock Growers, Saskatchewan Stock Growers, as our Minister 

of Agriculture eluded to as well, are supportive of this 

agreement. And the president of the Saskatchewan Stock 

Growers noted the EU has imposed a quota which limited 

combined Canadian and US imports to 14 950 tonnes annually 

at a 20 per cent duty rate. Under the new comprehensive 

economic trade agreement, the duty is reduced to zero on the 

Canadian beef imports and has been increased to 64 950 tonnes 

per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the Saskatchewan Stock Growers. 

 

So in addition to securing . . . Oh, Mr. Speaker, sorry. I’ve got a 

new one here, but it’ll be my last one for now. Mr. Speaker, the 

Canadian Pork Council of Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

couple of quotes out of the Canadian Pork Council of Canada: 

 

In addition to securing free access for processed pork 

products on the day this new agreement takes effect, 

Canada will acquire a quota volume equivalent to over 80 

000 tonnes of pork cuts. 

 

“The pork industry appreciates the government pursuing 

our access interests to the very end. [That’s from the 

Canadian Pork Council’s chair, Jean-Guy Vincent, Mr. 

Speaker.] The Canadian and EU markets for pork 

complement each other and this relationship holds great 

potential to enhance our sector’s export opportunities, as 

well as benefit workers, businesses, and families who rely 

on the pork sector for their livelihood.” 

 

I just want to read that last part again there, Mr. Speaker, “. . . 

as well as benefit workers, businesses and families who rely on 

the pork sector for their livelihood,” Mr. Speaker. This CETA 

deal, Mr. Speaker, affects families and people in all 

communities across Saskatchewan, and it’s a good deal for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m just going to jump to the end of their press release, Mr. 

Speaker. Oh I’ve got to go back a bit here. Again, still with the 

Canadian Pork Council: 

 

Based on existing market intelligence and the anticipated 

market opportunities for specific cuts of pork, this deal 

could, in a very few short years, lead to annual sales of 

400 million dollars. 

 

$400 million in sales that have not been there, Mr. Speaker. The 

press release goes on to say: 

 

Canada is the third largest pork exporter in the world. The 

EU is the only important pork-consuming market for 

which the Canadian pork industry has had . . . [any] real 

access with a population of 500 million people consuming 

over 20 million tonnes of pork. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and we haven’t had access to that market in 

Canada and, Mr. Speaker, now we will. Now we will. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I just want to allude to the fact that 

I will not be supporting the amendment as I do find it 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3983 

unnecessary, Mr. Speaker. If you go back and read the actual 

motion, the motion isn’t asking for support on every detail of 

the deal that is soon to come. The motion is asking, and I’ll read 

it: “That this House supports the agreement in principle . . .” 

Mr. Speaker, not every detail down the road. We’re supporting 

this: 

 

. . . in principle for the Comprehensive Economic and 

Trade Agreement reached by the Government of Canada 

and the European Union and calls on all federal parties to 

support the swift implementation of the agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s good enough for all these organizations 

representing people with jobs across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s good enough for me, and on behalf of our constituents in 

this province, I will be supporting this motion, Mr. Speaker, and 

not the amendment. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I just wanted to rise and make a few comments on this 

motion. I’ve had the opportunity of hearing the comments of the 

Minister of Agriculture and the Legislative Secretary for 

Agriculture and, Mr. Speaker, they both made very, very good 

speeches about the status of agriculture in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada and all the good work that our producers are doing here 

in Saskatchewan. And I think both made very good speeches 

about the status of agriculture of Canada and the need for a 

trade agreement with the European Union. 

 

And certainly we know that the European Union is already our 

third largest trading partner, but this kind of agreement will 

bring us up to a much larger volume of trade with the European 

Union, and certainly I think there’s no question on this side of 

the House that we do support the agreement in principle for the 

comprehensive economic and trade agreement. 

 

And if the motion had only read that, I think there would have 

been no need to suggest that we have an amendment to the 

existing motion. But unfortunately the motion went on, and 

what it did is it calls upon federal parties to support swift 

implementation of the agreement. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

think that’s a very important distinction that perhaps the 

Minister of Agriculture and the Legislative Secretary haven’t 

had time to amply consider. I mean certainly they had very long 

speeches prepared for them that they were able to share with 

this Assembly. But for example the Minister of Agriculture’s 

speech, only one page dealt with the actual details of the 

agreement, and that was some projected figures on numbers. 

But there was no information provided at all in either of their 

speeches about the actual details of the agreement. And you 

know why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because there are none. 

 

And what’s been said about this agreement today, and certainly 

what the New Democrats have said, is that when it comes to 

trade agreements, we know that details matter. And I think the 

COOL issue that we’re dealing with right now, the country of 

origin labelling issues that we’re dealing with the United States, 

is a good example of where details do matter. And until such 

time, I think it would be irresponsible for us as legislators to 

support swift implementation of the agreement if we haven’t 

had a chance to actually look at the details of the agreement. 

 

We know that the Conservatives have kept the details 

hush-hush. There hasn’t been transparency or accountability for 

the negotiations. Parliament has been kept in the dark and so 

have Canadians. And this is the issue I think that we feel that 

the suggested amendment would rectify in terms of the motion 

that’s before the Assembly today. We know that talks were 

concluded in secret for this agreement, and even though a deal 

has been announced, we do not have the details of this deal or 

the text of the agreement. So it would be irresponsible for us as 

legislators to just wave a flag, and when the federal government 

says, trust us, that we immediately say, rah-rah, we’re on side. 

 

Why would we trust this federal government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? This is the same government that eliminated the single 

desk for the Canadian Wheat Board. They’ve eliminated the 

PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration]. They’ve 

eliminated the community pastures program. They’ve 

eliminated the Indian Head tree nursery. They’ve eliminated 

hundreds of positions for food safety inspectors. And the 

Minister of Agriculture referred to a long list that he had. 

There’s long lists that we have here too, concerns about this 

federal government. And when the federal government says, 

trust us, I think that’s cause for alarm. 

 

And that’s why the amendment to this motion is so important, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. What the federal government is asking us 

to do, and the original motion is asking us to do, is to simply 

trust the federal government, to sign a blank cheque. And we 

know that as legislators, that is irresponsible. We need to ensure 

that proper accountability and transparency is in place. But this 

government, with the motion as it now stands without the 

amendment, shows again it’s not listening and it’s being 

stubborn. It’s sticking to its scripts and it’s not actually thinking 

through the implications of the motion and of the amendment 

that’s been put forward. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I certainly agree with the long lists of 

endorsements that both the Minister of Agriculture and the 

Legislative Secretary for Agriculture provided — the 

cattlemen’s association, stock growers. I mean if this agreement 

goes through, we agree that better trade with Europe is 

important for the producers of Saskatchewan. We support the 

producers of Saskatchewan. We know they’re working hard and 

they’re doing their part in order to make Saskatchewan’s 

economy thrive. 

 

We know Saskatchewan stands to benefit a lot from this 

agreement, and that’s why we do support the agreement in 

principle. We have no issue with that whatsoever. The biggest 

concern and the reason why we feel the motion needs to be 

amended is to ensure that as legislators we do our job, which is 

to look at the details and make sure it’s in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t understand why the 

government is not interested in ensuring that due diligence is 

done and that we make sure it’s in the best interests across the 

board. We cannot do that until we see the text of the agreement. 

And for that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do support the 

motion, but only as amended by the opposition. Thank you. 

 



3984 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I’d like to recognize the 

member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is 

an important topic that we’re debating in the legislature today 

and I think that I’m most anxious to participate because of the 

way this agreement will positively impact my own constituents. 

 

I know there’s going to be a much bigger story for the province 

of Saskatchewan, but I want to recite a story as part of the 

discussion here today that might help put this into perspective. 

A couple of weeks ago I was at the regional meeting of the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association held in Piapot. And it 

was just after Tyson Foods in the United States had announced 

that it wouldn’t be buying large numbers of Canadian fat cattle 

because of the implications of cost for their organization to put 

into place the COOL provisions, the country of origin labelling 

provisions. And there was an air of pessimism in the room 

because Tyson is probably the third largest purchaser of 

Canadian cattle any given year, and with them out of the 

market, it would have a pretty serious and negative effect for 

my producers. 

 

I think that the best response I could give those people that 

night in terms of encouragement was the fact that I know — 

and I knew at the time — that the Government of Canada was 

in the process of working very aggressively to conclude a 

comprehensive trade agreement with the European Union. I also 

know that we are in the Trans-Pacific Partnership and trying to 

tap in through that trade agreement . . . or that group, trade 

agreements that are making our product much more available in 

increasingly wealthy areas of Southeast Asia where economies 

are strong, unless of course they’re devastated by typhoons. 

 

But there is a growing opportunity for Canadian cattle 

producers in some of these growing economies in Southeast 

Asia. We’ve identified north Africa, the Middle East, some of 

those areas where there’s increasing opportunity. And really our 

best opportunities are going to be realized through these kinds 

of comprehensive trade agreements. If we’re out there on our 

own, battling everybody else without the benefit of a trade 

agreement, it’s going to be tough slugging. But Canada has had 

a particularly aggressive stance on initiating and negotiating 

and implementing trade agreements. And this is one of the more 

important ones, I must say, that has come to fruition as a result 

of that deliberate strategy. 

 

The Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and 

Trade Agreement, known as CETA, is going to have some very 

specific, positive effects for my producers. And I’m just going 

to recite a few of them. A lot of statistics, a lot of numbers have 

been put before the House already today, and I don’t want to 

belabour a lot of that. But here’s why it’s going to be good for 

my beef producers. 

 

Canada has secured duty-free, in-quota access for beef totalling 

50 000 tonnes carcass weight. Seventy per cent of the quota — 

that’s 35 000 tonnes — is dedicated to fresh, chilled product, 

while 15 000 tonnes is for frozen product. In addition, once the 

agreement is implemented, Canada will have immediate 

duty-free, in-quota access under the existing Hilton quota for 

high-quality beef. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we raise some of the 

highest quality beef in the world. This will put Canada at an 

advantage, a clear advantage over our US competitors who will 

continue to have an in-quota duty of 20 per cent. 

 

Now, Deputy Speaker, our loss of access to the American 

market through the Tyson decision could be compensated quite 

significantly by this advantage we’re going to obtain of 20 per 

cent over American beef trying to get into the European market. 

 

In terms of pork access, Canada has secured immediate, 

duty-free, in-quota access of over 81 000 tonnes. The quota is 

available to both fresh and frozen product. 

 

Now the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association and the Canadian 

Pork Council have both indicated that they support this level of 

access, while there’s going to be some opposition from dairy 

producers, I’m sure, who will probably oppose the agreement. 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this agreement is no different than 

any other agreement at an international level. There’s going to 

be some industries that probably would benefit a little more 

than others. There’s going to be some that will maybe lose a 

little bit more than others. 

 

But I’m reminded of my days selling farm machinery when I 

worked for an elderly dealership . . . I mean an elderly 

gentleman who owned the dealership. And his experience was 

put pretty succinctly one day when I was talking about a deal 

that I’d put together and it didn’t seem the customer was all that 

happy and I certainly wasn’t very happy. And my boss said to 

me, you know, I’ve come to understand that if two parties 

negotiate a deal and they both leave a little bit angry, it was 

probably a pretty fair deal. If everybody is happy, well that 

might not be quite so good. And if one party’s happier than the 

other is, that’s not good at all. So we’d rather have people go 

away from a deal who thought they didn’t get everything they 

wanted, because it’s probably pretty fair. 

 

And so that’s the way it is. That’s the reality for these 

international trade agreements. Not everybody gets everything 

they want, but they understand that the fundamentals are strong, 

and overall the benefit will be greater than if they had no deal at 

all. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what else is accomplished by this on 

behalf of particularly Saskatchewan producers? Well other 

highlights of the agreement include the immediate elimination 

of tariffs on canola oil. How important could that possibly be to 

us? We are the largest producer of canola in the world, and 

canola oil is one of our major exports. And so to remove the 

tariffs on canola oil in a market as large as the one in Europe is 

an incredibly important provision. 

 

Immediate duty-free, in-quota access for 3000 tonnes of carcass 

weight for bison. Now we have a number of bison producers in 

the province of Saskatchewan. I’m not sure we have the 

capacity to produce the full 3000 tonnes as yet, but that will 

happen. As a result of an agreement like this, there will be a 

growth in the bison industry, I’m sure. 

 

Canada has also secured immediate duty-free, in-quota access 

for low- to medium-quality wheat for 100 000 tonnes. Now 

100 000 tonnes might not sound like much, but when you have 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3985 

a lot of low-quality wheat lying around after a year where 

weather conditions have impacted your high-quality growth, 

well having a market and an access opportunity like this is 

going to be important. Current tariffs for grains are going to be 

phased out entirely over seven years. 

 

Canada and the EU have also agreed to letters on technical 

issues regarding biotechnology and meat issues. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, of all the provisions in this comprehensive agreement, 

I think this might be one of the most important because there 

have been non-monetary trade barriers thrown up time and time 

again in our access to markets, both in Europe and other areas 

of the world, that need a solid foundation for agreement. And 

this particular agreement will provide that on biotechnology and 

meat issues. There will be definitions around certain words and 

diseases and things that have been utilized to keep our product 

out of Europe. And this an important part of establishing a 

comprehensive and understandable liturgy around what’s 

acceptable and what isn’t. So that’s very important to our 

producers in this country. 

 

I want to read into the record a couple of things here because I 

think it states very importantly and succinctly the value of this 

agreement to the province of Saskatchewan: 

 

The Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic 

and Trade Agreement will bring benefits to every region 

of the country [and our province]. It will unlock new 

opportunities by opening new markets for Canadian 

businesses and creating new jobs for Canadian workers. 

CETA is a 21st century gold-standard agreement and is 

Canada’s most ambitious trade initiative ever. 

 

We used to think the NAFTA agreement was important, and it 

has been, and I’m going to cite some statistics that have grown 

out of that particular arrangement, but this is that much more 

important. It is broader in scope than NAFTA and deeper in 

ambition than the historic NAFTA agreement. 

 

Canada’s historical and cultural ties with the EU make it an 

ideal partner for a comprehensive and ambitious free trade 

agreement. The EU, with its 28 member states, 500 million 

people and annual economic activity of almost $17 trillion, 

is the largest and most lucrative market in the world. It’s 

also the world’s largest importing market for goods: the 

EU’s annual imports ($2.3 trillion) are worth more than 

Canada’s total gross domestic product, which stood at $1.8 

trillion in 2012. Reducing and eliminating tariffs and 

non-tariff barriers will make Canadian goods, technologies, 

and expertise more competitive in the lucrative EU market 

and benefit businesses of all sizes, as well as workers and 

their families. 

 

A joint Canada-EU study, which supported the launch of 

negotiations, concluded that a trade agreement could boost 

Canada’s income by $12 billion annually and bilateral 

trade by [up to] 20 per cent. Put another way, the economic 

benefit of a far-reaching agreement would be equivalent to 

creating almost 80,000 new jobs or increasing the . . . 

Canadian household’s annual income by $1,000 a year. 

 

This is like adding over half the total number of jobs currently 

found in the city of Saskatoon. Those are pretty impressive and 

important numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And as a person who comes out of a sales background, there is 

nothing more important than having a substantial market in 

which to sell. I mean if you’re running all over trying to find a 

customer here, there, and everywhere, you spend a lot of time 

unproductively. But if you’ve got a large and engaged market 

and a financially secure market, a market that’s willing to spend 

money to buy your products concentrated in an area as confined 

as the European common market, that is to our advantage as the 

selling agent. And so that’s what’s going to make this whole 

initiative so valuable to us as a province and a country. 

 

You know, I think there’s been a lot made of the number of 

products Saskatchewan produces and how important that is, you 

know, on the world market in terms of scale. We last year had 

farm market sales of a little over $11 billion, and we have a 

target of $15 billion that we want to accomplish in 

agriculture-related production. I think the goal is to reach that 

by 2020. Well we’re going to need these kind of comprehensive 

trade agreements to help us realize that goal. 

 

And that effort is well under way in a variety of initiatives that 

were articulated by the Minister of Agriculture early. We’re 

trying to find improved species. We’re doing a lot of work 

around research. We’re doing a lot of work around market and 

transportation and the development of markets. But man, an 

agreement that puts us in the middle of 500 million people is a 

pretty important part of our long-term success. And that again 

would suggest that an agreement like this is so very vital to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think my colleague from Shellbrook identified a number of 

organizations and individuals who have already spoken clearly 

about what they see as the value of this agreement. They don’t 

know all the details. They aren’t privy to every last jot and 

tittle. They haven’t seen every i dotted and every t crossed, but 

they know that the fundamentals of this agreement are going to 

be very important to their industries, and they’ve already 

articulated their support. 

 

That support is coming from the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association, from the Stock Growers Association, from the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. It’s very 

widespread, particularly though from organizations that 

represent rural interests, and they are fully onside with so much 

of what is in this agreement, and I’m glad to have their support. 

 

I guess I could read some of the quotes, but I’m not going to do 

that in the interest of time. But one of the questions I know will 

come up is, you know, how do you know all of these great 

outcomes will really be achieved? Well you know, we’re not 

certain about anything in this life. But if you don’t try, if you 

don’t put something in place, if you don’t move toward a goal 

and an objective, you probably aren’t going to achieve much. 

 

And so what is my reason for confidence in this particular 

agreement? Well I think I would refer again to the NAFTA 

agreement. I remember the uproar that was created when that 

was being negotiated, and if the naysayers had had their way, 

you know, we’d have pulled down the blinds, closed the doors, 

and stayed in our dark, little room. But unfortunately . . . The 

light of day was realized because of this agreement. 



3986 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

NAFTA has done more for the North American economy than 

anybody ever anticipated. It actually revolutionized trade and 

investment in North America. It helped unlock our regions’ 

economic potential. And since it came into effect 15 years ago, 

North Americans have enjoyed an overall extended period of 

strong economic growth and rising prosperity, interrupted only 

by an episode in 2008-2009 that was foisted on us by the greed 

of some individuals. 

 

But nevertheless NAFTA as a whole has had some pretty 

significant impact on our economy provincially. What has 

happened here? I think the Premier cited some of the results of 

NAFTA on Saskatchewan. I know what it is nationally. We’ve 

seen Canada’s trade with the US more than triple. Since 

NAFTA came into effect, merchandise trade among the 

NAFTA partners has tripled right across the board, in fact more 

so. It’s reached a total of $946.1 billion in 2008. So now we’re 

at 2013, so we can probably add a few more billions to that 

number. 

 

Today NAFTA partners exchange over $2.6 billion in 

merchandise on a daily basis. Heck, we do that with the 

Americans almost on a daily basis. So we have to add in 

Mexico’s contribution to that as well. Since NAFTA came into 

effect, the North American economy has more than doubled in 

size. The combined gross domestic product for Canada, the US, 

and Mexico surpassed US $17 trillion in 2008 and that was up 

from $7.6 trillion in 1993. 

 

North America employment levels have climbed nearly 23 per 

cent since 1993, representing a net gain of almost 40 million 

jobs. People tell you in their most pessimistic moments that a 

free trade agreement can’t be good — can’t be good for us. 

Well you know what? The evidence over the last number of 

years has been quite to the contrary. 

 

I want to talk to you a little bit just briefly about Mexico’s 

experience. Mexico is a very important player in the North 

American Free Trade Agreement. Everybody thought they were 

such a wounded duck socially and economically that they 

couldn’t possibly benefit much, that it would be a drag on the 

North American Free Trade Agreement because of their 

problems. But you know, early on in that North American Free 

Trade Agreement, Mexico determined that they would play an 

important part, that they needed success because of the poverty 

of their people. They needed to lift themselves up through this 

trade initiative. And it has gone gangbusters. 

 

Now I can recite a bunch of statistics from Mexico’s trade 

liberalization experience, but here’s something very few people 

know. When we talk generally about successful third-level 

economies, we talk about the BRIC nations: Brazil, Russia, 

India, and China. We hold them up as examples of great 

growing economies outside of the industrialized first world. 

Well last year the economy of Mexico produced results twice as 

strong as the nation of Brazil. Mexico, twice as strong 

economically from a GDP percentage as Brazil, we don’t hear 

much about that. 

 

But what has happened in Mexico is an incredible indication of 

how a country that liberalizes its trade laws can benefit. Mexico 

has as a result become the car capital of North America. Mexico 

sends more cars and car parts and vehicle parts as a group into 

the US economy than Canada does now. Mexico has become 

the western headquarters for Volkswagen. Mexico exports more 

Volkswagens to North America destinations, to China and 

Southeast Asia than any other area. 

 

Mexico has seen its growth propelled by a number of free trade 

agreements. In fact in their effort to increase trade with other 

countries, Mexico has a total of 12 free trade agreements 

involving 44 different countries. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 

my research might be wrong. I believe that Mexico has 

probably got about 20 free trade agreements now. But they have 

utilized that form of opportunity to transform their economy. 

And we’re finding Mexico as one of the bright lights of the free 

trade world simply because of the results that we have seen 

accrue to that economy as a result of this very deliberate 

undertaking. 

 

Since Mexico began trade liberalization in the early 1990s, its 

trade with the world has risen rapidly, with exports increasing 

more rapidly than imports. Mexico’s exports to all countries 

increased 475 per cent between 1994 and 2011. That resulted in 

$350 billion worth of activity. We could learn something from 

Mexico and the experience that they’ve had as a result of their 

free trade undertakings. 

 

Now if Chicken Little were alive today, he would best be 

represented by quotes from former Premier Roy Romanow. We 

have about three pages of quotes here that I’m going to share 

with the House today because this would indicate the kind of 

mentality that existed at the time of the North American free 

trade conversation. “Mr. Romanow called the trade deal a 

‘betrayal’ of the resource interests of western Canada.” That 

was quoted in the Toronto Star in October 1988. Mr. Romanow 

said, “We’re never again going to have a Canadian policy for 

oil and natural gas.” Never again. 

 

. . . ‘the free trade deal places in jeopardy the essence of 

Canada.’ [He said] There are fundamental differences 

between Canada and the U.S. but the trade deal ‘puts these 

differences at risk’ and ‘will impose sooner or later the 

American dream. That’s not the Canadian dream.’ 

 

[16:00] 

 

And he said: 

 

This in our judgement is the first step of a form of 

economic union. It’s a union with a foreign country whose 

basic rationale and operation is that of a marketplace, 

market-driven economy only. 

 

What a shame. What a shame. You know he said further in 

Hansard, June 23rd, 1988: 

 

. . . I say to the people of Saskatchewan, mark my words, 

if you like the kind of society that we’ve built, understand 

that we have built it because we’ve had the constitutional 

authority to do it and the political parties with a will to do 

it. Understand that if you want that society sometimes 

built in the future again so that we can be great again, 

understand that section 6 in the free trade deal raise major 

risks which 10 or 15 years from now may make this 

province and this country a satellite to the Americans — 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3987 

as I say, not the worst fate that could befall us, but not the 

Canadian fate. 

 

I think history, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has proven the former 

premier wrong. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve used up my time, and I know there 

are others yet who want to participate in this debate. But I do 

want to conclude by referring to our motion here as read into 

the record by the Premier earlier this afternoon. I noticed that it 

talks about this House supporting the agreement in principle — 

not in detail, not in specifics — in principle. I notice that the 

amendment produced by the official opposition wants more 

detail, more study, more consultation. You know, once again 

it’s kind of indicative of the NDP. They’re so process oriented 

that they’d rather make sure that the whole thing was drug out 

longer and longer and longer so we could understand all of the 

minutiae of the transaction. I think that as usual the NDP are 

more interested in process than they are in results. 

 

This is a government that is results oriented. This is a 

government that achieves results. This is a government that sets 

targets and goes after them. I alluded earlier to our plan to raise 

agricultural exports from the $11 billion level to $15 billion in a 

very aggressive time frame. 

 

You know, if you don’t set targets, it’s really hard to achieve 

increased and improved results. And so I just feel that this 

amendment put forward by the NDP is really counterproductive 

to the needs and the requirements and the benefits that will 

accrue to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I couldn’t help but notice though that they issued a press release 

saying that they were going to amend the motion and it’s titled, 

“NDP to amend motion, support European trade deal in 

principle.” That’s the same words that this motion says. It reads, 

“. . . this House supports the agreement in principle . . .” Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I don’t understand the difference. If you can 

support the amendment, you can surely support the original 

motion. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I won’t be supporting the 

amendment. I will be in full support of the motion. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to introduce a very special guest that travelled 

a long ways. He lives in the same community as I do. He’s an 

avid curler. He’s also an avid hockey player. Not as good as I 

am, but certainly he’s A for effort but a big fat F for skill. He’s 

our local high school principal. His name is Vincent Ahenakew, 

and he’s here today to visit the Assembly. 

And I’d like to make an extra effort today to recognize him and 

to welcome him to his Assembly, and to point out that I’ve got 

a very big family back home, and he’s one of my favourite 

cousins, one of the many hundreds of cousins I have. And about 

the only flaw in Vincent’s career, whether it would be sport or 

education or being the principal, is that he cheers for the Boston 

Bruins. And I remember the first time he met with the minister 

of the municipal services, which he mentioned that, isn’t that 

the fellow that cheers for the Boston Bruins? That was the first 

thing he mentioned to me. But I would ask all the members of 

the Assembly to welcome Mr. Ahenakew to his Assembly 

today. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Lakeview. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Support for Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to get up to speak to this particular motion and the amended 

motion. Progress on a trade agreement with Europe is good 

news for all Canadians, and I personally, and I know our party 

supports this agreement in principle. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Why is the member 

from Greystone on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much. Mr. Speaker, to ask 

for leave for the introduction of a guest. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

like to join the member opposite and the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. During our consultations, we were able to meet with 

Principal Ahenakew and a number of others in Ile-a-la-Crosse, 

and it was a great day. We appreciate his presence here today, 

and we just wanted to make sure that we add the government 

voice to a warm welcome for his presence in his Assembly 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Lakeview. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Support for Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. As I was saying, I’m pleased to 

stand here and support the agreement in principle that has been 



3988 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

reached with the European Union around trade, the 

comprehensive agreement. 

 

It’s important that we work together with our European 

partners. It’s also important to understand some of the changes 

that have happened over the last I guess it’s 60 years now, since 

the Second World War, as it relates to trade. All of us in Canada 

know that our role and our place in the Commonwealth was 

very much an important part of our trade internationally for 

many years. That changed quite dramatically with the North 

American Free Trade Agreement, and I’ll speak to that in a 

second. But we also need to remember that prior to that time, 

much of our economic activity in Canada came from Great 

Britain and from other members of the Commonwealth, but 

primarily Great Britain. 

 

And so one of the changes that happened in Europe when the 

European Union was created about 40 years ago was the fact 

that the trade relations for Britain were quite different than what 

we in Canada had traditionally been involved with. And so part 

of the importance of this agreement that we’re in the process of 

negotiating with Europe right now is that it will allow for the 

re-establishment of many of the Canada-Great Britain long-time 

traditional trade relationships in addition to the access to the 

markets of 28 countries and 500 million people. 

 

Now it’s quite interesting how long the Premier talked about 

NAFTA and the negotiations and things that happened there, 

because one of the differences between the discussion about 

CETA and NAFTA is that the NAFTA discussion and 

negotiation was a very open process. And as an open process it 

then did have many very detailed discussions right across the 

country, and some of those were quite acrimonious, but they 

were discussions. And so people had a pretty good 

understanding of what was in that agreement. Unfortunately 

now with this particular agreement, we still don’t have the 

details of the agreement. In the NAFTA negotiations we would 

have had contracts or clauses or things to talk about so that we 

could look at some very specific things. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

is the fundamental question today when we’re looking at the 

motion from the Premier and then our amendment. 

 

Now it was quite interesting to follow a machinery salesman — 

and I emphasize the word salesman — in his speech. And he 

didn’t attribute to where he read a great big chunk of his speech, 

but I happen to have the text in my hands. And it comes from 

the action plan of the federal government, and basically he just 

read what the federal government says about this agreement. 

 

Now it’s good information, but it’s very similar to buying 

something by looking at the brochure. And one of the ways that 

I have been trained personally as a lawyer is, yes, you look at 

the brochure. You look at the salesman’s discussion when 

you’re buying a house or when you’re buying a car or 

something else. But you also look at the detail of what you’re 

going to sign and how much money you’re going to spend. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the fundamental question 

today. The people of Saskatchewan expect every member in 

this House to do their due diligence and understand what it is 

that we will be committing for on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I say those words very specifically because 

I know that the Europeans, when they started the discussion 

about CETA, they said to the Canadian government, we’re not 

going to negotiate with just the federal government. We know 

that under the Canadian constitution, trade is an activity that is 

both federal and provincial. And so we’re not going to negotiate 

just with federal officials on this. You have to have provincial 

officials here. 

 

Now the curious thing for me today was, there must be more 

information that the provincial government has about this 

agreement than what was presented today in this Assembly, or 

there should be more information than what was presented 

today in this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, the question 

becomes, what was the role of the negotiators that 

Saskatchewan sent forward into the negotiations? I know 

there’s a joke that’s been described that when the Canadian 

team went over with the federal government and the provincial 

officials they could fill a European Airbus. When the European 

negotiators came back to Ottawa they could fill a Challenger 

jet. And so it was this kind of a sense of the Canadian team was 

a big team of people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the questions that are raised here today 

relate to that specificity or those concerns about what the text 

will actually say. And, Mr. Speaker, we have more information 

with the announcement from the Prime Minister that we had 

two months ago, but there still are quite a number of questions 

around what the actual clauses are and what specific things need 

to be negotiated over the next couple of years. 

 

Now I’d like to thank a good Saskatchewan product and a good 

Saskatchewan diplomat, Colin Robertson from Regina, who is 

now in Toronto — and he’s a former diplomat for the Canadian 

government — for some of the comments and questions that 

I’m going to raise here. But he makes the point that there’s a lot 

of give and take in what happens in any negotiation. Now what 

we do know since the comments that Colin wrote in June last 

year when things were a little bit dicey about the CETA 

negotiations is that we have answers on some questions, at least 

generally. We don’t have the specific terms, and that’s the 

question for all of us is, what are the specific terms? 

 

So we know in general idea what the patent protection for 

pharmaceuticals is, but we don’t totally know what the cost of 

that is going to be to the province or to Canadians in general. 

We’ve got some of the limits around sales of pork and beef into 

Europe, also bison. And we have some idea of what we’ve had 

to give on the cheese and dairy import sides, but we don’t know 

what the exemptions are. We don’t know what some of the very 

specific clauses are. And we all know from what’s happened 

with NAFTA over the years that that’s the area where there are 

some very specific, have been specific concerns, whether it’s 

the country of origin labelling issue or some of the other 

technical things that have been allowed with the Americans. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now one of the solutions to that in the CETA agreement, at 

least in name — we haven’t seen the text for it yet — but is 

something called the Canada-EU regulatory co-operation forum 

which will facilitate dialogue between authorities around 

regulations. And I know how crucial something like that can be 

and it goes right to the heart of the dispute resolution 

mechanisms within the CETA agreement. 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3989 

Now it may be that the Premier or the Government of 

Saskatchewan has more information about this than they’ve 

presented here and they’re not allowed to tell us. Maybe they 

could tell us at least that much. But right now what we have is, 

you know, reading basically the press release from the action 

plan of the federal government as to detail. 

 

Another question that has more specificity to it now than it did 

in June is the terms around government procurement. In other 

words, how much of our Canadian government purchasing can 

be allowed for European firms and vice versa? Now clearly 

their market is much, much bigger than ours, so we will have 

access with some of our businesses bidding into the European 

Union. So that’s a good thing. But we also then need to know 

what these terms are. 

 

Another question which I’m not sure is resolved relates to oil 

sands products and what kind of restrictions the European 

Union may place on products like that. I know it’s been a 

political issue in Europe. And clearly it will be a political issue 

for us in Western Canada because we are concerned about 

making sure our products are treated fairly on a worldwide 

standard. And that’s an area where there has been quite a bit of 

debate. So does the provincial government have detail on that? 

If they do, we’d sure like to hear about it. 

 

There are a number of issues related to financial services. And 

we know, given some of the debt issues throughout the 

European Union, that some of our Canadian protections have 

stood us in good stead over the last six, seven, eight years. Are 

there going to be changes in this agreement that affect how we 

regulate our financial services industry? That’s, I think, 

something that would be in the text. We need to know an 

answer about that. 

 

Just going back to, are we going to have similar problems like 

the COOL, like with the country of origin labelling? Because 

rules of origin can apply. And I know from some of the 

discussions over the years when I was a minister, but also as 

somebody who’s very much involved with our legislation, that 

in Europe there is a real strong concern to identify where food 

comes from and where it’s been — from the farm to the table. 

And how much, what kind of rules or regulations are going to 

be in that area? Are there things there that we will have 

difficulty with? We know that we’re trying to go back and 

re-establish some of that. But what are some of the specific 

terms around that? 

 

Now ultimately all of these general principles will have 

exemptions and it’s often the exemptions that are the parts that 

are the most difficult to understand and interpret, and it’s where 

there’s the wiggle room on both sides to deal with particular 

issues. 

 

Now we’ve had some pretty strong sales talk about how this 

agreement could work. I think what the public expects us as 

legislators to be is, yes, salesmen or promoters or proud 

participants in a trade deal which is beneficial for all of the 

businesses of Saskatchewan. But they also expect us to do our 

job of analyzing and making sure that we don’t end up with a 

deal that’s going to cost different parts of our community more 

than it should or more than anybody expected. 

 

And so transparency: that’s a word that we hear quite a bit 

about, but we don’t get much of it from the federal government, 

and I’d have to say often we’re stymied on a number of things 

provincially as well. And so on this particular motion that we 

have today, I think that the Premier may want to agree with our 

amendment because it gives him a chance to basically say, yes 

we agree with this trade deal in principle, but we want to make 

sure Saskatchewan people and Canadians are benefiting, and we 

want to see what the detail is before we rush the implementation 

of it. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s that fundamental question 

about what’s the role of the legislature as it relates to protecting 

the province of Saskatchewan and the citizens of Saskatchewan, 

the businesses of Saskatchewan, versus what’s the role of the 

legislature as the salesman for the action plan of Prime Minister 

Harper and the national government of Canada. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, there are many positive things in this 

trade deal, and I’m very supportive of us continuing and going 

ahead with it. But I say that let’s do it with due diligence. Let’s 

do it with honour to our jobs as legislators. Let’s do it in a way 

that we all can be proud of supporting something that works for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I urge the Premier and the members opposite 

to adopt our amendment to this particular motion, as it will 

reflect what I think is the Saskatchewan people’s understanding 

of the role of the legislature when we deal with international 

trade agreements. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 

honour to add the voice of Prince Albert Northcote to this 

motion. We encourage all the federal parties to support the 

implementation of the agreement in principle for the 

comprehensive economic and trade agreement, and to do so 

expeditiously. My colleagues so eloquently explained the 

positive impact this agreement will have for Saskatchewan — 

positive impacts in new markets, manufacturing, forestry, 

mining, jobs. And they went on to explain how other trade 

agreements have benefited Saskatchewan. I concur. Today I’ll 

be pointing out a little bit about the benefits closer to my own 

home constituency. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the dynamic intersect of the boreal fringe, 

with our forest and resources, and the parkland, with its rich 

agricultural land, is where you will find my constituency of 

Prince Albert . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I’d like to ask for leave 

to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Thank you. I’d like to 

introduce to their legislature two good, well four good friends 

of ours. We have Jonathan Abrametz. Just give a wave up the 

Chamber up there. And then we have Claire, and Claire just 



3990 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

started speed swimming. And when she grows up . . . She loves 

right now spending time with her grandparents, so when she 

grows up she wants to be a grandparent. And next to Claire is 

Paul. Paul, can we get a little wave? And Paul is a huge hockey 

fan. His favourite team is Team Canada. And he might have 

been a little concerned about this talk about changing rules for 

hockey with free trade that might have occurred back in the 

’80s. But thankfully, Paul, it didn’t change. And then also with 

Paul is Paul’s lovely mom, Andrea. And Andrea is a teacher up 

in Saskatoon. And I would ask all members to please welcome 

the Abrametzes to their legislature. 

 

I recognize the member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Support for Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, welcome to the 

Abrametzes. As I was saying, the dynamic intersect between the 

boreal fringe and the parkland is where you will find my home 

constituency of Prince Albert Northcote, which is located inside 

the boundaries of the city of Prince Albert. It is the reason why 

the residents of Prince Albert and indeed Saskatchewan will 

benefit. 

 

Did you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that approximately 54.5 

per cent of the total provincial land area is covered by our 

provincial forest? The rest, Mr. Speaker, is agricultural land. 

When we read the section of this agreement that discusses 

forestry, we learn that, on entry into force, elimination of all 

existing tariffs and a specific bilateral dialogue on forest 

products to facilitate regular engagement between Canadian and 

EU forestry experts. Mr. Speaker, the objective is to minimize 

potential impacts of EU measures on Canada’s exports and to 

help ensure continued access for Canadian forest products into 

the EU. 

 

Mr. Speaker, uranium is located in Saskatchewan’s North. In 

this agreement we see the opening of foreign investment in 

uranium mines. We need only to look at Cameco to find a 

corporate example of the largest industrial employer for First 

Nations in Canada. When we look at employment at our 

uranium mine sites, we see that employees and contractors 

combined make up more than 3,300 people benefiting directly 

from this industry. Of these, Mr. Speaker, 49.5 per cent are 

residents of Saskatchewan’s North, and 45.8 per cent are of 

Aboriginal ancestry. 

 

With the Canada-EU Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement, Canada, and therefore by extension Saskatchewan, 

will no longer require EU investors to first seek a Canadian 

partner in order to receive approval for uranium production 

projects. This will make Saskatchewan the most attractive 

destination in the world for EU investment in uranium mining. 

Included in this trade agreement, Mr. Speaker, is that Canada 

retains the ability to apply national security considerations in its 

approval process. Thus we learn that CETA creates an enhanced 

employment opportunity for Saskatchewan’s northern and 

Aboriginal residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is well known that Saskatchewan grows more 

food here than the people that are living here can eat. It is also a 

well-known fact that the world wants to buy what we produce. 

Mr. Speaker, as the Premier, the Agriculture minister, and my 

other colleagues so aptly pointed out, the EU is the world’s 

largest importer of agricultural and agri-food products. In 2012 

the EU imported more than $130 billion worth of agricultural 

products, including beef, pork, wheat, oats, barley, pulses, just 

to name a few. Thus, Mr. Speaker, being that Prince Albert is 

located on the parkland fringe, it is clear that this trade 

agreement will benefit Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this comprehensive trade agreement has the social 

fabric of our province and country at heart. I went online — 

which the opposition might have desired to do — but anyways I 

went online and downloaded several documents outlining and 

explaining some of the agreement. As we read through some of 

the myriad details of the agreement, I encourage all of our 

citizens to remember, and I quote from page 5 of the document 

that is located on the Government of Canada’s website about 

how CETA will benefit Saskatchewan, and I quote: 

 

As do all of Canada’s international trade agreements, 

CETA will continue to preserve policy space for activities 

that are fundamental to our social fabric. Nothing in 

CETA prevents governments from regulating in the public 

interest, including for delivering public services, providing 

preferences to Aboriginal peoples, or adopting measures to 

protect or promote Canadian culture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agreement goes on to point out how we as a 

government, a province, and a country will continue to have 

jurisdiction over the delivery of public services and measures to 

protect or promote Canadian culture. This preservation of 

policy space for cultural policies and programs at all levels of 

government is a recognition of the importance of the 

preservation and promotion of Canadian culture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Premier, the member from Swift Current, and 

our government is the first to say that growth for the sake of 

growth is not and never has been the objective of our growth 

plan. It is to improve the quality of life for all our citizens. As 

we listen to our colleagues and we delve into the details of this 

agreement, we see that indeed all Saskatchewan residents will 

have an opportunity for an improved quality of life. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion brought 

forward by the Premier. Thank you. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

didn’t plan on rising in this debate, but I’ve listened with 

interest to comments from members on both sides, and I have to 

say, Mr. Speaker, that the position of the opposition makes no 

sense. 

 

They put out a press release saying that . . . Here, I’ll read it to 

you, Mr. Speaker, “NDP to amend motion, support European 

trade deal in principle.” Okay. Well that’s fair enough, Mr. 

Speaker. What’s the motion itself say? “That this House 



November 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3991 

supports the agreement in principle for the Comprehensive 

Economic and Trade Agreement . . .” It literally makes no 

sense. It’s internally contradictory, their position. 

 

And on top of this, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the speech from 

the member from Regina Lakeview. What the member from 

Regina Lakeview essentially said in his speech is that he’s 

smarter than the entirety of the group supporting this — the 

Canadian Pork Council, the Stock Growers Association, the 

Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, the Canola Council of 

Canada, the wheat growers, the chambers of commerce. Go 

down the list, Mr. Speaker. What the member opposite is 

saying: he is way smarter than them. He knows way more than 

they do and therefore they support the agreement in principle, 

but not the agreement in principle. It literally makes no sense. 

 

So what I’m going to do, Mr. Speaker, is encourage the 

members opposite to support the main motion and vote for it, 

and I hope they do. And we’re going to have that vote shortly, 

so thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the House is the 

amendment proposed by the Leader of the Opposition: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting all words after 

the words “European Union” and the following be 

substituted therefor: 

 

and call on all legislators to undertake the appropriate due 

diligence to review and assess the agreement and support 

its swift implementation if it is confirmed to be in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 16:33 until 16:37.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 8] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Belanger Chartier McCall 

Nilson Sproule  

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 41] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Duncan Draude Krawetz 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Harpauer Huyghebaert Doherty 

Norris Reiter Heppner 

Harrison Tell Weekes 

Elhard Hart Bradshaw 

Bjornerud Brkich Hutchinson 

Makowsky Ottenbreit Campeau 

Wilson Marchuk Kirsch 

Michelson Doke Merriman 

Jurgens Steinley Hickie 

Lawrence Tochor Moe 

Parent Docherty  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 8; 

those opposed, 41. 

 

The Speaker: — The amendment is lost. The motion before the 

House presented by the Premier is: 

 

That this House supports the agreement in principle for the 

Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) 

reached by the Government of Canada and the European 

Union and calls on all federal parties to support the swift 

implementation of the agreement. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 16:40 until 16:41.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. Close the 

doors. 

 

[Yeas — 41] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Duncan Draude Krawetz 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Harpauer Huyghebaert Doherty 

Norris Reiter Heppner 

Harrison Tell Weekes 

Elhard Hart Bradshaw 

Bjornerud Brkich Hutchinson 

Makowsky Ottenbreit Campeau 

Wilson Marchuk Kirsch 



3992 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2013 

Michelson Doke Merriman 

Jurgens Steinley Hickie 

Lawrence Tochor Moe 

Parent Docherty  

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 8] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Belanger Chartier McCall 

Nilson Sproule  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 41; those 

opposed, 8. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 

the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada 

and the Leaders of the Opposition parties in the House of 

Commons. 

 

The Speaker: — It is moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 

the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada 

and the Leaders of the Opposition parties in the House of 

Commons. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 

a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:44.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3963 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3963 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3963 

  Norris ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3963, 3987 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3964 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3964 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 3964, 3979 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3964 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3979 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3987 

  The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor) ......................................................................................................................................... 3989 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3964 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Home First/Quick Response Pilot Program 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3964 

 Community Supports Refugees 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3965 

 Groundbreaking for New Saskatoon Mosque 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3965 

 Seniors Awards Presented at Gala 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3965 

 Progress Made in Housing Program 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3965 

 First Nations and Potash Company Sign Opportunities Agreement 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3966 

 Treatment of Issues 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3966 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care Conditions and Staffing 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3966 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3966 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3967 

 Saskatchewan Transportation Company Bus Routes 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3968 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3968 

 Funding for Francophone Education 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3969 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3969 

 Provision of Educational Facilities 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3970 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3970 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3971 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Wilson ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 3971 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 903 — St. Thomas More College Amendment Act, 2013 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3971 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Support for Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3971 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3975 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3975 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3977 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3978 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3983 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3984 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3987 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3989 



 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3990 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 3991 

 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 3991 

  Harrison (transmittal motion) ............................................................................................................................................... 3992 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




