




















































Hansard: October 30, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 5A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3735 

 October 30, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has requested leave 

for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly and 

our assembled guests today, it’s my pleasure to introduce and 

welcome some special guests of our own to the province of 

Saskatchewan and to our Legislative Building. 

 

I’d like us to welcome His Excellency Charles Murto, the 

ambassador of Finland to Canada; his spouse, Mrs. Ritva 

Murto; and with them I’m delighted to introduce our newest 

honorary consul in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chad 

Eggerman, who is representing Finland to this province. Mr. 

Eggerman is a resident of Saskatoon at this time. 

 

This is Ambassador Murto’s first official visit to our province, 

Mr. Speaker. And while in Saskatchewan, His Excellency will 

meet with the Lieutenant Governor, with representatives of the 

government, Crown corporations, the Petroleum Technology 

Research Centre, the University of Regina, and the private 

sector. 

 

And as two northern jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, it’s safe to say 

that the people of Saskatchewan have a lot in common with the 

people of Finland, something that probably goes beyond hockey 

and cold weather, and it’s a relationship, Mr. Speaker, that 

actually dates back some time. Our relationship is really quite 

strong. 

 

Historically Saskatchewan has been connected to the people of 

Finland through immigration. Immigrants came from Finland, 

settling the land as early as 1887. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

an area of Saskatchewan still near the towns of Esterhazy and 

Rocanville close to the Manitoba border where to this day 

residents still refer to that area as new Finland. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and Finnish companies are 

working together to build strong relationships through 

commerce. Mr. Speaker, I’m eager to continue to strengthen the 

bonds that we share. We had an excellent conversation today. 

We enjoyed the company of His Excellency and his spouse and 

Mr. Eggerman, and we look forward to doing continued work 

with the embassy and with the great country of Finland. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all members of the 

legislature to make our guests welcome. Would our guests 

please rise for our welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I would like to join with the Provincial 

Secretary in welcoming His Excellency Charles Murto along 

with his partner, Ms. Ritva Murto, and honorary consul, Mr. 

Chad Eggerman. It’s wonderful to see His Excellency here in 

the Assembly today as well as Mr. Eggerman. It was good to 

chat with the honorary consul on the Throne Speech day and the 

festivities attached to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Secretary is correct. Our ties in the 

province do go back a long way when it comes to Saskatchewan 

and Finland. We think of many communities throughout the 

province that were settled by people from Nordic countries, 

including Finland. And so the ties are strong there socially. 

They’re also strong in an economic sense, and I think there’s a 

lot we can learn from one another, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In Saskatchewan over the recent while we’ve had a big 

discussion about the future of our education system. And I 

know one of the examples that is held up as a bright light is 

Finland’s in terms of what the country has accomplished. 

 

So I think there’s a lot we can learn from each other, Mr. 

Speaker, and I would ask all members again to welcome His 

Excellency and honorary consul to the Assembly today and 

wish them all the best in their meetings over the next while. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, I have 

the honour of introducing two very special groups of people 

today. And not in the order of importance, but I’m going to 

choose the larger group that are with us today on the floor of the 

Assembly. 

 

Today I have the honour of introducing some important groups, 

a group of people who are going to be taking on the very 

important work of the citizen consultation team that are going 

to be developing our province-wide disability strategy. Joining 

us today are the two team Co-Chairs: first of all, Amy Alsop 

from Regina is the citizen Co-Chair, and Daryl Stubel who is 

the executive director of the office of disability issues for the 

ministry. The other members of the team are Merv Bender, 

Larry Carlson, Roger Carver, Dawn Desautels, Carole Eaton, 

Lynette Griffin, Charmaine Landrie, Andrea Lavallee, Michael 

Lavis, Marie Lindenschmitt, Laurie McSymytz, Eugene Paquin, 

Shaun Soonias, and Ian Wilkinson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this team is meeting for the very first time today 

to start preparing for the province-wide consultation. I am 

honoured to be the lead minister on this file and I’ll be 

supported by the Legislative Secretary for disabilities, the MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Regina Coronation 

Park. Other ministries that are participating in the process are 



3736 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

Health, Education, Advanced Education, Government 

Relations, Economy, Finance, Justice, and the Attorney 

General. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to making 

Saskatchewan the very best place in Canada to live for people 

with a disability. We’re going to take the time to do this right 

by hearing from as many people as possible on this important 

issue, and I’m asking all members of the Legislative Assembly 

to welcome their guests to their Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have the honour today of introducing 

special guests who have dedicated their lives to making life 

better for Saskatchewan children and youth. Joining us today 

from the Saskatchewan Foster Families Association is the 

executive director, Deb Davies. Next to Deb is Tony Nagy who 

is a dedicated and caring foster parent who lives right here in 

Regina, and Kevin Harris who is the Chair of the provincial and 

the Regina foster parents board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Nagy family has opened their hearts and their 

home to foster children for four years, one of which is now 

playing football for the Notre Dame Hounds on full scholarship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week, Foster Family Week was celebrated 

here in our province, and next year the Saskatchewan Foster 

Families Association will be celebrating 40 years, a 40th 

anniversary. Foster families make a huge difference in the lives 

of our children in our province. In addition to looking after 

them on a daily basis, they are opening up their homes so they 

have a place to call home. 

 

I’d like to thank Mr. Nagy and all foster families for all the 

work they do. On behalf of a grateful province, thank you very 

much and welcome to your Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join the minister in welcoming these people to our legislature. 

It’s very important work. It sounds like they’re embarking on, 

especially the citizen’s consultation team, heading out to do a 

lot of consultations on a very, very important issue. 

 

We agree with the province. This should be the very best 

province for people with disabilities to live. And we’ll work as 

hard as we can, and we really want to strive for common sense 

solutions. So that’s very, very important. So we wish you all the 

best in your consultations. And on behalf of the opposition, we 

want to welcome you to your legislature. 

 

As well I’ll take this moment as well to recognize the foster 

families in the gallery, the Nagy family and the good work that 

they do. This is also very critical work to make sure that our 

youth and children in Saskatchewan have safe places they can 

call home, that they know they’ll be well cared for. 

 

I want to especially acknowledge Deb Davies, the executive 

director of Foster Families. The good work that she’s been 

doing has gone a long way here in Saskatchewan. So thank you, 

Deb and thank you to the Nagy family. Thank you. Welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, seated in the west gallery today is a good friend of 

mine and of many members on this side of the House, Mr. Jeff 

Sturzuk. 

 

Jeff is a long-time friend of mine who now unfortunately lives 

in Calgary and cheers for the Flames. But he is a business 

owner, a businessman, and his wife, Jody, and their two girls, as 

I said, do reside in Calgary although he is still a very strong 

supporter of our Premier and of our party. 

 

I have the long history of Jeff of being a roommate at one time. 

I was in his wedding party. We worked together. And he has 

found himself quite often at the losing end of our golf games, 

Mr. Speaker. So it’s a pleasure to see Jeff. His business allows 

him to come back to the province that he was born and bred in 

and raised in. And we’re just delighted to see him here today, 

and welcome to the Legislative Assembly, Jeff. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister and the member from Saskatoon Centre 

in welcoming the folks, especially from the Foster Families 

Association. 

 

And in particular I’d like to say a fond hello and a thank you to 

Tony Nagy. I’m not surprised to hear that he’s a tremendous 

foster parent because he was once upon a time a tremendous 

hockey coach, Mr. Speaker. And for whatever . . . sort of 

claimed any kind of talent in the hockey arena that I might’ve 

had, he had a lot to do with it. We had a lot of fun time down at 

the Kinsmen Arena and rinks throughout the city.  

 

But it doesn’t surprise me, Mr. Speaker, that Tony Nagy’s a 

tremendous foster parent because indeed he was a tremendous 

coach and still is a tremendous member of the North Central 

community and a good neighbour. So it’s really good to see 

Tony Nagy here today at his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 

you and through you, it gives me great pleasure to be able to 

introduce my wife, Larissa, who is in the gallery. She’s no 

stranger to the House; she’s a hard-working public servant of 

ours here in the provincial government. 

 

And she also has with her our new son Nickson Walter 

Steinley. He’s five and a half months old today and he’s pretty 

good up there. I’m not sure if he’s going to heckle very much 

because his dad doesn’t, so I don’t think he will. So he’s been a 

perfect baby so far, and he’s a growing concern. He’s 21 

pounds now, Mr. Speaker. And he’s a pretty smiley little baby, 

and we’re very blessed to have him in our life. And my wife 

does a wonderful job being his mother and looking after me as 

well. So together I’d like to welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly, and I don’t think it will be the last time they’ll be 

here. So welcome, honey, and Nickson. 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3737 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to welcome Deb Davies. Deb Davies is a 

resident of Fairview, a long-term resident, and a foster for over 

30 years. And I just wanted to acknowledge her. And she’s also 

a very good friend of mine, so if we could all welcome her to 

her legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for reasonable funding so all 

Saskatchewan students can do well. And we know students who 

need support from educational assistants and other resources are 

not getting this support because of chronic underfunding. New 

Canadian students are often not receiving as much support as 

they need for learning English. And we know the Government 

of Saskatchewan has chronically underfunded student support, 

and their agenda must change to reflect the real priorities of 

Saskatchewan schools today. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: cause the government to immediately 

increase financial support for all Saskatchewan students, 

to include resources to limit class sizes, to provide 

resources for students with special needs, to support 

English as an additional language, and to provide more 

support for Aboriginal education. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud owners in their communities. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent to own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our province in the beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many northern residents. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of replacing the gym at Sacred Heart Community 

School. Of course there’s a temporary gym that has been 

cobbled together by the school division in conjunction with the 

province, but as with any other school, Mr. Speaker, the 

students need a permanent gym. They need a gym like any 

other school in the province. 

 

And Sacred Heart Community School is a growing school. 

There’s 450-plus students there. There are, 75 per cent of those 

students are First Nations and Métis, Mr. Speaker. It is the 

largest school in North Central Regina and it’s a literacy leader. 

They take reading very seriously, and it’s something that the 

whole school has gotten behind. And of course, Mr. Speaker, as 

a matter of basic fairness and common sense, Sacred Heart 

Community School needs a gym. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

To cause the Sask Party provincial government to 

immediately commit to the replacement of the gymnasium 

of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

This petition is signed by citizens from the city of Regina. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Equal Justice for All Reopens 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last year 

the Saskatoon non-profit group Equal Justice for All, a 

charitable advocacy organization that helps people with 

mediation and appeal decisions by government agencies, 

particularly Social Services, had to close their doors when the 

government decided they would no longer provide them with 

funding. 

 

I’m happy to say that on October 18th this very important 

organization was able to reopen their doors once again, thanks 

to the support of the community, especially donations from 

SaskTel, the Roman Catholic Diocese of Saskatoon, the Holy 

Spirit church, and the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Before they were shut down last year, Equal Justice for All was 

helping with an average of 100 cases a month, but their funding 

was cut because they were told there were enough organizations 

in the community already doing the same advocacy work as 

Equal Justice for All. 

 

Mr. Speaker, currently Equal Justice for All is completely 

staffed by volunteers, many of whom live in poverty themselves 

and have one or more disabilities. Roberta Fehr, the executive 

director of Equal Justice for All says, and I quote, “I think 

people really need to be able to communicate with somebody 

who has that lived experience, that has gone through what 

we’ve gone through or similar, and not be judged.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask my fellow members of this legislature to 

congratulate the staff and the board at Equal Justice for All in 

their valuable struggle to keep their doors open so they can help 

and support those in need in Saskatoon. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 



3738 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

Developing a Disability Strategy 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to inform all members that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has taken another important step towards making 

this province the best place to live in Canada for people with 

disabilities. 

 

This morning we announced the 15 members of the citizen 

consultation team that will lead the development of a 

comprehensive disability strategy for the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, those 15 team members were 

selected from more than 100 applications submitted by 

members of the public. Our province’s disability strategy will 

focus on the priority areas specified in our government’s plan 

for growth. Other priorities may emerge during the consultation 

process. 

 

On that subject, the members of the citizen consultation team 

are getting to work right away on developing the public 

consultation process and are in fact holding a daylong meeting 

today here at the legislature. Preliminary plans call for a number 

of consultation methods to be utilized, including community 

forums to be held across the province next spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is growing and we need to ensure 

that everyone is able to share in the opportunities created by 

that growth. We’ll do that by hearing from as many people and 

as many different viewpoints as possible in the development of 

our disability strategy. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatchewan Wearable Art Gala 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Wearable Art 

Gala took place this past weekend at the Mercedes-Benz 

showroom in Saskatoon. The event was organized by the Jack 

Millikin Centre as a fundraiser for their sustainable build of an 

all-season facility on the Ness Creek site. It will be a green 

facility for cultural and ecological activity in northern 

Saskatchewan, and to nurture and steward cultural land use. 

 

The gala was the brainchild of Lindsay Embree, a Saskatoon 

artist who has submitted pieces to wearable art shows around 

the world. She decided it was time to host such a show in 

Saskatoon. One of her pieces, a dress made from rejection 

letters she has received throughout her career as an artist, was 

featured in the first part of the fashion show at the gala. 

 

The gala showcased artists from around the world who had 

been invited to submit works of wearable art. The pieces were 

then modelled by dancers from the Alma Flamenco Dance 

Studio accompanied by live flamenco musicians as they 

gracefully and powerfully displayed piece after piece of 

imaginative, absurdly delightful, wearable art. The wearable art 

was juried and the winners took home cash prizes donated by 

Lindsay, her husband, Arnfinn Prugger, and PotashCorp. All 

other monies raised from the evening will be put toward the 

building of the Jack Milliken Centre. It was a spectacular 

combination of live music, dance, and art delighting the eyes 

and ears of all present. 

Saskatoon Nutana constituent Carlie Letts did an outstanding 

job organizing the event and many fellow constituents 

contributed as volunteers. Please join me in congratulating all 

the volunteers who made the gala a successful and memorable 

event. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Thank You to Foster Families 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise in the House today to continue our recognition of those who 

support our foster children across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week we honoured the province’s many 

dedicated foster families during Foster Families Week. And 

today we’re honoured to have with us a member of the 

Saskatchewan Foster Families Association and also the Nagys, 

a very caring foster parent family right here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Foster Families Association 

exists to support and encourage foster families through 

education and advocacy, helping to create healthy homes, 

positive environments, and brighter futures for children and 

youth in care across our province. Foster families make a huge 

difference in the lives of children and families they serve by 

providing the most important thing of all, a place to call home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we continue to honour and recognize those who 

support and foster our province’s children and youth, I ask all 

members to join me in expressing our most sincere appreciation 

to the Saskatchewan Foster Families Association and to our 

province’s many foster families for taking on these crucial 

roles. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Girl Guides Youth Recognition Ceremony 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last Sunday, 

I had the privilege of bringing greetings at the Girl Guides 

Youth Recognition ceremony right here in Regina. Mr. Speaker, 

what an honour it was to recognize the various 

accomplishments of these bright and promising girl guides. 

 

Young women from across the province were recognized at 

Sunday’s event. And the awards included the Canada Cord 

Award, Chief Commissioner Bronze Award, Chief 

Commissioner Silver Award, Chief Commissioner Gold Award, 

Commonwealth Award, the Duke of Edinburgh Bronze Award, 

Duke of Edinburgh Silver Award, the Cynthia O’Connor 

Scholarship, and the Mildred Baldwin Scholarship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I heard about the young women learning about 

global and cultural awareness, career exploration, science, 

technology, business, and the arts. While learning about 

cyberbullying, self-esteem, and body image, the Girl Guides are 

also developing the skills required to stand up and speak out 

and take action on issues that matter to them most. The 

knowledge and skills and the value of being part of Girl Guides 

will undoubtedly help these young women face the challenges 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3739 

and tough decisions that life brings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly applaud 

the Girl Guide membership recognition awards ceremony and 

the Girl Guides organization for the very important work they 

do. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Trafalgar Day Gala 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

Saturday evening, the member from Wood River and I had the 

privilege of attending the Trafalgar Day Gala held at HMCS 

[Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship] Queen, the Royal Canadian 

Navy’s establishment here in Regina. 

 

Led by her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, 

the dinner celebrated the decisive victory of Great Britain’s 

Admiral Horatio Nelson over a larger combined force of French 

and Spanish warships off Cape Trafalgar during the Napoleonic 

wars 200 years ago. But much more importantly it focused 

community attention on the present-day contribution of 

Canada’s navy whose regular force and reserve members work 

hard in challenging locations all over the world to keep our 

country free. 

 

Proceeds from the dinner will be given to Wounded Warriors 

Canada. This is the non-profit organization that assists injured 

military personnel from Canada and now the United Kingdom, 

the United States, and Australia who have returned from 

deployment in troubled areas, from Bosnia to Afghanistan. 

Many Saskatchewan residents will recall the fantastic retreats 

provided to these veterans in beautiful Nipawin over the last 

two summers. 

 

I want to close by thanking and congratulating Lieutenant 

Commander Linda Mushanski, commanding officer of HMCS 

Queen, and the splendid team of naval reservists along with 

friends of the navy members whose exemplary work made the 

Trafalgar Day Gala a truly great community event. Hats off to 

Steve Smedley and Ken McCaw, Carolynne Kobelsky, Scott 

Dyson, Wrahnda Eichhorn, Alaura Campbell, Don Lindsay, 

Rebecca Miller, Gordon Chan, and Katherine Pitka. You did an 

outstanding job. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Regina Youth for Christ Hope Dinner 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 

pleasure of attending the Regina Youth for Christ Hope Dinner 

2013 at Conexus Arts Centre along with the member from 

Yorkton. Close to 500 guests gathered at the dinner to hear 

about the work of YFC [Youth for Christ] in Regina. 

 

Originally Youth for Christ reached out to youth through 

community outreach and school programs. Recognizing the 

need for young people to have a place to call home, Youth for 

Christ Regina rented a U-turn home for 15- to 18-year-old 

youth in December of 2009. In the fall of 2010, a house for 

youth aged 12 to 16 in the care of Social Services was opened. 

In 2011 a second U-turn home was opened in Moose Jaw, and a 

home for youth aged 12 to 16 in the care of Social Services was 

opened in The Battlefords. In 2012 with the help of Leon 

Friesen of Westridge Construction and many supporters, the 

Regina U-turn home moved from a rental unit into their very 

own brand new house. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of Youth for Christ’s housing provides young 

people a place to live, a place to learn, and a place to be loved, 

and they recognize the hope and potential in every young 

person. 

 

We were also inspired by a message from Geordon Rendle, a 

former Saanich police officer now president of YFC 

International, to reach out to the youth of our city, province, and 

country. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in recognizing 

Regina Youth For Christ and the crucial work they do for young 

people across this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Health Care Conditions and Staffing 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Suzanne Stewart is a retired 

registered nurse. She’s worked for 36 years in hospitals and in 

care facilities throughout Saskatchewan — places like Regina, 

Saskatoon, Meadow Lake, Prince Albert, Swift Current, and 

Yorkton. And she had this to say, Mr. Speaker: “I have never 

had to work in a filthy and unsafe environment. The standard of 

care and level of sanitation was always maintained.” But she’s 

been retired a few years, Mr. Speaker, and her recent 

experiences have left her deeply concerned that our health care 

system is getting worse. 

 

So my question is for the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how can he 

explain to Suzanne why our health care system is getting 

worse? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. One 

of the first things that this government did when it took office in 

2007 was consult with patients around the province, Mr. 

Speaker, and front-line staff through the Patient First Review, 

Mr. Speaker. That indicated that there were a number of areas 

that the citizens of this province wanted to have addressed, Mr. 

Speaker, including the longest wait times in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province will see that this 

government has made significant progress in that area, Mr. 

Speaker, as well as staffing. That was one of the concerns that 

was raised, Mr. Speaker, and the appropriate level of care that 

we can provide. Because we had a horrible shortage in staffing, 

Mr. Speaker, when it came to acute and long-term care 

facilities, whether that be RNs [registered nurse], Mr. Speaker. 

We knew we were 800 short in this province, Mr. Speaker. We 

not only did hire 800 but an additional 200 over that, Mr. 



3740 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

Speaker. 

 

Is there more work to be done? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. But I 

think this government has been able to demonstrate, on the 

operational side as well as on the capital spending side, 

unprecedented investments into health care in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Suzanne Stewart is clear that our 

health care system has been getting worse in recent years. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll take the word of an RN with 36 years of 

experience over the words of this government any day. In her 

last two times in the hospital as a patient, Suzanne says the 

hospital was “filthy dirty.” And she doesn’t blame the front-line 

staff. She says the staff are “stretched beyond their capacities 

due to cutbacks.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, how does the Premier explain health care facilities 

that are described as filthy dirty? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite I don’t believe has indicated 

which facility he’s referring to, Mr. Speaker. We’d be certainly 

willing to look into any types of those concerns because we do 

know that our front-line staff, Mr. Speaker, work to ensure that 

we have hygienic, safe environments, not only for the patients 

but as well for the front-line staff, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

you know, we certainly would want to address this particular 

concern. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, for anyone I think to say that the health care 

system has gotten worse in the last two years, Mr. Speaker, I 

would only have them talk to somebody who only two years 

ago or four years ago or seven years ago, under the former 

government, would have been waiting more than 18 months for 

surgery, Mr. Speaker, in this province. There were nearly 3,000 

people in our province at one time, under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party], waiting longer than 18 months for surgery, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there is more work to do, but we’ve 

made significant progress in these areas in the last six years. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the situation was so bad for 

Suzanne, and her surroundings were so unsanitary, that her 

family actually took it upon themselves, Mr. Speaker, to do the 

cleaning when she was in the hospital as a patient. The family, 

Mr. Speaker, actually had to clean their loved one’s hospital 

room and their bathroom. 

 

It would be shocking, Mr. Speaker, if we weren’t hearing other 

stories like this. Just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we heard of the 

Phillips family who actually had to hire a private care provider 

to go into the hospital to ensure that their mother received a 

basic level of services because of short-staffing. Suzanne 

Stewart, Mr. Speaker, says the government has “made a system 

so lean there isn’t enough staff to do the basics in cleaning and 

in basic nursing care.” 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: how does he think 

this amounts to fairness for families? My question is, how does 

he think this amounts to fairness for patients, for safety for 

patients and dignity for patients? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we have made, as the member will know, we have 

made unprecedented investments into the health care system. 

The health care budget, Mr. Speaker, for our health regions is 

up 46 per cent in just the last six years, Mr. Speaker, which has 

resulted in additional staff in every single area, Mr. Speaker, 

working within the health care field, whether that be nurses or 

other front-line providers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I notice that the member opposite doesn’t refer 

specifically to the facility that he’s speaking about. Obviously if 

there are concerns where family members are having to clean 

the room, Mr. Speaker, we’d want to look into that, Mr. 

Speaker. But we know that the Leader of the Opposition has a 

tendency to come into this House and not provide all of the 

information, Mr. Speaker, when he brings up cases. But in a 

case like the member opposite raises, we’d be certainly pleased 

to look into that, Mr. Speaker. We believe that we have made 

significant progress when it comes to all front-line staff, Mr. 

Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan I believe know that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m somewhat surprised 

that the minister says he wants to look into Suzanne’s 

complaints because Suzanne wrote to the Premier on two 

occasions and received form-letter replies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So let’s be clear. Yesterday we talked about and heard from the 

Phillips family who had to hire a private care provider, Mr. 

Speaker, in order to ensure that their mom received basic help 

in the hospital for going to the bathroom and receiving her 

meals. Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from the province’s nurses 

who say they are very fearful because of short-staffing and 

because of this government’s drive to cut corners. And now, 

Mr. Speaker, we hear from Suzanne Stewart, a retired RN who 

has raised alarm bells about her recent experience as a patient in 

the health care system. And she says it’s getting worse. She 

says our hospitals are filthy, in her words, again largely because 

of short-staffing, Mr. Speaker, and this government’s drive to 

cut corners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: has he heard enough, 

Mr. Speaker, to recognize that the concerns in the health care 

system are alarming? I know this is a joke for the House Leader 

on the government side, holding up his iPad. But this is serious, 

Mr. Speaker. Has the Premier heard enough to recognize that 

the situation is alarming and that their drive to cut corners, their 

drive, Mr. Speaker, to have short-staffing, is hurting patients 

here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3741 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what the 

record will show, Mr. Speaker, is that the health budget in this 

province is up 42 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in the last six years, all 

within a balanced budget. Health regions alone, Mr. Speaker, up 

46 per cent. Mr. Speaker, $1 billion in increased funding to the 

health regions over the last six years. And the member opposite 

will know — whether we’re speaking of RNs, whether we’re 

speaking of LPNs [licensed practical nurse], whether we’re 

speaking of providers who are represented by the unions of 

CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees], SEIU-West 

[Service Employees International Union], Mr. Speaker, or the 

other provider unions, Mr. Speaker — will know that all of 

those numbers have been up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we took staffing issues very seriously, Mr. 

Speaker, for the fact that we knew that in five years of the last 

NDP government we lost 174 doctors, Mr. Speaker. We lost 

nearly 500 nurses, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we lost 52 

facilities across this province, Mr. Speaker. We have worked 

very hard to dig ourselves out of a deficit, Mr. Speaker, of 

health care funding by the members previous to this 

government, and we’ll continue to do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Proposed Closure of Distribution Centre 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — We learned yesterday that Regina will 

lose 276 jobs as a result of the Sears distribution centre closing 

up shop here and moving to Calgary after decades of operations 

here in Regina. Our thoughts are obviously with the families 

who are affected by this closure and for whom this is very 

tough news. 

 

My question to the minister: when did his government learn that 

Sears was considering moving to Calgary and what did it do to 

make the case for keeping these jobs here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 

government learned in recent days . . . I’m not exactly sure. I 

can get clarification in terms of that for the member, when we 

learned of the news of Sears making the decision to close out 

these positions. 

 

Any time, any time that there is a loss of jobs in Saskatchewan, 

our government is concerned about it. That goes without saying. 

And that’s precisely the reason why we deploy the rapid 

response team to talk to those individuals as soon as we can 

possibly arrange it, to talk about other opportunities that might 

be available to them. 

 

We will be contacting Sears as well to see whether there’s any 

possibility . . . I don’t know that because we haven’t made that 

contact yet. However we’ll be doing that in addition to other 

steps that we’ll be taking to try and help. Mr. Speaker, we do 

know though that this is not going to happen for a period of 

time, so it does give some time for these people to transition to 

other positions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question I’ve been 

hearing repeatedly since the announcement, and the question 

I’m relaying to the minister here this morning . . . or this 

afternoon is this: why did Sears choose Calgary instead of 

Regina? And if Sears was interested in a new distribution 

centre, why did this government’s Global Transportation Hub 

fail to attract it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, those are all good questions 

and that is exactly what we will be posing to Sears, whether or 

not there’s any opportunity to take a look at the Global 

Transportation Hub. 

 

Businesses make decisions that they feel are in their best 

interests. And it’s unfortunate any time that it results in a loss of 

employment for people here in Saskatchewan, and we 

understand that. And we certainly are mindful of the concerns 

of the individuals that will be losing their jobs as a result of this 

decision that was made by a private company. We will be 

working with them to transition as quickly as possible to other 

jobs. In the meantime the rapid response team will be talking to 

them. 

 

We do have some time, as the member probably knows. I 

understand it’s about five or six months or perhaps even a little 

longer than that before this move takes place so it does give I 

think our administration an opportunity to talk to Sears and see 

whether there’s any opportunity. I don’t know that, but we will 

certainly endeavour to find out. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Involvement by Senators in Provincial Elections 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, when the Premier called on 

Justin Trudeau to return the speaking fees he had made while 

serving as a Member of Parliament, he tweeted, “I make no 

apologies for asking questions about accountability.” I agree, 

Mr. Speaker, and I have questions myself about accountability 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We’re happy to see this government and its political party 

finally agree with Saskatchewan families and the New 

Democratic Party about the need to abolish the Senate. It’s long 

overdue and what’s also long overdue is the end of 

campaigning by unelected, unaccountable, partisan senators in 

our provincial elections. 

 

Will the Premier or the designate on that side agree that along 

with repealing The Senate Nominee Election Act we should also 

be looking to safeguard against senator interference — on the 

taxpayers’ dollar, no less — in our provincial elections? 

 

The Speaker: — This is a party matter. There is no 

representatives on the government side dealing with party 

matters. Therefore this question is invalid. 

 

I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this question pertains to The 

Election Act, which is clearly in the purview of that 



3742 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

government. Senator Pamela Wallin’s winter 2012 newsletter 

contains a glowing report, complete with pictures, about the 

2011 election in Saskatchewan. Senator Wallin states, “I spent a 

few days in Saskatoon with many of our MLAs and candidates. 

It was a high energy campaign and it generated a lot of 

interest.” 

 

Now Lord knows she wasn’t campaigning for her own election 

as a senator. No, Mr. Speaker, she was campaigning for that 

party opposite. Moreover Senator Wallin billed the Canadian 

taxpayer for expenses during the campaign, claiming $6,700 for 

her travels . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Again, this question is regarding party 

politics. The Senate is not represented on the floor of this 

Assembly, and this question and series are out of order. 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Proclamation of Workplace Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s been 

one year, five months and 14 days since this Assembly passed 

legislation that significantly increased the fines for employers 

that violate occupational health and safety rules. My question 

for the Minister of Labour: why has the government not 

proclaimed section 24 of that legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

earlier the member opposite was highly critical about lack of 

consultation, wanting us to postpone and delay things. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going ahead with consultation. We’ve got a 

number of advisory committees that are under way. We’re 

optimistic that this proclamation will come about in the early 

new year. 

 

We are very concerned about the safety of all of the workers in 

our province. We have an unacceptably high injury rate. We 

make no secret of that, and we intend to develop and implement 

a regime that will give us a substantial reduction in the injury 

rate and hold people accountable for things that take place in 

our workforce. That process is under way, and the indication I’d 

like to give the members opposite is that it will take place likely 

early in the new year. And we look forward to them supporting 

everything that we’re doing in that regard because I’m sure we 

all have a common purpose in that area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the Minister of 

Labour had to say on May 8th, 2012, and I quote, “These 

changes will serve as a significant deterrent to ensure that 

people will follow the Act.” They pledged to implement these 

changes last fall, but when they proclaimed it, they left out 

section 24 which increases the fines for employers liable for 

workers’ serious injury or death from 300,0000 to $1.5 million. 

My question to the minister: why has he failed to deliver on 

what he has correctly called a significant deterrent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite across and myself both agree on the importance of 

workplace safety. We both agree on the importance of some 

significant deterrents. We need to get our regulatory regime in 

place. We are in the process of training occupational health and 

safety workers. 

 

As our province grows, we have more and more corporations 

that are large multinational corporations carrying on business in 

our province, and it is appropriate that we have fines that are 

reflective of their ability to pay. We’re also aware that we’ve 

got many small businesses with one, two, and three employees, 

and we have to make sure that we’ve got appropriate methods 

in place to ensure that those people have fines in place that 

adequately reflect their ability to pay in their place in the 

marketplace. When you’ve got businesses of incredibly 

disparate size, you have to make allowances for that. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, it does not in any way minimize 

the obligation of all employers to ensure that their workers are 

safe, that they’re adequately trained, that equipment is in place, 

and I look forward to having something in the relatively near 

future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, in committee last fall the minister 

said, and I quote, “I find it disappointing that the best way to get 

people’s attention is by prosecuting them and fining them. But 

the reality of it is that when you talk to the officials that are in 

this room, that is the most effective way of doing it.” That’s 

what he said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last spring we read into the record 60 names of 

workers who died on the job last year. And I know that 

members on both sides of this Assembly said we never want to 

do that again. Yet for some reason, despite recognizing that 

increasing fines for employers is the most effective way of 

improving occupational health and safety, this government has 

refused to follow through on its promise to implement these 

changes. My question again for the minister: will this 

government do so today? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite is 

aware, we’ve included occupational health and safety 

provisions into The Saskatchewan Employment Act. This Act 

clearly defines rights and responsibilities of employers and 

employees. It better protects workers in a great number of ways. 

We received some 3,800 submissions. We want to make sure 

that the things that we do are done appropriately and done with 

some diligence and some caution on the thing. 

 

As much, Mr. Speaker, as I would like to see some things take 

place immediately, Mr. Speaker, I can advise that the officials 

within the ministry are working hard to have regulations in 

place that will adequately and appropriately protect workers. 

 

The member opposite raises the numbers of fatalities and, Mr. 

Speaker, even one is one too many. One injury is one too many. 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3743 

The only acceptable number, Mr. Speaker, is zero. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Resources for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, through meetings with 

teachers, school boards, students, parents, we’ve heard that the 

Throne Speech was vacuous on the real issues facing 

classrooms and students. This comes after the government 

suggested that it had finally listened. The Throne Speech clearly 

didn’t reflect the realities of the classroom that teachers and 

students face. 

 

To the minister: after failing education for so long and 

pretending that they recognized this, why did this government 

fail to address the real pressures and challenges of today’s 

classroom in its Throne Speech? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rather surprised to 

hear a question like that coming from the members opposite. 

Last week we announced an unprecedented announcement with 

regard to nine new joint-use schools. Why are we doing this, 

Mr. Speaker? Because of the incredible increase in the number 

of students. Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what happened with the 

members opposite. In June of 2001 they used enrolment 

projections that were produced under the NDP government and 

they suggested that by the year 2010 there would be only 

140,000 students in the province. Today there’s over 170,000 

— that’s growth, and we’re working to address that growth, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government that 

has failed to listen and work with educational partners, ignoring 

the voice of teachers, of boards, students, and parents, a 

government that has failed students and failed education. Mr. 

Speaker, teachers, school boards, parents, students are working 

harder than ever before. They’re holding up their end of the 

bargain. But under this government, they’re facing larger and 

more complex classrooms with fewer supports, cuts to hundreds 

of educational assistants, dismissal, and disrespect. It’s past 

time for this government to step up. 

 

To the minister: in this Throne Speech, why did this 

government fail to step up to address the challenges facing 

classrooms, to support teaching, and to ensure students have the 

supports and one-on-one time that they deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in each and every year, the overall operating grant for school 

divisions has increased. It has increased over 23 per cent since 

November 2007. The total funding for pre-K education is now 

1.775 billion — that’s billion with a “b” — dollars. The funding 

is over and above the $600 million record capital investment, 

and over and above the historic $165 million relief to property 

taxes. 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no lessons from the people opposite 

that planned for and scheduled and lived with decline, and put 

the people in our province through the misery of 16 years of 

NDP government. We’re not tolerating it anymore, nor will the 

people in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, most everything this 

government has attempted in education seems to have failed. 

Maybe that’s a consequence of ramming forward with its own 

agenda, top down, without listening and without consultation. 

Often it’s a different stance on policy and what’s on hold and 

what’s not, whether it’s the deputy minister, the old minister, or 

the new minister or the Premier answering the question. 

 

So to the minister: can he clarify once and for all, has his 

government finally scrapped its expensive standardized testing 

agenda? And are there immediate actions to redeploy the 

millions it was diverting to standardized testing to where it 

counts — in the classroom? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in 1993 and 1994, the 

NDP actually reduced the operating grant that was given to 

schools in our province. The following year, in 1995, they 

chose not to reduce it. They chose instead to give it a zero. So 

for the first three years of the NDP government, they were 

going backwards. Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no lessons from the 

people opposite as to how to fund schools or how to operate 

schools or how to have a good, onward-looking plan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the enrolment projections that they lived under 

were ones where they were planning for decline, planning for 

zero growth, and planning for the out-migration. Mr. Speaker, if 

they were running schools for the people that were in the 

province, they’d be building schools in Calgary because that’s 

where most of the people went to under that government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question was a pretty 

straightforward and simple question to the minister, and there 

wasn’t any recognition of the question in that answer. The 

question is: has that government finally scrapped its 

ill-conceived standardized testing agenda, and will they place 

the resources where they matter — in the classroom? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, earlier we announced that 

a number of initiatives within the ministry were under pause. 

We paused those things specifically so that we could go ahead 

and have a careful review and analysis, and do some deep 

listening and some deep discussions with the teachers of our 

province. Pursuant to that, Mr. Speaker, we appointed Patricia 

Prowse, a senior educator from the city of Saskatoon, and Russ 

Mirasty, retired commissioner of “F” Division, to engage in 

those consultations across the province. Mr. Speaker, you 

cannot have two better qualified individuals to undertake such a 

review. They will make the determinations — what and if 



3744 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

things are paused, what and if things are continued, and how 

and best we can replicate and move things out across our 

province. 

 

We want to hear from the teachers in our province. We provide 

a lot of investment in the education. And the best ones to listen 

to in our province are the front-line teachers, and we’re going to 

be doing that, Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Opposition House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. McCall: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What’s your point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. McCall: — During question period I was asking questions 

that clearly dealt with appropriate behaviour under The Election 

Act and were ruled out of order . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Questioning a decision by the Speaker is not a 

point of order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013 

Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013 be now 

introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move that Bill No. 99 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — If the members wish to carry on discussions 

between themselves, they may do so outside of the Chamber. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 99, 

The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

If the members wish to continue, I will see to it that they’re 

doing it outside of the Chamber. 

 

Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister of governmental 

affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 100, 

The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Government Relations that Bill No. 100, The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced 

and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill 101, The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and read for a first 

time. 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3745 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education that Bill No. 101, The University of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Standing 

Committee on Private Bills met earlier today and considered 

compliance of the rules for the petition of private Bill No. 903, 

praying to amend An Act respecting St. Thomas More College. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills to present its third report. Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatchewan Rivers: 

 

That the third report of the of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills now be concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The motion is carried. Pursuant to 

rule 98, private Bill No. 903, the St. Thomas More College 

Amendment Act, 2013 is deemed to be read the first time and is 

ordered for second reading on the next private members’ day. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Makowsky, seconded by Mr. 

Merriman, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me to 

rise here today in response to the Speech from the Throne that 

was given last week. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin with, as is 

traditional with many members in this Assembly, with a few 

thank yous. 

 

First of all in our constituency office in Rosthern-Shellbrook, 

we have Ms. Sally Fitch who’s a constituency assistant there, 

and the eyes and the ears and really the voice and, thankfully, 

some days the face of our constituency office to all the 

constituents of Rosthern-Shellbrook. And I appreciate her effort 

and her genuine nature that she approaches each and every point 

of contact with constituents in Rosthern-Shellbrook. So thank 

you very much, Sally. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Also I’d like to take a moment just to thank all of the staff in 

this beautiful provincial capital building that we work in, 

whether it be the caucus staff on both sides, the security staff, 

the House staff, the committee staff, Mr. Speaker. The effort 

and the genuine way that they show up and do their work so 

efficiently each and every day is greatly appreciated and helps 

us with our daily tasks. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to thank 

my family, as many in here have done. Firstly with my children, 

Carter and Taryn. My son is at university now, so I don’t see 

him too much as he’s moved out of the house during the winters 

and he returns home for the summers. And my daughter is in 

grade 10 back in Shellbrook. And I know I miss volleyball 

games and dance competitions. And I missed a speech last night 

that she gave, Mr. Speaker, in preparation for the Student 

Leadership Council provincial conference that they’re hosting 

in Shellbrook. And I wasn’t able to make that, but I am going to 

get it by email or YouTube here later today, and I look forward 

to it. I think I probably miss spending time with her more than 

she misses spending it with me. She’s quite content with the 

amount of time that we spend together, but I do thank her for 

what I think is a sacrifice. 

 

And my wife, Krista — what else do you say but thank you for 

allowing me to take the time to represent the constituents of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook in this capital? So thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I begin with some comments to the Speech 

from the Throne that was delivered here last week, I would like 

to provide a little context on the vision of the Speech from the 

Throne and more specifically, its theme of “Meeting the 

Challenges of Growth.” 

 

In the spring of 2012, Mr. Speaker, about a year and a half ago, 

as the legislature closed, the Premier asked us as government 

MLAs, as we went out into our constituencies and met with 

constituents and community groups and community leadership 

groups, Mr. Speaker, that we inquire with them as to the growth 

that has happened in our province and inquire with them as to 



3746 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

the positive effects of this growth, but also as to the challenges 

that they view that may be arising with that growth. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, this consultation was extensive and it was thorough, 

and the result of this consultation by all government MLAs was 

the forming and ultimate release last fall of The Saskatchewan 

Plan for Growth: Vision 2020 and Beyond. And, Mr. Speaker, 

The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth states, and I quote: 

 

. . . identifies principles, goals, and actions to ensure that 

Saskatchewan is capturing the opportunities and meeting 

the challenges of a growing province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is not a narrow plan that sets our 

province’s goals in one sector or one ministry, but it’s a broad, 

multidisciplinary plan with very specific goals. Many of these 

goals are centred around fostering growth in our province. Mr. 

Speaker, the purpose of that growth is not growth for growth’s 

sake, but growth to secure a better quality of life for all 

Saskatchewan residents. Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of another 

recent government document that has been created with such a 

vast and thorough consultation process or a document that so 

precisely sets out the plan for growth for the province. 

 

The Saskatchewan plan for growth is authored by the people of 

Saskatchewan and its guidance by the very people that we in 

this Chamber represent, and a vision that this government will 

move to realize. Mr. Speaker, budgets and announcements, as 

well as the Speech from the Throne last week, are rungs in the 

ladder, if you will, in providing a framework to achieve the 

goals that were stated in the Saskatchewan plan for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the growth of our economy comes challenges 

with regards to transportation. Transportation in Saskatchewan 

is predominantly on our provincial highways as well as our 

urban and rural road systems. Mr. Speaker, in the constituency 

of Rosthern-Shellbrook, we have recently observed the 

resurfacing of Highway No. 40 as well as upgrades to the 

access road into the community of Laird. And, Mr. Speaker, 

just this past Friday my colleagues from Prince Albert and 

Batoche were at the completion — not the opening 

announcement, but the completion announcement — of the 

twinning of Highway No. 11 from Saskatoon to Prince Albert. 

Mr. Speaker, from the southeast part of the 

Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency, I cannot express to you how 

it has been expressed to me by constituents in that area, how 

this road and the twinning of this highway has made not only 

transportation easier for our export commodities, but also the 

highway is much safer. 

 

We always must understand there’s much more to accomplish 

in the way of highway investment. And it’s all too important in 

an exporting economy such as Saskatchewan. And I would 

however be remiss if I did not remind members of the estimated 

$1 billion highway infrastructure deficit that this government 

inherited in 2007 due to lack of appropriate investment in prior 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, spending on highways has increased 76 per cent in 

the last six years over the six years prior, and that includes the 

$500 million investment this year. This translates into almost 

$50 million that’s been spent in the constituency of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook in the last six years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Housing challenges have been discussed in this Chamber, but 

more importantly those same housing challenges have been 

discussed in our communities. Expansions of the life lease 

program and broadening the Headstart on a Home program to 

improve housing options in Saskatchewan are options that 

Saskatchewan people have asked for and this government is 

addressing. Expanding the housing supply by adding or 

rejuvenating 12,600 units, and backing this up with $344 

million is a very ambitious goal, Mr. Speaker. And it’s another 

initiative that was requested and will be delivered on by this 

government. 

 

In Rosthern-Shellbrook the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

consists of 14 housing authorities governing 327 units. It’s 

through the appreciated efforts of these volunteers that we were 

able to offer the housing options that we have. Mr. Speaker, this 

fall, on behalf of our minister, I had the opportunity to join with 

Chief Cliff Tawpisin of the Muskeg Lake Cree Nations in the 

grand opening of five homes in the community of Blaine Lake. 

This was a joint project between Muskeg Lake First Nations 

and the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. Later in the day, 

Chief Tawpisin and myself also had the opportunity to turn sod 

for an additional three homes in another joint project. I would 

like to take this opportunity to thank Chief Cliff Tawpisin and 

the community of Muskeg Lake Cree Nations for their joint 

partnership in this important housing initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I had the opportunity to stand in 

this Assembly and speak, and I did not take that opportunity to 

speak about rural health care, as Rosthern-Shellbrook is a very 

rural constituency. And I do have some comments I would like 

to make on health care. But prior to that I do have a couple of 

statements that I would like to enter in on the record here. 

 

And first I quote from the September 3rd edition of the 2010 . . . 

the local paper where I live, the Shellbrook Chronicle. And it 

goes such as this, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “As you are no 

doubt aware, your area includes one of 13 Saskatchewan 

communities to have its new long-term care facility or hospital 

cancelled in the Wall government’s 2010 budget.” And that’s 

signed by NDP Health critic, Ms. Judy Junor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a year later Ms. Junor went on to state, and in The 

Southwest Booster in August of 2011, “The 13 communities 

who were promised newer renovated facilities in the 2009 

budget have yet to see those promises fulfilled. They are still 

dreaming almost three years later.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my experience that a dream disappears when 

you wake up. In families and communities across this province 

that had ambitious goals to replace or rebuild those 13 facilities, 

that was never a dream to them, Mr. Speaker. It definitely 

wasn’t. The people in the area of Shellbrook were not 

dreaming, Mr. Speaker, and I doubt whether the other 12 

communities were as well. 

 

At the very time of that NDP Health critic’s letters to the editor, 

Mr. Speaker, the very people in those 13 communities — and 

the NDP dismissed them as dreaming — were working with 

their respective health regions, the government officials, and 

different fundraising groups within their respective 

communities all in the effort to build their respective facility, 

one of the 13, Mr. Speaker. 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3747 

At the time I read those letters to the editor from the NDP 

Health critic, I could not understand why she would refer to the 

communities’ and individual’s goals as dreams. And I thought 

about it, Mr. Speaker, and the more I thought about it the more 

it started to make sense. And to the NDP, those always were 

dreams, Mr. Speaker. The NDP could do nothing but dream of 

building long-term care and health care facilities as they were 

far too busy, quite frankly, closing them — 52 hospitals and 

pulled 1,200 long-term care beds from the provincial . . . Mr. 

Speaker, thankfully in 2009 these facilities received 

commitment from their newly elected government, and it was 

not a dream as the NDP so callously suggested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a little over a week ago I had the opportunity, with 

our Premier, our Minister of Health, our Minister of Rural and 

Remote Health, and my colleague from Saskatchewan Rivers to 

attend the grand opening of the Parkland Integrated Health 

Centre. This was one of those 13 facilities, and it was the first 

integrated facility, with 34 long-term care beds, 20 acute care 

beds, a full complement of community services, and a fully 

functioning emergency department. 

 

It was noted by many in the region at this opening and in the 

days after, Mr. Speaker, how this new integrated facility would 

ensure that all the hospital and long-term care staff have an 

efficient workplace so that they may provide the very best care 

to the patients and residents within. And sadly, Mr. Speaker, 

just a couple of weeks ago in a press release, the NDP were 

again not accurate with their statements, and I quote: “The 

government has already reduced hours and shut doors on 

emergency rooms in dozens of communities.” That was the 

NDP government, Mr. Speaker. They closed the 52 hospitals 

and they pulled the 1,200 long-term care beds from the 

provincial system. 

 

The press release goes on to indicate that Shellbrook was one of 

the communities that faced closed emergency room doors and 

reduced medical services because of doctor shortages. Mr. 

Speaker, that emergency department is open, in part due to 

Health ministers on this side that have made efforts to build 

Saskatchewan’s complement of medical professionals. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that emergency department is open in a new 

facility, in part due to this government’s belief that hospital and 

long-term care facilities were necessary goals for the people of 

Saskatchewan and not just dreams. Mr. Speaker, it was the NDP 

that denied provincial approval for these facilities while they 

were in government. It’s the NDP that recently referred to 

Saskatchewan people’s goals as dreams, and today it’s the same 

old NDP that doesn’t have their facts straight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a little more relevant to the Speech from the 

Throne, regarding CECs or collaborative emergency centres. 

And firstly, at the outset I would like to take the opportunity to 

congratulate and thank the community of Maidstone as well as 

all those involved from the Prairie North Health Region, the 

providers, on the opening of the very first collaborative 

emergency centre in the province of Saskatchewan. This 

innovative approach to improve access to both primary health 

care and emergency services is a boost for rural communities, 

and it’s something that they’ve asked for for many years. 

 

This model also provides a framework of sustainable access for 

all our rural communities. In the coming months other 

collaborative emergency centres will open in Shaunavon, 

Spiritwood, Wakaw, and Canora, goes the Throne Speech. Mr. 

Speaker, in 2006 under the NDP government, the facility in 

Spiritwood lost its emergency services. When this facility had a 

service disruption, there was an outreach from the community. 

They wanted to contact the NDP Health minister of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, without success. This was indicative of how the NDP 

handled service disruptions in rural Saskatchewan, and that was 

quite simply just to ignore them. 

 

Make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker, health facilities such as 

the one in Spiritwood offer an important service to the residents 

not only from the community of Spiritwood but all of the 

surrounding communities. And it’s this present government, 

specifically the Minister of Health along with the Minister of 

Rural and Remote Health, and their willingness to look at 

different initiatives and different models of care such as a 

collaborative emergency centre, and this will provide access to 

emergency and primary health care services to all of our 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

It’s at this point with the announcement of the additional sites 

for CECs, or collaborative emergency centres, that I thank the 

Prince Albert Health Authority for their support and 

acknowledge the health providers in Spiritwood for their 

support for the system. And I would also like to acknowledge 

the people from Spiritwood and the surrounding communities. 

They’ve worked so diligently over the past number of years to 

improve the recruitment and retention efforts in their 

community and also advocate for greater services. Your 

government’s announcement of your collaborative emergency 

centre is a result of the commitment of individuals, and 

improved access of health care services in the communities 

around Spiritwood will be the result. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not enter a few 

comments about agriculture. Rosthern-Shellbrook is a very 

diverse rural area, but there is no question that agricultural 

production, agricultural service, and agricultural processing 

industries make up a very large percentage of the economic 

activity in the area. And this consequently is also the case for 

our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:45] 

 

In 2012, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan exported just over $32 

billion of exports; $11.2 billion of these exports were 

agricultural exports. 2012 was a record year for Saskatchewan 

ag exports. However it should be noted that we’re in a great 

position to add to these numbers in 2013. In 2013, in the first 

six months, our ag exports are up 13 per cent, and this is with 

producers recently placing a very valuable crop in the bin and a 

value-added industry that is poised to expand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to reach 9 billion people in this 

world, we’re going to need to produce more food worldwide 

and here in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is poised to and will 

be required to be an integral agricultural producer and exporter 

to the world. To enhance Saskatchewan’s position in a world 

market, we need to continue to encourage our research and our 

innovation agendas. We need to ensure continued and expanded 

international market access for our producers and our exporters, 



3748 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

and we need to increase the value of our agricultural products 

that we export. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agricultural economy in Saskatchewan is 

extremely diverse — many different eggs in many different 

baskets, if you will. It ranges from traditional crop production 

on numerous different crops destined for numerous different 

markets all around the world, each with a different processing 

option, many which take place right here in this province. 

 

We also have numerous different types of livestocks also which 

are destined for all over the world. The future is bright for food 

producing nations, Mr. Speaker. Our agri-food industry in our 

province is in a great position to supply the world with the safe 

and sustainable food production system that we have become so 

well known for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Rosthern-Shellbrook we had a busy spring with 

. . . We had a large snow melt with a large runoff, and we had 

10 to 12 inches of rain in May and June. And the result of that, 

Mr. Speaker, was we had a lot of roads that were washed out. I 

can think of one RM [rural municipality] in particular that had 

an excess of 130 roads that were inaccessible. 

 

And I would like to just take a minute to recognize the rural and 

urban municipal councils and the effort that they gave this 

spring in putting their communities and their infrastructure back 

together. And I would also like to make note of programs such 

as the Provincial Disaster Assistance Program, Mr. Speaker, the 

FDRP [Flood Damage Reduction Program] program for . . . just 

to help a little bit with these communities as they put their 

infrastructure back together after the excess of moisture that we 

had this spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s also been recently announced that 

Saskatchewan recently reached 1.1 million people. Many 

thought this achievement was not possible in this province. The 

Saskatchewan plan for growth has recently set the population 

goal at 1.2 million people by the year 2020. It would be 

interesting to note if those same people that thought the first 

100,000 wasn’t possible, if they’re on board for the second 

100,000, whether they support that or not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, as I said, could be considered quite a rural 

constituency, but yet we’ve had significant population growth 

in Rosthern-Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker. After experiencing a 

decline in population during the census years of 2001-2006 of 

negative 10 per cent, for example, the community of Hafford in 

the latest census recorded positive 10 per cent growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those same years under the NDP, Rosthern was 

negative 8 per cent. Now Rosthern is over 13 per cent growth, 

Mr. Speaker. And the community that I live in, Mr. Speaker, in 

Shellbrook, under the NDP was negative 4.8 per cent growth. 

Now, sixteen and a half per cent growth, Mr. Speaker. As a 

matter of fact, all of the towns in Rosthern-Shellbrook have 

experienced positive population growth in the last census. This 

is quite indicative of what’s happening in the province with 80 

per cent of our rural towns are now experiencing positive 

population growth, Mr. Speaker. And this is in stark contrast to 

just a few years ago. 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is no longer closing schools. We’re 

building them. Saskatchewan is no longer removing health care 

services and infrastructure. We are adding and we are investing 

in them. Saskatchewan is no longer nationalizing corporations. 

We are attracting companies and their investment. 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is no longer attacking rural 

infrastructure and agriculture. We are most definitely investing 

in it. Saskatchewan is no longer the place where we manage for 

population decline. 

 

We’re taking steps, some of them in this year’s Speech from the 

Throne, to achieve the people’s vision of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s the Saskatchewan plan for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those comments, I’ll end my comments with 

regard to the Speech from the Throne and I would like to 

indicate that I will not be supporting the amendment. I will be 

supporting the Speech from the Throne moved by my colleague 

from Regina Dewdney, seconded by my colleague from 

Sutherland. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker, and colleague. I just want to start off by saying it’s 

an honour for me to be able to rise in this House and contribute 

to the conversation and to the debate about the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

There’s a few people I’m going to thank before I get into the 

meat of my Throne Speech response. And first and foremost, 

I’d like to thank my beautiful wife, Larissa. She is my constant 

companion and she gives me wonderful feedback and keeps me 

grounded. And I think, obviously, we all owe our spouses a 

wonderful round of applause for the work they do at home. 

They keep the home running. They keep the home running 

while we’re away. Obviously we’re not at home as much as 

we’d like. 

 

And my new son Nickson’s here as well in the legislature for 

the first time. And he doesn’t get to see dad as much. The last 

couple days I haven’t been home as much as I was before and 

he’s already playing shy with me. And he might be mom’s boy 

here for the next five or six years, I think. So he’s heckling me 

already, Mr. Speaker. So I just want to say hi to my family 

which is always great that they can make it out to the 

legislature. 

 

Honestly, we do a lot of work away from the office as well, and 

there’s some people in our constituencies that we need to thank. 

Our CAs [constituency assistant] do a pile of work for us. They 

do a lot of casework when we have our constituents calling 

when they need a helping hand, and these people do a lot for us 

and make sure our office runs smoothly. So I want to thank 

Heather Howell-Shiplack. She’s been my CA since we were 

first elected, and she does a wonderful job and an admirable job 

and she’s a pleasure to work with, and I’m very happy to have 

her as part of my team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously I’m proud to stand and speak on behalf 

of the people of Regina Walsh Acres. It’s a privilege to speak 

on their behalf. And every time I get up to speak in the House, I 

want to thank them for giving me the honour and giving me the 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3749 

ability to speak on their behalf and talk about the Speech from 

the Throne and talk about some of the things that they think our 

government’s doing right in moving this province forward. 

 

And right now, I want to talk about the Speech from the Throne 

and say that, meeting the challenges of growth, that’s what 

we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, a challenge to the growth in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A month ago we reached populations of 1.1 million which 

many people thought was farcical, thought it was just a dream, 

something that couldn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. And these 

people, they’re representative, Mr. Speaker. One of these 

people, I’ll quote: 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say their plan flies in the face of reality, 

Mr. Speaker. Now, it may be an admirable goal, but it’s 

not very realistic, Mr. Speaker. It’s also, I might say, if this 

is the basis for their whole approach to government, that 

this is a shaky basis for an economic plan, Mr. Speaker. 

Because these plans, Mr. Speaker, if you’re not right, you 

will in effect take hundreds of millions, billions of . . . 

dollars to put it into a plan that is doomed to fail because 

the reality is this plan will fail, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that was a former Finance minister, Harry Van Mulligen. 

A former Finance minister says, your plan, NDP Finance 

minister, your plan is doomed to fail. It’s going to cost you 

billions of dollars because this province will never be more than 

1 million people. 

 

With planning like that, Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder that when 

you look at the province under the NDP’s term, 16 years in 

government, there’s no wonder why it took them 72 years to 

grow the population by 100,000 people. And fortunately with 

some good fortune, we were able to reach our population in 

seven years, Mr. Speaker. A hundred thousand people came to 

our province in seven years. And I think that’s indicative of 

how they feel the government’s been running this province, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not the government. Government doesn’t get 

credit for this growth, Mr. Speaker. It’s the hard-working 

people of Saskatchewan, the business people, the entrepreneurs, 

the young entrepreneurs that are contributing to the growth of 

our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think . . . There’s a couple of stories I’d like to tell about 

people that live in my area, the young entrepreneurs that are 

doing well, and one is JLB Electric. He’s a good friend of mine. 

He used to work for Town & Country. He got his journeyman, 

became a journeyman electrician, and he had the confidence, 

the confidence in our province, the confidence that our province 

is going to continue to grow, to leave a very good job and go 

and start his own company. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to say that JLB Electric is a 

growing company, Mr. Speaker. He’s bought more new trucks. 

He’s hiring more people. And, Mr. Speaker, that is how you 

grow an economy — by giving people the optimism and the 

confidence that things are going to keep continuing to grow, to 

be able to spend some money, spend some of their hard-earned 

money, invest it into a company, and take the opportunities that 

are given to them and take the opportunity to be your own boss, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that was something that was missing 

for a long, long time in Saskatchewan — the confidence that 

our province is going to continue to grow. People didn’t have 

that, Mr. Speaker, a long time ago, a long time ago back in the 

days of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Young people, they were fleeing. Fleeing for the border. 

Fleeing for Alberta. Fleeing for Ontario. Fleeing, just trying to 

get away because they didn’t see that there was a future in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I’m glad that those days are 

gone, and I’m glad to say like that’s one of the reasons that I 

wanted to get into politics is because I think Saskatchewan was 

going to become a much greater province than it was under the 

NDP. 

 

We had the resources. We had the hard-working people. We 

had the work ethic, Mr. Speaker. We just didn’t have 

confidence in our leaders. And that has more to do with the 

NDP than any of the people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we can’t underestimate the role that 

the government can play with creating a sense of optimism in 

our province. It’s not the government that’s going to go and 

create jobs. It’s not the government that’s going to start up 

companies or start up businesses. But it is the government that 

can create the opportunity and the optimism and the confidence 

of people to want to come and invest here. 

 

And I think that’s one of our most important jobs, so that people 

know you can come to Saskatchewan. You’re going to have a 

stable tax regulatory system. You’re going to have a stable 

regime in government. You’re going to have people that are 

going to be willing to work hard. You’re going to have an 

employment force, Mr. Speaker. That’s one of the challenges 

we’re facing is that we need more people to work. 

 

One of the challenges in Saskatchewan is that we don’t have 

enough people to work. Can you believe that, Mr. Speaker? 

Before we didn’t have enough jobs, and now we don’t have 

enough people to work. And we’re going to meet that challenge 

head-on, and that is one of the challenges of growth. 

 

An unemployment of 3 per cent is very low. It’s good that 

people have jobs, Mr. Speaker, but that shows that we need to 

open up more training spaces. We need to train more people to 

work, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why our government in this 

Throne Speech sets out a plan of opening up 1,000 more 

training spaces, Mr. Speaker, which I think is very important, 

and making more investments in SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology], investments in 

post-secondary education. Because our young people have the 

opportunities. And we’ve got to ensure that they have the 

opportunities to become skilled labourers, to ensure that they 

know that they have a government that wants to make sure that 

they can go to SIAST and get that plumbing education, go to 

SIAST and become an electrician, become an electrician, go 

and work for a company like Town and Country. 

 

And then if they have the confidence in a growing economy, 

they can go and start their own business. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

proud to say that I think we’ve set out that framework where 

government has given people the confidence to go and try and 

make it on their own, which is a far cry away from what was 

happening under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 



3750 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

There’s a few things I’d like to discuss. Some of our colleagues 

across the way have made some comments in a few of their 

speeches, and one I’d like to give credit. And I don’t do this 

often, Mr. Speaker, but I’d love to give credit to the member 

from Athabasca. I know that may sound a little off, but I’ll give 

credit where credit is due. And one of the quotes from him, 

from the member from Athabasca during his speech was, “This 

government has not had a major problem right now since 

they’ve been in government because they’ve spent the money.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I take that as a compliment because — I 

think I may be paraphrasing for the member from Athabasca — 

but he’s saying the government has put money in the right 

places. We’ve spent money in housing. We’ve spent on 

highways because we inherited a gigantic deficit in the 

highways budget, Mr. Speaker. We spent over $3 billion on 

highways, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a huge investment to ensure 

that our highways are safe. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that I had some opportunities, along with 

the member from Riversdale and the member from 

Cumberland. We were on the highway Traffic Safety 

Committee. So we went all over Saskatchewan this summer, 

along with the Chair from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton and the 

member from North Battleford and myself and the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. And going all over our beautiful 

province during the summer, we had the opportunity to hear 

some of the concerns from people all across the province of 

how to make our highways safer, where we need to invest in 

infrastructure, where we need to invest some more policing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think going out and hearing from these people . . . I know 

I had the opportunity to go out to Pelican Narrows. And I had 

never been up north that far, Mr. Speaker, and it was a great 

experience for us to go up and listen to some of the people’s 

concerns up there. 

 

And I think that leads us to another conversation. Our 

government has been listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 

That was a great consultation tour we took across the province, 

Mr. Speaker, and I think it was fantastic to hear the concerns 

that some of the people had with our highways, with some of 

our infrastructure, wanting to make guardrails. Guardrails were 

an issue up in northern Saskatchewan, and the member from 

Cumberland knows that. And that was wonderful to hear 

because sometimes maybe we don’t think of the things like that. 

 

And I think it’s very important that governments take the time 

to listen to the people that they have the privilege to in 

government, that put them in that place. And I don’t think this 

government’s lost that, and I think it will continue to listen to 

the people of Saskatchewan to ensure that our priorities are 

meeting their priorities. 

 

And another opportunity that we were able to have is we . . . 

Headstart on a Home, Mr. Speaker. Affordable housing is an 

issue in Regina. We know that our vacancy is going up, but 

that’s not good enough. There’s more work to do. And I 

commend the Minister of Social Services on the Headstart on a 

Home program, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s probably the best 

housing program out there for affordable housing in the 

country. It’s a wonderful program. 

 

I’ve been able to attend a few of the ceremonies where people 

are coming to get their key ceremonies, Mr. Speaker. And to 

know that these people without this program would not have a 

place to call home, not have a place to take their children, a safe 

place, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s one of the things government 

has to do. They are judged by how the most vulnerable in our 

society are treated, Mr. Speaker, and I think I’d go out on an 

election campaign and say I’m okay with being judged on that. 

Headstart on a Home is giving people the opportunity to have 

four walls, to have a safe place to call home, and to build a 

family. And I think building a family, having a secure place is 

very important, especially for young families with kids. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, another program that we’ve invested time, 

resources, and money in is SAID, the Saskatchewan assured 

income for disability, Mr. Speaker. And SAID wasn’t around, 

wasn’t around before 2007, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a program 

where I know we celebrated 10,000 people who were enrolled 

in the SAID program. And that’s ensuring people have income 

for regular things, things that we probably all take a little bit for 

granted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you talk to people that are enrolled in the SAID 

program — now I’ve had a couple to come to my office — and 

it’s just heartwarming, Mr. Speaker, to hear the stories they tell 

about being able to buy a bed for the first time or being able to 

go out for a nice meal at a restaurant sometimes, things that we 

do take for granted, Mr. Speaker. And I think that program, the 

SAID program, the Headstart on a Home program, speaks to the 

monumental work our Social Services minister is doing, who I 

think is probably the best, who’ll go down as the best Social 

Services minister in our province’s history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a few more things. And our member from 

Regina Rosemont, I know sometimes he gets off on tangents 

and sometimes his maybe mouth moving quicker than his brain. 

And I think that a couple of these situations would be talking 

about Pioneer Village, Mr. Speaker. And he said: 

 

And the degradation and continued degradation of the 

facility without maintenance, support for maintenance and 

rehabilitation, or what I hear from many is the need for a 

rebuild, Mr. Speaker — we just don’t hear anything about 

that. 

 

And that was said by the member from Regina Rosemont, 

talking about Pioneer Village. And it’s a seniors’ complex on 

Dewdney here in Regina. And I wanted to see if that was true 

because if it’s true, that’s a very alarming statement. And 

sometimes that other side can be a bit of an alarmist, and they 

put some statements before fact checking. Mr. Speaker, since 

2008-2009, Pioneer Village has received $14,595,550 for 

maintenance and repairs, plus upcoming repairs worth an 

estimated $584,000. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s $15 million since 

’08-09. I would say that’s not a small per cent of change, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think for alarmist issues, like the member from Rosemont 

says, you know, there’s the roof’s falling in. There’s no 

maintenance. There’s no repairs. I think it’s just another scare 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3751 

tactic of the NDP, which is pretty much high on their Rolodex 

of tricks to try and play on the people of Saskatchewan, saying 

the sky is falling; the sky is falling, like Henny Penny. I believe 

the member from Coronation Park likes to use that saying a fair 

bit, or the doomsday nine or whatever he calls them over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s some more conversations I’d like to have 

about some of the statements made by the members opposite, 

the members from across the aisle, and that’s our record on 

health care, Mr. Speaker. And I think I would take our record 

on health care over the 72 or whatever years they were in 

power, Mr. Speaker. I think our record in health care speaks for 

itself. 

 

You know the NDP, sometimes they talk about what they 

would do, and they don’t really remember that they do have a 

record. They have a record of 16 years of failure, Mr. Speaker. 

Their record was they had the worst doctor and nurse retention 

rate in the country. Between ’08 and ’06, the NDP’s last five 

full years in office, the province lost. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

what they lost: 1,160 total health care workers; 455 RNs and 

RPNs [registered psychiatric nurse]; 173 physicians; 155 

pharmacists; and 95 physiotherapists, Mr. Speaker. And they 

get on their soapbox, and the leader from Massey Place gets on 

his soapbox and cries about — obviously there’s more work to 

be done for us, Mr. Speaker — but he talks about what they 

would do, what they would do. 

 

Well I’m fond of a saying that our caucus Chair has, Mr. 

Speaker, that the best indication of future behaviour is past 

behaviour. And this is their past behaviour, which they seem to 

have amnesia and not remember that they do have a record over 

there, Mr. Speaker. And when they’re talking about what they 

would do, well this is what they did do when they had the 

opportunity and the privilege to be in government, which we 

don’t take lightly, Mr. Speaker. We know it’s an honour to be in 

government. We know it’s a privilege that we don’t take lightly, 

and we want the people of Saskatchewan to continue to have 

faith in us. So that’s why we really continue to do what we say 

we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So a little bit on our record on health care. People in the last . . . 

what we’ve been doing in the last six years, Mr. Speaker. 

Twenty per cent more nurses call Saskatchewan home than they 

did six years ago. Mr. Speaker, we have 18 per cent more RNs, 

37 more LPNs, 58 more nurse practitioners, and 18 more nurses 

per capita than the Canadian average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that those are just numbers but, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re numbers that show a government that is 

working hard to ensure that Saskatchewan residents have the 

health care that they so richly deserve. We are proud of our 

health care record, Mr. Speaker. There is more work to be done. 

But we’re proud of the hard-working health care workers within 

Saskatchewan that are working hard to deliver the quality of 

care, the best quality of care they can, and they’re doing a 

fantastic job, Mr. Speaker. Health care workers are some of the 

hardest workers in our province, Mr. Speaker. And we think 

that they’re doing a fantastic job, and we’re proud of what 

they’re doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a few more issues I’d like to bring up here, 

and one is with physicians, Mr. Speaker. And I know I enjoy 

quoting the member from Regina Rosemont because I think 

he’s a great young man. He’s just a little off base on a few 

things, Mr. Speaker. “I think as well of the challenges that so 

many are facing as it relates to access to a family doctor, to a 

general practitioner, to a GP.” So many constituents do not get 

access to a family doctor. And this is a direct quote from the 

member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

So I wanted to go around and see how long it would take us to 

find some names of people that are accepting patients as a GP, 

Mr. Speaker. So I hopped on the Internet here, and I did a 

search on the Regina Qu’Appelle website to find a GP. Within 

five seconds, 21 physicians popped up that are taking new 

patients. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if he has constituents that are having a hard 

time finding a general practitioner, check the website, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s 21 in Regina Qu’Appelle Valley right now 

that are accepting new patients. So I hope I can help him out 

and he can get his constituency assistant to give these people a 

call and say, check the website; there’s 21 physicians accepting 

new patients right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s worked hard to create an 

opportunity for doctors to come to Saskatchewan. We’ve 

recruited 300 more doctors in our time as government. We 

created Saskdocs to work with RHAs [regional health authority] 

on physician recruitment, SIPPA [Saskatchewan international 

physician practice assessment] to facilitate integration of 

internationally trained doctors into practice.  

 

This has brought 91 doctors to date — and I think my colleague 

from Saskatchewan Rivers brought one on her own actually — 

Mr. Speaker, and added 40 medical training seats to the College 

of Medicine, so that’s 60 to 100; doubled medical residency 

positions to 120; and there’s a 10.5 per cent premium on 

earnings for rural physicians adopting the scope of practice. In 

rural Saskatchewan, we added 20 doctor locum, and we’ve 

given an opportunity for new graduates of the College of 

Medicine to have some of their loan forgiven, up to $120,000, if 

they practise in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s a conversation going on in 

Saskatchewan, and our Health minister did a wonderful job 

having the CEOs [chief executive officer] go out and look at all 

the long-term care homes across our province. Our seniors are 

the people that built this province. They were the pioneers. 

They did the hard work to make sure that Saskatchewan got set 

on a solid foundation. And, Mr. Speaker, obviously we all have 

grandparents, parents, and we’re all concerned about how our 

seniors are treated and their quality of life. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a few things though that fail to make 

sense when the member from Massey Place gets up and talks 

about . . . Because once again the NDP forget that they have a 

record. They had the privilege to govern. They have a record, 

and obviously the best indication of future behaviour is past 

behaviour, Mr. Speaker. So what did the NDP, when they had 

the privilege to govern our province . . . NDP failed to increase 

the senior income plan benefits for 16 years — 16 years, not a 

percentage increase to seniors for their income plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP closed 1,200 long-term care beds. 



3752 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

Obviously long-term care beds are a conversation right now; the 

NDP closed 1,200 of them. NDP eliminated 60 long-term care 

facilities. NDP closed 52 hospitals. And Judy Junor had this to 

say about the NDP plan to phase out long-term care beds. This 

is what Judy Junor, the former MLA from Eastview, Saskatoon 

Eastview, said about long-term care beds and their plans to 

phase them out: these plans will lead to a better quality of 

long-term care overall. 

 

So I haven’t had the . . . I don’t know a lot about long-term 

care, but to close long-term care homes and to shut down 

long-term care beds will lead to a better quality of long-term 

care overall, I’m not quite sure how that works out, Mr. 

Speaker. But I would think that closing beds probably doesn’t 

lead to people having a better quality of long-term care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that we’ve had the ability, the pleasure to 

open up, are on the verge of building 13 long-term care homes 

throughout rural Saskatchewan to look after our seniors, build a 

long-term care home in Saskatoon to help look after our seniors, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that obviously there’s going to be 

some issues, Mr. Speaker, because when you close 1,200 or 

close 1,400 long-term care beds, you have some work to get 

back up to that infrastructure to ensure that there’s the quality of 

care there for our seniors. And I think our Health minister’s 

done an admirable job of working on this, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think there’s more work to be done, and we’re going to work 

hard to ensure that our seniors are looked after because they are 

the pioneers of our province and they’ve set a grand foundation 

for us to be experiencing some wonderful growth right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously meeting the challenges of growth is 

what our Throne Speech is all about. And we look at, right now 

looking at the city of Regina, I see growth all over, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s land being cleared for a new area up in the 

Northwest close to Regina Walsh Acres. There’s new homes 

being built in Regina Walsh Acres, infill in new areas. 

 

And I think that these growths do come with some challenges. 

And one is housing. Another is infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. And 

I was able to attend the Regina west bypass, which our Minister 

of Highways got done ahead of schedule I might add, Mr. 

Speaker. And the Regina west bypass is another connecting peg 

in the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. Speaker, which is a 

wonderful opportunity. It’s creating jobs. It’s creating economic 

spinoff, Mr. Speaker. The GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 

just west of Regina, close to the constituency of Walsh Acres is 

a cog in the wheel of our economy. I think it’s going to show 

some great benefits going down the line, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to say the west bypass is rerouting truck traffic. So 

there’s not much truck traffic going on Dewdney, going through 

the city, which makes our city streets safer, Mr. Speaker. I think 

that Dewdney served as an alternative route for a bit till the 

bypass was opened. And that bypass is creating a lot more 

throughway traffic and easing the truck congestion going 

through the city of Regina right now. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did have the opportunity to attend a lot of events 

and a lot of openings over the summer. And I was able to talk to 

a lot of constituents. And the constituents are saying . . . And go 

out door knocking. And that’s one of the favourite parts of our 

job, Mr. Speaker, is going and door knocking in our 

constituency and talking to constituents and seeing how they 

feel we’re doing because we need that feedback. We need our 

constituents to let us know if they think we’re on the right path, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that the constituents of Regina Walsh 

Acres, I’ve talked to many of them, and they feel our 

government is on the right path. And they’re feeling that our 

government is maintaining the priorities that they have. Their 

priorities are continuing to grow, continuing to welcome more 

people to our province, Mr. Speaker — immigrants, people, 

expats, people that are coming back from Alberta. 

 

When I was graduating high school, Mr. Speaker, a lot of my 

friends went to Alberta. And we decided to stay because I think 

Saskatchewan can be a better province than it had been under 

the NDP. They’re coming back now, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got a 

friend coming back, working with Halliburton; Halliburton who 

moved their shop from Medicine Hat to Regina, Mr. Speaker, 

which is a fantastic sign. And I have friends that moved home. 

And they’re in Swift Current right now, and I’m happy that they 

made it back. 

 

And our growing province, Mr. Speaker, are 1.1 million people, 

and then we have a great growth plan that’s going to look at 

having our province be 1.2 million people by 2020. So that is 

why I wholeheartedly support this Speech from the Throne, and 

I will not be voting for the amendment put forward by the 

member for Rosemont. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise in the House today to join the debate on the 

Throne Speech. And, Mr. Speaker, I will be speaking about 

vision, leadership, and the great province of Saskatchewan. 

 

First though, I have a few very important people that I would 

like to thank that are important to me personally and important 

to me in my work as MLA. First of all of course is my beautiful 

wife, April, whose strength and support have very much made 

me who I am today, and let me say that that continues to be a 

work in progress. Thank you to my family . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . It’s a work in progress. Thank you to my 

family: Kelli and Howard, Brandi and Zack, Brendan and 

Carly, Reilly and Felisha, as well as their children or, as 

grandparents, we think more importantly, our grandchildren. 

And well, as all grandparents do, we love them all equally. 

 

My eldest grandson, Justice Smith, plays with the Maple Creek 

Redmen down in the southwest corner. Last weekend he made 

the Sask-first basketball team for the North American 

Indigenous Games. And that’s quite a feat, and he’s a heck of a 

basketball player. At 14 years old, he’s about the same height as 

I am, but I still have a little bit of bulk on him, probably a fair 

amount. And as we are aware . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — But you taught him everything he 

knows. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Taught him everything, yes. No, that ended 

early. As we are all aware that our CAs make it possible to keep 

the offices running while we are in the legislature. And they 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3753 

keep it running efficiently when they’re gone, and they do their 

darndest to keep it running efficiently when we’re there. But 

I’m very pleased in the last couple of years to have had the 

opportunity to work with Laurie Hookway and Peggy Gordon 

who are wonderful people, and I acknowledge their great efforts 

in the Chamber today. 

 

The people of the Melfort constituency have always been very 

kind to me as I travel around, in meeting with municipal leaders 

and attending many events in their communities. And we 

always talk that it’s the people of this province that make this 

province great. And I think that is never more true than in the 

Melfort constituency. 

 

And as I have the floor today, I’d also like to make note of 

some of the businesses and the industries of my constituency 

and the constituency that I’ve been so honoured to represent. 

 

And of course we have all heard about BHP Billiton potash 

mine near LeRoy. No matter what the other member may say, 

it’s in my constituency . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The hole 

is in my constituency, the potash may be in yours. This is a 

project that has just been . . . received an extra $2.6 billion — 

an extra $2.6 billion. This one project will make a difference, a 

positive difference to every person in Saskatchewan. 

 

And last Tuesday I had the opportunity on the way down here 

to stop in and visit with Bourgault Industries and Bourgault 

Tillage Tools as I was going through St. Brieux. And I stopped 

in and I picked up their product catalog, and it was maybe a 

quarter to a half inch thick at each place. And I could 

understand the word Bourgault, and everything else in that book 

was written in Russia. This is more Saskatchewan companies 

that are serving the world. 

 

And you know, we have so many more businesses and 

industries in the iron triangle, as it’s called, that make this 

constituency so special. And I would like to mention that when 

I was out at Bourgault Industries, I noticed they were putting up 

an addition to their plant. The addition to the plant is 186,000 

square feet. It is huge. And as I passed by Englefeld, I noticed 

Schulte Industries is putting a very large addition on the back of 

their building. And that’s great. It’s great to see business 

coming along in every part of Saskatchewan. 

 

Something else I would like to mention about the constituency 

is the transition house that was approved in last year’s budget. 

We talk about making life better in Saskatchewan for all our 

residents, and that will go to help some people who are very 

much in need. And it’s an important step. It’s now in the project 

planning and in tendering, and we look forward to 2014 during 

the constructive. And it is, and it’s been mentioned before that 

it’s the first transition house built since 1989. Now we mention 

that, but let’s not forget that the party opposite were not in 

power in 1989. I remember that very well because the Riders 

won the Grey Cup, and they never do that if they’re in power. 

 

But as far as the transition house goes, I would like to 

congratulate the North East Outreach Services and especially 

Louise Schweitzer for her dedicated efforts in there, in that 

project. 

 

If I sound proud, Mr. Speaker, of the businesses, organizations, 

and people of the Melfort constituency, there’s a very good 

reason because I am so proud to represent this constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the opportunities we get as members at this 

time is to express our feelings about things as they relate to the 

budget. And there was a line on . . . or the Throne Speech. And 

there was a line on Monday evening that it was a bit of a pet 

peeve of mine. And I’ve heard it before and it’s something I 

expect to hear from, let’s say Thomas Mulcair — you know, 

somebody who doesn’t know Saskatchewan. Somebody who 

hasn’t got a clue about Saskatchewan and who thinks our 

economy is a disease. I expect that. That’s what they do. But to 

have somebody stand up in the legislature in Saskatchewan and 

talk about Saskatchewan leading the per capita nation, leading 

the nation in greenhouse gases per capita, sounds to me like 

somebody who has never been in Saskatchewan.  

 

You know, like I don’t doubt it’s the truth. I really don’t doubt 

that it’s the truth. And I want to say, I’ve done my part because 

I did trade off my SUV [sport-utility vehicle], and I’m driving a 

car with about 70 per cent better gas mileage. But some of my 

neighbours and friends back home, you know, they drive these 

huge four-by-fours, you know, and they go around and around 

town. I’ve heard they go around and around all day long. And 

sometimes they even have eight wheels on these four-by-fours 

and they’re pulling seeders and they’re pulling cultivators and 

they’re pulling things that farmers should be pulling. 

 

Don’t they know that our farmers use fuel? And why do they do 

that? They do it so they can grow food for a world that has 

seven billion people. But somewhere we’ve missed that. All it 

is . . . I’ll bet you one of those tractors on a hard day of harvest 

from 6 in the morning till midnight that night, I bet you it uses 

enough fuel for an entire high-rise in Toronto.  

 

But that’s what happens in Saskatchewan. That’s what we are. 

We produce food for the world and maybe, unfortunately for 

the party opposite, that this year we even burned more fuel this 

year because we had a tremendous harvest. And people are 

going to eat just a little bit better because of that. But could it 

also be, could it also be that we have the harshest weather in all 

of Canada? Could it be that? Like it takes a little more heat, a 

little more energy to heat my house than it does to heat 

somebody who’s in Victoria. It does. It just does. And yes, 

Victoria. 

 

You know, and what fascinates me about it? In Saskatchewan, 

people . . . We take a perverse pride in the fact of our harsh 

winters. And I remember a day, Mr. Speaker, when I was 

outside in my shirt sleeves in a day with a wind chill factor of 

minus 75 below. It was chilly. And it’s probably a story best 

told for another place and another time. But there was a bit of 

pride in there that I’ve been in that day. And that’s the way we 

are. 

 

We also have the most roads in all of Canada. That’s because 

we have 41 per cent of the arable land in Canada, and we have 

roads all over the place because we need roads all over the 

place. And you know, we measure distance in hours. I live three 

hours north of Regina. We do that. And often the nearest quart 

of milk or loaf of bread is 30, 40 miles away. That’s us. 

 

Now Thomas Mulcair may not understand that. He’s probably 



3754 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

never been in the country in Saskatchewan. He may never 

understand that. And I don’t think he’s overly welcome here 

anyway. But you know, and another thing that happens here in 

Saskatchewan and something that I take a lot of pride in is our 

people in Saskatchewan produce more products per person for 

export than anywhere else in Canada. But it takes energy, and 

that may be a bad thing. And that may be. But when you come 

out with this rhetoric about that you’ve heard your national 

leader talk about and you have this saying that everybody 

always says about Saskatchewan, just stop, listen, and make 

some sense of it. 

 

And now that I’ve got that off my chest, I feel so much better. 

And I would like to start the next part by complimenting the 

party across the Chamber. And I feel strange because I believe 

the speaker before me, the member from Shellbrook, did the 

same thing, or the member from Walsh Acres . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . And no, it wasn’t you. No. And it was . . . But I 

do want to compliment them that true to their name, the official 

opposition, they’re opposed to everything. They’re opposed to 

business. They’re opposed to new schools. They’re opposed to 

growth in Saskatchewan, opposed to additional long-term care 

beds, and in so many cases, just opposed to Saskatchewan, you 

know. And if I may I’d like to spend a few more minutes on 

that but later on in the speech. 

 

You know, but first I would like to bring the House up to date 

on what I’ve been up to since February 7th when I was 

appointed Legislative Secretary for regional municipal 

co-operation. I’ve had the very big pleasure to talk to many, 

many rural municipalities and cities and towns and villages 

around this province in regards to additional co-operation in 

infrastructure, in equipment, and in personnel. 

 

You know, and regional co-operation is something . . . There’s 

150 buildings in Saskatchewan that have more than one 

municipality in the building. There’s many administrators that 

look after two or more municipalities. You know, regional 

municipal co-operation is there today and it will be there 

tomorrow. But the reason, and what I feel my job is, is that to 

take full advantage of the opportunities we have today and so 

much we have on the table, that we have to co-operate in this 

province as never before in order for the municipalities to 

continue to grow and prosper, and grow and prosper as a 

province. 

 

[15:30] 

 

This past June I had the opportunity to attend five of six SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] regional 

meetings across the province. I would like to thank the member 

from Cut Knife-Turtleford for standing in for me at the 

Battleford meeting, and I understand he did an excellent job. 

But I did go back anyway to the next meeting. 

 

I also had the opportunity to attend seven SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] regional 

meetings this fall. And it again took me right across this 

beautiful province from side to side, end to end, and it was a 

great experience. And one thing I did notice, and I would like to 

compliment the Minister of Highways, that in all the kilometres 

I travelled across Saskatchewan there was only one road that I 

would call bad. And I think that may have been my own fault as 

I followed my GPS [Global Positioning System] when there 

was . . . Yes, I shouldn’t have followed my GPS . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . No, there was no highway involved. It was a 

grid road for about 30 miles, and it was good grid road. I just 

wasn’t supposed to be on it. 

 

And I would like to thank President Dave Marit of SARM and 

President Deb Button of SUMA for their welcomeness and for 

allowing me to join the meetings and to speak at the meetings. 

And I’d like to say I’m very proud of Her Worship as Deb is the 

first lady to lead SUMA in its 100-year-plus history. So I’m 

pleased to know her, and she is a good friend. And it was a 

great four weeks I guess being on the road with the two. 

 

And as a former mayor myself, I was so at home with these 

excited municipal leaders from across the province. When I had 

the opportunity to speak to each gathering, I would say, I know 

that you have challenges of growth and they’re serious 

challenges. However the challenges are always part of being a 

council and of serving your community. 

 

Councils 15 years ago, 10 years ago even, had the serious 

challenge of survival — working to keep their schools open, 

working to keep their hospital, long-term care beds, shrinking 

commercial sector. And if at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if at the end of the day they could leave their 

community as they found it, they were satisfied. I will take the 

challenges of growth any time over watching your community 

die a slow death. 

 

These municipal leaders had one thing very much in common: 

they know they had a government that would work with them to 

meet the challenges of growth. This is a government that is a 

willing partner in the continued growth of municipalities and 

the province. Part of the commitment is to work with the federal 

government in their replacement or extension of the Canada 

builds grant. 

 

Now there is a quote that is very relevant to this conversation 

and my speech in particular. And we’ve heard it many times 

because it is so outlandish, but I’m going to say it again just 

because I want to. And the quote is, the Saskatchewan Party 

proposed: 

 

. . . to increase the population of Saskatchewan by 100,000 

over . . . I forget . . . [how many] years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well it is so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, that 

it flies in the face of reality. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker — and that was the end of the quote 

— and I think, Mr. Speaker, why I want that in my speech is 

because he was a minister of Municipal Affairs when I was 

elected to be the mayor of the city of Melfort. When I was at the 

sitting mayors conference, this was the NDP government leader 

who would come to us and break us a bad news about declining 

population, about no more money, about growing nothing. This 

was their leader of the Municipal Affairs — farcical. Doesn’t it 

sound farcical today to use that quote? It just couldn’t happen. 

 

And you know, I don’t know. This place itself is somewhat 

amusing at times because you see the same thing coming up day 

after day. And I know the opposition is trying to get something 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3755 

that sticks and that type of thing. But I had to chuckle last 

Thursday in the Chamber when the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition came out with the line: debt is debt is debt. And you 

know, it was such a good line that the Leader of the Opposition 

repeated it the next day in a radio interview. And it was such a 

good line that the member for Athabasca repeated it on 

Tuesday, yesterday. Well you know, that’s a great line, but let’s 

look at what the NDP doesn’t like to look at and that’s 16 years 

in power. Let’s talk about debt is debt is debt. 

 

When we talk about their 16 years, well yes, we didn’t 

accomplish a lot and we had to do a lot of cutting, but we were 

caught by the debt. We were suppressed in what we could do by 

this debt. And I know the member for Athabasca loves to say 

that, but what did they do about the debt? 

 

When we took over government, when the Sask Party took over 

government in 2007, we had a deficit, a debt, that has cost us 

already $3.7 billion in highways alone — $3.7 billion. And 

what did the NDP do? They raised taxes. That’s what they do. 

They close. 

 

And the Deputy Leader of the Opposition in his passionate 

remarks yesterday, I believe, said that schools are the heart of 

our community. Schools are the heart of our community. They 

closed, they closed 176 schools, tearing the heart of how many 

communities. I find it disingenuous when they stand up and 

then say a line like that because I think we believe that. I don’t 

think they ever did. 

 

Now they left a deficit in education. They failed to maintain 

other schools. They’d left a debt that we’re working on. In fact 

we just announced nine new schools — 18 new schools 

together — last week, and now they’re against that. You know, 

it’s just they’re good at the opposition. You know, they leave 

that debt. And what did they do after they close the schools? 

They raise taxes. Then they went out; they closed 52 hospitals. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many? 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Fifty-two hospitals. They closed 52 hospitals, 

leaving a debt, a deficit in health care infrastructure. And you 

know what else they did? They raised taxes. Over the years . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They raised the PST [provincial sales 

tax]. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — They raised everything. Over the years they 

received over $4 billion in equalization because they turned our 

proud province into a have-not province. They took $4 billion. I 

believe the figure was about $4.4 billion in their last time in 

government. 

 

And you know what else they did? They raised taxes. And they 

raised taxes. And then they wondered why everybody’s leaving. 

But there’s more for the rest of us, they say. You know, you 

name it. Whatever they got their hands on, they’ve buried it in 

debt. And then they stand up and they say, debt is debt is debt. 

We saw it all. We saw your debt. 

 

Saskatchewan is now a growing province, the fastest growing 

province in population, in wage increases, in so many things. 

We are a province today that will take a back seat to no one 

anywhere in the world. That is the kind of government, that is 

the kind of province that the people of Saskatchewan deserve. 

 

In 2007, almost in 2003, people of Saskatchewan maybe 

listened to a voice in the wilderness, a few Saskatchewan Party 

upstarts who said things could be different. Things could be 

better. We are not and should not be a have-not province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And after that election in 2007, things were 

different. Things have been different. 

 

But you know, since then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since then it has 

changed again because now it’s the people of Saskatchewan, the 

1.1 million people of Saskatchewan, that are the leaders. 

They’re the ones that believe . . . In fact they’re the ones that 

know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what Saskatchewan could be. And 

today they are the true leaders. They work, they invest, and they 

grow Saskatchewan. And now today it’s a nimble nine across a 

floor that are the voices in the wilderness. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that is a very good thing. 

 

The Speech from the Throne is part of the plan that builds 

towards 2020, part of the plan that was introduced a year ago as 

the Saskatchewan plan for growth. It’s a plan that has targets — 

targets. We put targets into a plan, and they’re targets that are 

very hard to reach — maybe even farcical, somebody might say 

— but targets that everybody can see. And they can judge us by 

the targets we set, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Saskatchewan plan for growth has a crystal clear vision of 

this province for the next seven years. And this year’s Throne 

Speech shows that it is a reflection of that plan and shows you 

what we’re going to do in the next 12 months to get to that plan. 

This vision, the vision for Saskatchewan, is simply to make 

Saskatchewan the best place in the country, the best place in our 

great country to live, to work, to raise a family, and to start a 

business. 

 

Too many times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen the 

visionary approach to throne speeches — visionary — and then 

the next year we see another visionary approach to throne 

speeches. And they go this way, and they go that way, and 

they’re kind of like something shiny, something shiny. But we 

have a plan, and we’re heading towards that plan. We’ve set out 

the plan, and we’re following the plan, and we have the vision. 

And as I said to municipal leaders right from one end of 

Saskatchewan to another, I said we are going to make some 

mistakes, but we are going to make those mistakes going 

forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You see, standing still or moving 

backwards — and believe me there’s an opportunity maybe 

ever to move backwards — is the biggest mistake that we can 

ever make. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to thank you for giving me the 

opportunity to present my thoughts today on this important 

document. I will be supporting the motion, and I will be 

continuing to support the growth and the strength of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I will not be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 



3756 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to get in 

and join in the conversation and I guess to bring a message to 

the government on behalf of the residents of the Cumberland 

constituency and also some of the residents that have shared 

some of the stories when I’ve been visiting other constituencies 

and meeting with some of the residents who are facing many 

challenges. 

 

But before I start getting into some of the comments and 

bringing the words from some of the leaders and community 

members in northern Saskatchewan throughout the 

communities I visited, and people have shared with me some of 

their concerns and frustration, I just want to acknowledge of 

course my family who support me — my wife and my children, 

my 17 grandchildren who keep me in line and know why I’m 

here doing this job and making sure that there is a province that 

they can be proud of and that they’re a part of and is important. 

 

And not only do I have First Nations but I have Métis 

grandchildren, and I’m very proud to let them know we’ll work 

hard. And I’ll do all I can to make sure they’re a part of this 

province, and they should feel a part of the province. As 

residents, they all should feel that way, that this is their home, 

and they should be proud and not feel any different than any 

other resident in this beautiful province. They have a right to 

take part in the economy, an education, and to feel truly I guess 

accepted in this beautiful province by government, by 

opposition, by all residents of the province. They should feel 

that way, and I want to say that I will work hard to make sure 

they have that. 

 

I also wanted to acknowledge my wife and again, Sandra, say 

thank you for the support that she gives me and the support she 

gives to our family. I also would like to just acknowledge my 

CA, Devin Bernatchez, who works in my office and my CA 

who was Al Rivard, who retired and decided to say he put in a 

long career. And we wish him well on his retirement and thank 

him for the years he put into the province. 

 

And Al as a CA was great, but he also . . . he worked on many 

organizations. He was appointed to the health board but, 

unfortunately, for whatever reason, changes came, he did not 

get reappointed. He thought he was going to and then didn’t. 

And he made decisions, based on many boards that he sat on, 

whether he was with Métis Nation as area director, president on 

the Kikinahk board. And I just want to acknowledge the years 

the he put into northern Saskatchewan. 

 

He’s now retired. He went to BC [British Columbia] to join his 

son and his grandchildren, and I wish him well over there in his 

retirement and thank him for his good friendship over many 

years and the strength that he brought to the northern table, 

lobbying for northern individuals and Métis, and his leadership. 

So with that, you know, I thank him for that. 

 

Also Pearl Doris Morin, I just want to acknowledge her as a CA 

that comes in part-time at the office. I acknowledge her good 

work. But also the executive and everyone else in the 

Cumberland constituency who works hard to raise the issues 

and the concerns of the Cumberland constituency and work 

hard, I just want to thank them for their supporting me and all 

the good work that they do to let northern people know that our 

party is doing our part, and I will do my part. 

Having said that, I would like to get into some of the areas that I 

guess individuals have raised to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

clearly the concerns are there. I think this Throne Speech was 

an opportunity for the government to, you know, put the brakes 

on and have a look at what they’re doing and the way they’re 

handling things and the way they’re handling organizations, 

individuals, and the concerns that they’re supposed to be 

hearing. 

 

And I can reassure you from the conversations I’ve had with 

individuals, with just listening to what’s going on in the coffee 

shops and individuals that are contacting my office and I know 

the members opposite office, there are concerns, and the 

concerns are many. 

 

Yes, you know, you could say the economy is doing good, and 

we want to encourage the business to come to this province. 

And we support that 100 per cent. It’s important. Our leader 

supports business. I know our party does, and we’ll continue to 

let business people, entrepreneurs know that as official 

opposition we’ll work with them, and should at some time, you 

know, they need assistance, we’ll gladly do that. And we wish 

them well. And we wish . . . 

 

When I talk about entrepreneurs too, I want to talk, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, clearly about some of the family businesses that go on 

in this province. There’s many of them, entrepreneurs who are 

family, and they run family businesses. And it’s interesting to 

see the support. And they create so many jobs, you know. 

Sometimes they’re small businesses that create so many jobs in 

this province and give opportunity to so many people.  

 

And I give credit where credit is due with that, and it is the 

family who have created, you know, and the business families 

that have created a lot of the jobs of the small, you know, 

operations. They’re not the big ones where they have hundreds 

but that have, you know, small numbers of employees. But 

they’re local and they do a great job. And they find as 

entrepreneurs where they can assist and work with industry, and 

they find opportunities where we say, well we’re not sure if a 

big business is looking at that. So I want to give them credit 

where credit is due, and it’s to the job numbers that are in our 

province. Yes, it’s to big business, but also to the small family 

business. I want to be clear on that, and we see that. 

 

Some of the other positive things that go on in the province, we 

see leadership. And our municipal governments are working 

hard trying to represent the residents in northern Saskatchewan. 

But also I see and I get to meet with some of the leadership in 

other municipalities, and you hear some of their concerns. And 

we wish them well as they try to represent the individuals and 

the residents they’ve been asked to represent. But it’s also very 

concerning when you hear some of the challenges that they’re 

facing with infrastructure and some of those challenges. 

 

And government can say all they want. And I know this current 

administration likes to pat themselves on the back and, you 

know, they did it their way and it’s their idea and continue, you 

know, good news. And it’s always doom and gloom and, you 

know, from the NDP. And I want to make it very clear, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s not. We do see some good things 

happening and we see industry coming in. We see family 

business, and I talk about that. We see some of the changes 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3757 

happening in our communities, and we see infrastructure. We 

want residents to have that opportunity and we want to make 

sure . . . And that’s good. 

 

But when you see the challenges that some of our 

municipalities are facing, whether it’s infrastructure, and I 

guess the message that they’re sharing, whether it’s . . . When I 

think about Prince Albert, you know, and I want to talk about 

Prince Albert. The community of Prince Albert has done a great 

job to raise the concerns about a second bridge for Prince 

Albert. And you know, we’ve had good talks, and I know the 

critic for — and member from Athabasca — for Highways has 

carried that message on behalf of the residents of Prince Albert. 

 

And it’s too bad that the members that represent Prince Albert, 

Sask Party members, don’t stand up and have not fought for 

Prince Albert and a second bridge and some of the challenges 

that Prince Albert is facing. And you know, the members can, 

you know, yell out all they like. That’s fine. It’s interesting, it’s 

interesting that they want to . . . Maybe they should speak up 

when they’re in Prince Albert and fighting at the . . . [inaudible] 

. . . oh, that’s right. Those are challenges that . . . sometimes 

opportunities. So I would encourage those members to speak up 

for Prince Albert because I know we will be speaking up for 

residents of Prince Albert for their second bridge.  

 

And you know, you think about some of the challenges and 

some of the concerns. Like, you look at the laundry facilities. 

The regional hospital had a laundry facility. And you know, 

unfortunately this government has made a decision, and it’s 

impacting Prince Albert’s economy when you lose the type of 

jobs that the regional laundry facility was doing and, you know, 

would continue to do and was doing a great job. Why would we 

change that when it gave Prince Albert residents an opportunity 

at a good income? They had homes that they could take care of. 

They take care of their family. And you see government making 

decisions like this. So P.A. has not done well being represented 

by the Sask Party members, and I think those members should 

pay attention. 

 

And whether it’s Moose Jaw, the members over there as well, 

they’ve got some challenges. And I think the people of this 

province are going to send a message. And you know, we watch 

what’s going on, and you hear the conversations. And yes, some 

people are saying, you know, the province is doing really great 

and, you know, the numbers. And they can talk about that and 

brag, give themselves a pat on the back. But when you see 

families and individuals that are struggling in this province to 

make ends meet, and whether it’s in northern Saskatchewan, the 

urban area, rural Saskatchewan, we see many families that are 

not feeling a part of the economic boom, and they’re struggling 

with the cost of living. So there are challenges that individuals 

are facing, families are facing. 

 

And we see the challenge that this government is bringing 

forward and, you know, I want to go through some of the 

challenges. And I think about northern Saskatchewan and some 

of the commitments that this government has made. And I think 

about the Wollaston Lake road, the all-season road, all-weather 

road that was announced in 2008 by the current government 

who made that announcement, commitment. I’ve seen the 

announcement. It was . . . You know, they said it. It was a 

commitment to the leadership. And it’s pretty sad. We had the 

chief and council here. 

 

So I was thinking well, you know, they talk about all this 

money they’re putting into highways, and they want to talk 

about record spending on highways, you know. They really like 

patting themselves on their back. But when they make 

commitments to communities like Wollaston Lake, they should 

honour that. So those chief and council, the residents, the mayor 

and council, they should respect. When a government makes a 

commitment and announcement and says you will have an 

all-weather road, it will be completed by the fall of 2012, and 

then they turn their back on those community members and 

they talk about oh, we have other priorities. Yet they want to 

get up here and they want to talk about all the great things 

they’re doing, record spending, when it’s about safety. And you 

know, Wollaston Lake, and it’s unfortunate again, you know, 

when you think about the loss of life on the ice roads travelling 

to Wollaston Lake. In 2010 there was a tragedy — we lost a 

teacher. And to see this government not fulfill that honour and 

obligation that they said they would fulfill, they did not. 

Wollaston Lake did not get the road, and it’s a safety issue. And 

I’ve listened to the leadership, the community members, the 

petition. The chief and council came to this legislature to ask 

the government to honour their commitment, and what did they 

get told? No. 

 

So I was thinking of this opportunity, maybe the government 

could put the brakes on and say hey, you know, we are doing 

record spending. Let’s do the right thing and let’s honour our 

commitment, our announcements to, you know, an all-weather 

road, all-season road to the community of Wollaston Lake. 

 

So it just goes to show . . . And I say this to individuals out 

there, when you have a government that’s willing to make 

announcements and put out the press release and photo ops, 

which this government likes to do, but there is a commitment. 

And they announce about facilities, you know, all the different 

facilities they’re building and stuff. And we’re going to get into 

that and I’m going to get a chance to talk about some of that 

stuff. And we will, you know, give some credit where credit is 

due but also criticize where it needs to be, and the concerns of 

northern residents and the residents that I represent. And we, in 

the opposition, hear the concerns and bring forward to this 

Legislative Assembly whether it’s through question period, 

whether it’s through petitions, whether it’s in committee, we 

can raise those concerns and we will raise the concerns of 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

When the government like the Sask Party government quits 

listening to those individuals, we will stand up. We’ll do the 

right thing and we will raise their concerns so that this 

government can say, oh we didn’t know about that. Yes you did 

know about it. You chose not to have it as your priority, and 

shame on you in some of those areas. 

 

Now having said that, we look at some of the northern roads, 

and I know the government likes to announce certain key roads 

that it has, its priorities, but there was commitments by previous 

governments and money allocated. We know that. This 

government has not given its fair share to northern residents 

when it comes to infrastructure and roads. We know that. And 

we’ve raised that many times in this House, and it gives the 

government a time to look at that. So on that case, I give the 



3758 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

government, you know, a grade. If you want to talk about 

school, they would get an F on that when it comes to roads in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know that we’ll be serving petitions for some of the roads 

in northern Saskatchewan. Some of the residents, whether it’s 

respiratory problems from dust, some of those travelling, or 

safety. We’ll be raising those concerns, but also we’ll be raising 

petitions in the House and coming clearly showing that. 

 

You know, we talk about education and education is important. 

And northern Saskatchewan, we have a young population of 

First Nations, Métis, and northern residents. And you know, we 

work together in the school division. They do a great job trying 

to lobby and advocate for northern children to make sure that 

residents in northern Saskatchewan have the same opportunity 

to education. 

 

And you know, you watch the teachers. And you know, I want 

to say to the teachers and the support staff that are there . . . you 

know, keep doing the great job you’re doing. I know sometimes 

it’s frustrating when you see a government lay out a plan 

without consulting, without talking to teachers, without talking 

to the students, without talking to the families, the parents, 

without talking to the boards of education. And they roll out 

their plans, and they say this is the direction we’re going to go. 

You know, without doing the right thing. And the right thing is 

to talk to the individuals, the front-line individuals. 

 

And we’re talking about teachers who are truly committed. And 

I’ve seen so many of them who do so much. That you know, it’s 

not just the hours, from the school hours that they operate. It’s 

early mornings. It’s late evenings. Whether they’re coaching, 

whether they’re going on trips, whether they’re bringing them 

to this Legislative Assembly to see what goes on here — it’s the 

challenges. 

 

But when you take teachers, students, boards of education, and 

parents for granted, you will pay a price. And you can ignore 

them and you could say oh, we’ve done the right thing. And 

you can pat yourselves on the back all you want and you can 

brag about all the reports that you’re doing and where you’re 

going. But when you see the outcomes of some of the reports 

and no action from this government on some of their reports 

and very little action . . . 

 

[16:00] 

 

But you know, I want to give credit. And I’ll say a small area 

where they chose to go on First Nations, you know, driver 

education program — yes, it’s a start, and I give credit to that. 

But they chose to pick some small part that’s not going to cost 

them a lot of money. Not a lot of money to say, yes we’re going 

to . . . There was so much they could have done from . . . You 

know, when you look at the committee and the task force that 

went on education for First Nations, you know, and you look at 

the report that came out, how do we improve? There was some 

great recommendations from that report. Gary Merasty was on 

there. There was other devoted individuals who did a great job, 

and I thank them for that. 

 

And unfortunately this government chose to again put that 

report on the shelf and use very little of it. When you ask them 

about it, it’s like they’re . . . So we see that. 

 

Now it’s KidsFirst, I think, is the model they’re going to use. 

They’re going to go around and try this differently now. 

They’re going to have another group go around and consult 

with KidsFirst or . . . You know, I’m not sure of the term right 

now they’re going to use, what they’re going to call that report. 

But I’m not . . . You know, it’s great to see these individuals 

volunteer and do their part to be committed to going around 

doing these reports and visiting and consulting with kids. 

 

But at the end of the day, the good work that those reports do, if 

government doesn’t act on those, then shame on the 

government. Because what have you done? All you’ve done is 

taken a group of individuals who are committed, individuals 

who have put their time and effort into saying, yes here’s what 

we need, here’s what we think would work, and here’s what 

we’re hearing out there, and here’s our report. And the 

government says, well that’s great. Thank you very much. And 

we’ll take the photo ops and make a big deal, big 

announcement, and then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they don’t act on 

it. Shame on this government and shame on the minister who 

should be moving this forward, clearly, with education. 

 

Now having said that, you know, we look at the NORTEP 

program [northern teacher education program]. The NORTEP 

program in northern Saskatchewan had an opportunity to 

educate many of our northern residents to become teachers to 

support in their local communities after they get their education. 

And many of those have gone on to get their master’s, and they 

go back in their home communities. They teach the kids. They 

encourage them. They’re role models. They’re mentors. And 

it’s such a program . . . And I happen to be, for years, sitting as 

a board of governor on there before I came to this Legislative 

Assembly representing the people and the good people of the 

Cumberland constituency. 

 

Now having said that, they need a stand-alone facility. We talk 

about record spending. We talk about commitment to all 

children in northern Saskatchewan to the education and to the 

commitment of Saskatchewan residents. And here is an 

organization who’s begging and saying, look, here’s the 

numbers. Here’s the proof. Here’s what we’ve achieved. We’re 

retaining our teachers. We’re doing our part, and the northern 

residents, the teachers in the NORTEP program, the staff, the 

faculty, the board of governors are doing a great job and they’re 

doing their part, and the government is not doing their part, by 

ignoring, not giving them a stand-alone facility, something that 

they’ve been lobbying, fighting hard for. 

 

So again, unfortunately the government, here’s an opportunity 

to put their brakes on, to do some right things, and to do the 

right thing means supporting facilities in northern 

Saskatchewan — whether it’s for the northern teacher education 

program, schools, whether it’s long-term care. And I want to get 

into that because there are many areas where this government is 

failing northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And you know, when I think about seniors, and you look at the 

report. The health region, health authority in the community 

that I represent, and, you know, we took La Ronge and area, 

Mamawetan Churchill River Health Authority, you look at their 

board and you look at their commitment. And in 2010 they 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3759 

went ahead and said it was a need. They’ve seen a need for 

long-term care so they conducted and found, you know, the 

Croft report that was, I think, came out in 2009 to them and ’10, 

they made it public. Clearly identified long-term care, the need 

for our elders or seniors to be respected, and that we only have 

16 beds in northern Saskatchewan for that health region. 

Fourteen were for long-term care, two were for respite. And 

that’s pretty sad. The report came out, I believe it was 46 have 

identified they put in the category of code red — critical 

shortage of long-term care. And it’s unfortunate that you’d have 

to have, you know, triple, triple the amount of beds to cover our 

residents in northern Saskatchewan. And you know, you raise 

those concerns with government and they say, oh yes, we’re 

going to listen. We hear your concerns. 

 

And I know there’s been a large group and more and more . . . 

And I want to talk about this. And I want to talk about when 

communities come together we see how some governments and 

some organizations will split and they’ll try to put a wedge 

between communities and organizations and, you know, a 

government like SaskParty who tries to drive that wedge. And I 

want to show them about don’t drive wedges between 

Saskatchewan residents. Do not do that. It’s the wrong place to 

go. 

 

We’re a province that’s very proud and we’ve always worked 

together in northern Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan. So 

we’ve come together and we will work together and continue. 

And I want to use northern Saskatchewan as example. And truly 

they can show this government here’s how it’s done. You don’t 

take communities and you don’t take organizations and try to 

split them and play them one-on-one. You try to work together 

with them. 

 

And here’s what northern Saskatchewan is doing. The La 

Ronge and area working with the health region and, you know, 

watching the leadership; the mayor from La Ronge and his 

council; the mayor of Air Ronge and his council; Chief Tammy 

Cook-Searson, La Ronge Indian Band . . . I look at the health 

region. I look at community members, residents that are coming 

together. And on October 21st there was a large meeting, a 

public meeting on long-term care and, you know, it was over 80 

people showed up at the meeting to hear the concerns and 

they’re watching it. 

 

And you know, when you have family members come into the 

office as the MLA and they thought they could take their loved 

one — whether it’s mushom, kohkom, their mom or dad — into 

a long-term care facility in northern Saskatchewan in La Ronge 

and they make arrangements and they think that they’re going 

to go in there and their loved one is going to be with them and 

they’re going to stay around northern Saskatchewan where 

they’re used to the culture, where they’re used to their family 

being around, where they’re used to having their loved one 

close to them in a facility, and they find out that there is no 

room and they’re on a waiting list of 40-some to get into there, 

that it would be years before they would get in. 

 

And given, you know, the circumstances, the government has 

known this because they’ve got the Croft report. They’ve got 

the plan from the health region. So it can’t be any surprise. I 

believe that some of the leadership has shared that with the 

minister and the ministry. And I think the health region has 

done a great job of bringing those concerns forward saying, it is 

such a need. It’s a crisis. 

 

But I just want to show how you can take those individuals in 

northern Saskatchewan, whether they’re from the First Nations 

community, whether they’re from the Métis that represent . . . 

have a Métis local and they’re residents that are Métis, residents 

of the First Nations, residents from Air Ronge, La Ronge. It 

doesn’t matter where they live. They’re working together. 

They’re not trying to divide and separate on a cause, and a 

cause is long-term care. They’re grandparents. They’re 

mushom. They’re kohkom. They’re mom and dad. They’re 

fighting. They’re going to work, and they’re going to lobby. 

And they’re going to do whatever it takes to make sure 

long-term care gets the attention of the government. And I 

commend our leader for raising the concerns about northern 

Saskatchewan and long-term care. He has clearly identified it. 

 

And you know, we’ve had residents who have had many 

challenges. And last session it was brought up in the House by a 

resident that we’ve seen wasn’t treated so great when it came 

her opportunity to get into a long-term care facility. She 

couldn’t get in so they placed her in another place where, you 

know, she said she was treated great, but it wasn’t a long-term 

care. It was in a hospital. And that’s sad and that’s wrong. This 

government has an opportunity to fix that. 

 

And I hope when this group that’s come together with so many 

. . . And like I said, October 21st they came together. They’re 

committed to having more meetings and doing whatever they 

need, what the action plan is. What’s the next plan to make sure 

this government hears the concern, whether it’s lobbying, 

whatever it needs to be done. They want to work together. 

They’re not divided and going separate ways. They’re going to 

work together. So you have municipalities. You have First 

Nations. You have Métis individuals that are coming together. 

And I commend the work. And I just want to say it’s important 

that they’re not trying to drive a wedge like this government has 

tried to do on many occasions and has done. And that’s sad and 

they should be ashamed of themselves for that. We need to 

work together. And our province is very proud of the culture. 

It’s very proud of different minorities, of different groups that 

come here, new residents to this province. We will all work 

together and we try to make sure people feel . . .  

 

So I think this government has a challenge on their hand and I 

think the individuals back home have a challenge. But they’re 

going to raise it, and I hope the government will look at that. 

 

Now we look at some of the other challenges that we see. And 

some of those are trappers, our northern trappers. You know, 

we were hoping that the government would deal with our 

Northern Trappers Association fairly and would work with the 

leadership. And you know, I have to say I’ve seen the PAGC 

[Prince Albert Grand Council]. They’re trying to work with the 

trappers. The Métis Nation has signed an agreement. They’re 

going to work with PAGC. And they’re going to come together 

with northern trappers to support them in certain ways. And I 

commend that they’re doing that to try to make sure that our 

trappers are treated with respect. 

 

And many trappers, you know, they’re on their traditional 

traplines. And we have industry and sometimes industry comes 



3760 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

in . . . They’re supposed to consult and they’re supposed to not 

just go in an area where somebody has their family trapline. 

And they might be there for generations, very proud of what 

they have. They may not have a lot, but they’re proud of their 

trapper cabin, their trapline that their mushom and kohkom, 

their grandparents, their parents, maybe were born and raised 

on, on that trapline. And they respect it and they do that. And 

they do, you know, cherish the culture for their grandchildren, 

their children. And they’re trying to hand it off to the next 

generation to show. And unfortunately industry is going into 

some of their traditional territory without consulting them, 

whether it’s SaskPower. And those are issues we’re going to be 

raising because we have trappers right now who are currently 

frustrated, you know. SaskPower goes in there and does what it 

wants to do. 

 

So industry has to make sure that they’re respecting the trapper. 

They’re not against industry and they’re not against, you know, 

working with industry to move ahead, and they encourage that 

and they want it. But all they’re asking for is to be shown the 

respect, to be consulted, to make sure when there’s areas that 

they want to be accommodated, they can be accommodated. 

And that’s what they’re asking for. They’re not asking for a lot. 

They want to work in partnership. 

 

So we see different groups in northern Saskatchewan that work 

in partnership and work good. And I used the example of 

long-term care. There’s a partnership that’s being developed 

from many community members, from leaders in the 

community. It’s a partnership. It’s working together for what’s 

better for Saskatchewan, for northern residents and that’s very 

important. 

 

So when you look at the trappers, I think we’ll be pushing hard 

on that and I again commend the good work that the northern 

trapper is doing. We see an industry that, you know, we see the 

fur prices going up. And I wish them well. We’re coming up to 

that season where they’ll be out harvesting furs, and we want to 

make sure that they get the support. And unfortunately right 

now this current government has not supported these 

individuals that are lobbying hard. 

 

So I just want to make it very clear that government needs to do 

a better job of consulting and working with the Northern 

Trappers Association. And the PAGC, I want to give them, you 

know, great credit for the good work they’re doing to work with 

. . . And the Métis Nation has signed an agreement. 

 

So having said that, you know, I see those are challenges. But 

we also look at our commercial fishing industry in northern 

Saskatchewan. Commercial fishermen, they’re, you know, 

family business again. Small, but they try to do a great job and, 

you know, there’s a lot of cost to it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot 

of cost. They used to have a freight subsidy for transporting 

their fish to market and this government, not only did it say, 

well you weren’t using the money, you didn’t use it all, so 

we’re just going to cut the whole program, we’re going to scrap 

it. I’m hoping that this government will go back . . . And I 

didn’t see that in the Throne Speech, where they’re going to 

work with industry. You know, we’re going to put the brakes 

on, we’re going to talk and we’re going to get an opportunity 

here to talk with the commercial fishermen and see if maybe we 

did some . . . And I know they did some wrong things and they 

can change that. 

 

And I’m going to encourage the government and I hope the 

ministry within the government, to say, okay, you know, we’ve 

made some errors. Let’s stop here. Let’s stop and think a little 

bit about this. How are we impacting families and northern 

people? How are we impacting those individuals who live a 

traditional lifestyle? Maybe we were too quick to act on this and 

maybe we should have consulted and talked. Maybe they have 

better ideas to support them in a very supportive way, instead of 

saying, no, we’re just going to go ahead. We’re going to put our 

blinders on. We’re going to do what we want to do, and we’re 

just going to go ahead. And that’s unfortunate that that 

happened. 

 

But the government, and even the government, instead of 

patting yourselves always on the back and it’s all your great 

work that the province is doing . . . It’s six years they want to 

talk about, always six years. They don’t want . . . And when 

they want to reflect back on any other administration, they want 

to talk about how negative it is. Well you know what? At the 

end of the day, people are going to see what’s going on. And 

you know, I talked about some of the conversations that are 

happening in restaurants, and individuals. And I say this: 

members, people who I know supported the Sask Party 

government, this government, this administration, who are 

starting to wonder. They’re starting to say, whoa, whoa, this 

wasn’t what we were told. You know, that stuff like challenges 

that individuals see. And you know, three more MLAs is 

another one. You know, these are things that they’re talking 

about and cost. They can rethink these ideas. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So having said that, as these individuals are saying, how come 

our costs of utilities are going up so much, whether it’s 

SaskPower rates increasing . . . Well that’s your government. 

That’s the Sask Party government who’s achieving that. Give 

themselves another pat on the back. You’re putting more costs 

on Saskatchewan residents because of the way you’ve handled 

things, so give yourselves another pat on the back. You seem to 

want to do that. So pat yourself on the back for that. 

 

Why is it when Saskatchewan residents are struggling and 

struggling, this government doesn’t want to take . . . Oh, no, no, 

no, they don’t want to be in the photo ops, they don’t want to be 

anywhere near it. But the minute there’s a photo op to take 

where they’re going to get some good, they want to be right 

there. It’s amazing to watch. But after the fact, they don’t want 

to be anywhere near it. They don’t want to touch it. It’s 

amazing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how it goes, you know. They 

just don’t want to be there. So they don’t want to take any credit 

for the cost of living going up, rents. They had opportunities, 

and they had opportunities to stop and think, you know, about 

rents. And we look at the rents that are going on in this province 

right now. People cannot . . . Families are struggling to make 

ends meet. You know, you can talk about the good times but 

you see families struggling. And then we talk about a northern 

housing and the Minister Responsible for Housing and you 

know, interesting to watch, said she would consult before. And 

I was in a meeting in Sandy Bay where she said before, before 

we implement and make any changes in northern 

Saskatchewan, we’ll consult. Well we’re still waiting to see 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3761 

when she’s coming to consult and who she’s going to consult 

with. 

 

And maybe this government will say, oh yes, it’s time; we’re 

moving ahead with some plans. But you know, unfortunately 

they haven’t consulted. Who have they consulted with? I 

haven’t heard who they have. So who are they talking with? 

And what meetings have they had? And is it public meetings 

that they’re holding to consult? Is it individuals? How are they 

doing their consultation process with renters before they 

implemented the changes? But yet we know people have got 

letters. They’re getting increases. They’re wondering why. 

They’re frustrated, 30 per cent. 

 

Yet you look at the cost in northern Saskatchewan. The home 

ownership program, I’ve raised petitions in this House about 

home ownership. Individuals signing petitions, hundreds of 

individuals upset and saying implement back and bring back. 

Don’t take away a housing program that gave renters an 

opportunity to own their home, to be proud. And they are. And 

they take care of their yards and they do a great job. 

 

So the government said, no we’re not going to consult. We’re 

just going to scrap that. Why would you do that to northern 

residents and any resident that had an opportunity in this 

province? But we look at the cost, the cost of living in northern 

Saskatchewan. And you talk to individuals whether it’s for 

food, clothing, heat to provide for your families, the cost is so 

much higher. 

 

Why would you even talk about increasing rents and the rents to 

individuals when they’re struggling? And we know. You look 

at poverty. You look at all the challenges families are in, and 

addictions. And you look at the rate of suicide and you wonder 

why, and how a government can say, well we’re going to do 

this, this without consulting. How is it that all these challenges 

are having, addictions and all the challenges, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that are facing northern Saskatchewan and residents? 

 

And it’s not just northern Saskatchewan. There’s many 

communities struggling — we know that — and families 

struggling. They’re doing their part. They’re doing their part as 

families. They’re trying to work. They’re trying to raise their 

families. They’re doing their part but the government is failing 

them. The government’s not doing their part on behalf of many 

Saskatchewan families. Let me tell you that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, very clearly. 

 

We’re hearing that, and the frustration by individuals, families. 

But does this government care? Do they listen? No. They’re so 

busy patting themselves on the back, patting themselves on the 

back for every good thing that happens in the province. It’s 

their doing. Everything happened the day they got in and it all 

changed. You know, if they want to believe that, continue with 

that. 

 

But I tell you, one day, one day Saskatchewan people will have 

enough of it, and they will say, that’s enough. You haven’t done 

. . . We trusted you, and we gave you —and I’ve said that 

before in this House — an opportunity, you know. We’re going 

to work hard on this side of the House to make sure we earn the 

trust of Saskatchewan people. And I know that we will work 

hard and we will do all we can — and I know my colleagues 

will — to raise the concerns being raised out there when there’s 

challenges, whether it’s long-term care, whether it’s individuals 

who are struggling with family, whether they’re in the hospital, 

they’re in long-term care. All those challenges . . . 

 

You know, they talk about all the facilities, you building all 

these facilities. Well I’m telling you, we’ve heard a lot of 

concerns about staffing. And the great work that the front-line 

workers are doing in hospitals, our RNs, our long-term care, 

those individuals are working hard. They’re doing their part, 

whether it’s the caretakers. They’re doing their part. They’re 

doing their best. 

 

But when they’re short of staff and they’re short of resources to 

do the good job that they want to do . . . And you hear the 

frustrations from the RNs. You hear the frustrations from 

individuals, families who are struggling. This government 

should be ashamed of themselves. Don’t pat yourselves on the 

back. Don’t talk about all the money you’re spending and all 

the great facilities you’re building. Make sure that you have 

adequate resources for the facilities that are there, the respect 

that our seniors deserve, our parents deserve. That’s what you 

need to do. And that should be where your focus is, not on 

patting yourselves on the back the way you do. 

 

You come in here. You talk about all the great things you’re 

doing. Are you not hearing the challenges? You know, there’s 

smart growth. Yes, there’s smart growth. We realize that. When 

good things are going in this province, good for the people of 

Saskatchewan, but when there’s many people struggling and 

aren’t feeling a part of that boom and the growth, you have to 

stop and wonder. You know, you’re elected here. Stop. The 

backbenchers, are you doing the right things for Saskatchewan 

people? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. Yes, we are. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Oh yes, yes. You are. Okay. You keep 

yelling that. The member from Moose Jaw North, keep yelling 

that because we’ll see in Moose Jaw how good you’re treating 

the residents in Moose Jaw and how you represent them. But 

that’s good. We’ll just let those individuals deal with that. 

 

And I have said to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve said this very 

clearly, individuals can pat themselves on the back, take credit 

for all that’s going on, the good work of many Saskatchewan 

people. There was a lot of work put in by Saskatchewan 

residents in the 16 years of the NDP government, the previous 

. . . Yes, and I’ll say that. There was a lot of good work that 

Saskatchewan people did working with that administration to 

try to change things. We came out of a mess and we know 

where that mess is. But they don’t want to talk about that. They 

just want to talk about the bad years of our 16 years. Well you 

know what? There was clearly many years where Saskatchewan 

people, Saskatchewan people did a lot of good work to clean up 

the mess of the years of the Conservative government. I tell you 

that, but they forget about that. But that’s okay. Saskatchewan 

people don’t forget. I listen to them. I watch. So these 

individuals can go around and pat themselves on the back all 

they want, and that’s fine. 

 

But you know, I want to get back into some of the areas where I 

think truly we’re dealing with. And I talked about the cost of 



3762 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

living. I’ve talked about SaskPower. And I want to talk about 

Sandy Bay. There’s a community in Sandy Bay. Many of those 

community members are very concerned about the way 

SaskPower, at the dam, has dealt with their community 

members — whether they’re First Nations, Métis, whether they 

live in the municipality — the way they were uprooted when 

the dam came in. There’s a lot of challenges and concerns 

raised to me about compensation, about different issues facing 

them. And this government has to face that. It’s time to do the 

right thing. It’s time to work with those communities, the 

organizations that represent the residents, and make sure that 

those families and those individuals that feel they were not 

treated right and that justice wasn’t done to them, they deserve 

that. And that needs to happen. 

 

So I would encourage this government to focus on that and deal 

with some of those challenges. But of course, you know, they 

want to pat themselves on the back. Do that, and then pat 

yourselves. Work on some of those problems that are going on 

in our province that we hear from residents, not just in northern 

Saskatchewan, not just in Cumberland, but all over the province 

that are feeling. Then they can pat themselves on the back when 

they’ve said they’ve done some good things to correct some of 

the concerns that they don’t want to hear or acknowledge. So I 

say that. 

 

You know, we look at the fire policy currently that this 

government has run on. We had the towers. The towers in 

northern Saskatchewan and in the South, they observe fires. The 

fire towers they were called. Individuals would go up and they 

would monitor the fire season, and they did a great job. I’ve 

talked to some of the members that worked there and were 

supervisors years ago and have retired and said, you know, the 

use of those towers were truly amazing. It gave . . . Whether it 

was hunters in the area, that there was people picking berries, 

they seen there was a tower there. They knew somebody was 

there should they get into trouble. That was a good thing that 

you had somebody there close, and that’s good. So I’ve heard 

that kind of stuff. 

 

But they talk about the change, and the loss of jobs. And some 

of these individuals, oh sure they say, oh we’ll give you some 

compensation. But unfortunately the government needs to do 

the right thing and put the towers back in, put the brakes on. 

And you can deal with that.  

 

And you can say, you know what, maybe we acted too quickly. 

Maybe we didn’t consult again. It shows again the government, 

the current government, you know, the Sask government does 

not consult, doesn’t like to consult. I don’t know why that is. 

They don’t like to. Oh they say, oh, they do. Oh yes, we do. But 

it’s hard to find. Why are so many people saying the same 

story, you know? You don’t consult. You just do it, do it, do it, 

and then you pat yourselves on the back. You know, people are 

tired of that. But you know, I don’t want to go on too long 

about that because let them deal that up. Let the people of 

Saskatchewan do the judging. And they will, and I know that, 

you know. 

 

Now we’ve talked about a lot of different issues in the House, 

and my colleagues have raised a lot of concerns, whether it’s 

education, long-term care, whether it’s about our trappers, our 

fishermen. And I’ve raised those issues, whether it’s roads, 

whether it’s cell service in northern Saskatchewan, you know, 

the home ownership program that this government scrapped, 

changes that this government’s going to make and costing 

northern families more throughout the province. 

 

And I’ve asked this, why? Why can’t you just stop and rethink 

this? Why can’t you put the brakes on and say, you know what? 

Maybe we are doing this too quickly. Maybe we should stop 

and think this. They can stop. I encourage them. Stop. The 

minister had the power, and the ministry’s to say, whoa, maybe 

we’ve gone too quick on this. We need to consult and talk to 

individuals. 

 

But let’s make sure. And I mean, I’m going to be asking more 

questions because I know there’s a lot of people in northern 

Saskatchewan when it comes to housing, you know, want to 

make sure they have a home that they call their home, that they 

have a place for their family. And we see the overcrowding and 

we see the crumbling houses that are in northern Saskatchewan. 

There’s a lot of work to be done. And you know, I keep hearing 

the government say, we know there’s more work to be done. 

Well it’s time that they do some of that work in northern 

Saskatchewan and quit ignoring northern people. It’s time to 

work. 

 

We’re a province that is supposed to be working together. And 

for many people, you know, we talk about the strength and the 

partnerships, and in northern Saskatchewan we do that. And I 

commend northern Saskatchewan — the different 

organizations, the leaders — whether it’s education, whether 

it’s post-secondary, they’re always doing their part. They’re 

doing their part to hold up their end of the deal, Saskatchewan 

families are, but this government is failing them terribly, 

terribly, the way this government is treating them. 

 

Now they expect northern Saskatchewan to do their part, and 

they do. But they’re going to hold this government to account 

for not doing their part, and I think Saskatchewan people will 

see that and will say that. So when I go back to some of this . . . 

You know, it’s interesting about consulting and talking with 

individuals. 

 

I think of the new provincial park, the provincial park. And I 

raised this to the minister from Parks, and it was interesting. I 

know that La Ronge Indian Band was concerned about the 

provincial park and the Blue Heron Provincial Park, the new 

provincial park that the government announced in its campaign. 

And they put it in a brochure, or their commitment was two 

provincial parks, and they’re going ahead with that. That’s the 

sad reality, you know, sad reality. Here’s the First Nations in a 

letter telling them, do not go ahead. We want to be consulted. 

We want to talk. We have concerns. We want to talk to you 

about this before you go ahead. Uh-uh, they’re firing ahead 

with it. It didn’t matter. We don’t care, First Nations, your 

traditional territory. We’re going to go ahead. 

 

So where is that showing respect to the First Nations leaders? 

Where is that? How is that showing respect? Here you have a 

provincial park, a new one. And you have a First Nations telling 

you they’ve got concerns. They want to sit down and talk, and 

you don’t. You just fire ahead with it, and you do it. So having 

said that, that’s pretty sad. 

 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3763 

And I wanted to put that in and commend the chief and council 

for their good work and trying to bring, you know, the concerns 

that they’re raising with their traditional territory. But they 

should be consulted. And they should agree with it. And you 

don’t just go out and do what you want. If you’re not willing to 

work with them, then don’t just announce this. So they can 

make all the announcements with the people going in. 

 

And you know, we encourage — and so do they — we 

encourage people to come to our parks. We have a beautiful 

North. We have beautiful parks, whether they’re regional, 

provincial. We know we have the national park. That’s great. 

We want people to come here. It’s good for the economy. 

Nobody’s about that. But you don’t make announcements, and 

you don’t go through the process and say, well we don’t have to 

consult the traditional territory of La Ronge Indian Band and 

others in the area that have an entitlement to that traditional 

territory. Let’s be very clear, and I make that statement very 

clear. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve raised a 

number of different issues, whether it’s education, housing in 

northern Saskatchewan, and some of the challenges. But I just 

want to say this last little bit clearly. We need to work together 

for all Saskatchewan people. We cannot be using, you know, 

and driving a wedge between residents of our province. It is 

wrong. It’s a wrong message to send. It is not the right message 

to send to our children, our seniors, our residents, wherever they 

come from, newcomers. 

 

We’ve got to be working together, and the government has to 

do a better job. And the way the government is driving wedges 

is wrong, and they should be ashamed of themselves. We 

should not be doing that. We should be all working together — 

northern Saskatchewan, southern — as a team in true 

partnership. That is true partnership. And when I see this 

government doing that — going out there, consulting, and 

making sure that everyone feels a part of this province in a 

partnership, then I will say, pat yourselves on the back. But till 

that time comes, quit patting yourselves on the back because 

you do not deserve it. The Saskatchewan people do. They 

earned it. They should be giving themselves a pat on the back. 

But no, you want to take the credit for it. They will come to 

judge you for this. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been an opportunity to share some of 

the frustration, but also some of the good work that has been 

done in certain areas. You know, and I’ve said that clearly, at 

this point I will not be supporting the Speech from the Throne, 

but I will be supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And now we will 

hear the rest of the story, Mr. Speaker. I’m trusting that I can 

paint a little bit different picture of the province of 

Saskatchewan than we’ve just heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank you. It’s with pleasure that I rise in the 

House today and enter debate on the provincial Throne Speech, 

Mr. Speaker. I’d like to begin by reiterating what a privilege it 

is for me to represent the people of Regina Douglas Park who 

saw fit to represent me.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I moved around the constituency over the 

summer and the past little while, I couldn’t help but be 

absolutely thrilled to see the redevelopment that’s taking place 

in Regina Douglas Park. You see, Regina Douglas Park is one 

of the older parts of Regina. Our first immigrants in the early 

1900s came, and many of them came from the eastern European 

countries and settled in what’s now Regina Douglas Park. In 

fact we used to call it old Germantown, Mr. Speaker, and these 

people built their houses on little 25-foot lots, clapboard houses. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, those little 25-foot lots have seen new 

houses being erected, the old being torn down and these new 

houses going up, being taken over by young people, Mr. 

Speaker, building environmentally friendly houses, Mr. 

Speaker, energy efficient houses. It’s an absolute joy to see the 

rejuvenation of Regina Douglas Park, especially the older part 

of Regina Douglas Park, that part that’s a little bit north of 

Broadway Avenue in the city, Mr. Speaker. It’s an absolute joy 

to see. 

 

And as I travel around the province — and I had a little 

opportunity to do that, Mr. Speaker, when I was minister — not 

only the constituency, but our great province, Mr. Speaker, it 

was just encouraging to be reminded of how great this province 

of ours is and how great the people of Saskatchewan are. 

 

This past summer, Mr. Speaker, four of my colleagues and I — 

the Minister of Health, the Minister of Social Services, the 

Minister of Government Relations, and the Minister of . . . help 

me out — visited Pinehouse Lake, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

just take a second to recount that experience. It’s an experience 

that will stay with me forever. It was just an eye-opener, and I 

came to appreciate first-hand just how special the North is and 

how special the people of the North are. 

 

And the area . . . We were met at the plane by His Worship, the 

mayor of Pinehouse Lake, Mike Natomagan and his council. 

And we had a quick visit in the auditorium, Mr. Speaker, and 

then we toured the school. The absolute joy and pride of the 

principal that showed us around that school is the best I’ve 

seen, Mr. Speaker. It was just an awesome experience. And 

then the Minister of Health and I had an opportunity to tour the 

health facility, and again the pride of the people was clearly 

expressed. 

 

But the highlight of the day, Mr. Speaker, was the journey out 

to Recovery Lake and the recovery lodge. We were invited to a 

celebration that was taking place, Mr. Speaker, where a young 

couple, who had fallen on a bit of hard times and had their 

children taken away from them, were reunited with their 

children. They had spent two weeks with community support in 

the recovery centre, and it was an absolute wonderful 

celebration of the accomplishments of this young couple. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t too long ago that Pinehouse 

Lake was given the label of the drinking capital of North 

America, I’m going to say. CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] did an article on the fifth estate. To see the 



3764 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

transition, to see the transformation of that particular 

community is just testament to the strength and the will of our 

people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and in particular the 

people of that community and of our North. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, my family and I have kind of rekindled a 

relationship with holidaying in the area around Prince Albert 

National Park, in particular Elk Ridge. We used to go to the 

North when the kids were young and spend a week up there. 

And just over the last couple of years, we’ve been able to get 

back up north, partly because of the job that we’re presently 

doing. To see the development, to see the growth, to see the 

excitement, to see the wonderful residences of the people that 

have made the North their recreation destination and their 

home, Mr. Speaker, again is just testament to the growth, to the 

vitality, to the vibrance that we call Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the new Saskatchewan, and it’s exciting to 

be from Saskatchewan. The pace has picked up. Although when 

you try to get from the north end of Saskatoon to the south end 

of Saskatoon at five o’clock, it’s a little bit, it can be a little bit 

frustrating. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the challenges of 

growth. 

 

The pace has picked up. There’s a sense of optimism, Mr. 

Speaker. And a sense of, well, there’s a sense simply of we’re 

number one, Mr. Speaker. And that never happened before. 

 

You know, last week the member from Regina Dewdney 

reminded me of how Saskatchewan used to be the butt of many 

jokes, Mr. Speaker. And the three lanes to Alberta and the one 

lane coming back to Saskatchewan reminded me of those days 

that weren’t very happy days. The days that we were closing 

schools. The days that we were closing hospitals. The days that 

there was the great migration to the west, Mr. Speaker. Just not 

a very happy time. But, Mr. Speaker, you know, that’s not 

happening in Saskatchewan any more. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we can claim to be number one in many, 

many different areas. The lowest unemployment rate in the 

country, Mr. Speaker. Second highest average weekly earnings, 

Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon and Regina lead the country in 

economic growth. Saskatchewan is Canada’s largest exporter 

per capita than anywhere else in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re on the world stage in many, many fronts, and a couple of 

fronts that are dear to me. 

 

Graham DeLaet is one of Saskatchewan’s products, Mr. 

Speaker. I had the great opportunity when I was a little younger 

to be involved with the junior golf program at a golf club that I 

worked at. And every year we had a junior tournament. And my 

job — I had nothing to do with Graham DeLaet’s golf career, I 

can assure you — I was the official starter for the golf 

tournament, Mr. Speaker. And I can recall very clearly standing 

on the first tee and announcing, and now on the first tee from 

Weyburn, Saskatchewan, 9-year-old Graham DeLaet. And I had 

the great chance to do that on two occasions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To see where Graham DeLaet is today, on the world stage, 

bringing this interest and intrigue to the province is an absolute 

delight, not just for me, Mr. Speaker, but for all of 

Saskatchewan. In fact during one golf tournament this past golf 

season, it was hard to . . . Well, it wasn’t that hard actually. But 

coming down the fairway on a Saturday was Graham DeLaet in 

the Saskatchewan colours, these brilliant green pants with this 

wonderful yellow golf shirt on. And, Mr. Speaker, emblazoned 

across his chest were the words, “Think Saskatchewan.” Now 

that doesn’t happen very often, Mr. Speaker. That’s the new 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And how can I mention Graham DeLaet in one breath and not 

on the other hand mention Mark McMorris and his brother 

Craig and their accomplishments about bringing Saskatchewan 

and the whole picture of Saskatchewan on the world stage. Not 

bad for a province that doesn’t have any mountains on which to 

snowboard, Mr. Speaker. So Saskatchewan clearly is on the 

world stage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the benefits of growth and the energy of the new 

Saskatchewan are visible throughout all of our constituencies, 

and Regina Douglas Park is no exception. Mr. Speaker, I spoke 

a little bit about the rejuvenation of Douglas Park in terms of 

the housing that’s taking place there, and let me just elaborate 

on a couple of other of the signs of growth and prosperity in 

Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Two new schools, Mr. Speaker. Arcola Community School, Mr. 

Speaker, and Douglas Park School, two absolutely beautiful 

new schools that provide an abundance of learning environment 

and atmosphere that are so challenging and conducive to 

learning, Mr. Speaker. I had the good fortune to be on hand 

when we opened those schools, Mr. Speaker, and to see the 

learning spaces, to see the fine arts facility, the new 

gymnasiums, the learning stations, Mr. Speaker. The 

opportunity for students and teachers to be creative is second to 

none, Mr. Speaker, part of the new Saskatchewan. 

 

New residence going up at the University of Regina in Douglas 

Park, Mr. Speaker. The SIAST nursing program expansion, Mr. 

Speaker, new child care spaces at the U of R [University of 

Regina]. 

 

On College Avenue, the part of Douglas Park where I grew up, 

just a little bit west of Balfour Collegiate, Mr. Speaker, College 

Park Retirement Residence, an absolutely delightful residence 

for our seniors to retire. The programs that are offered at 

College Park are an absolute joy to partake in. And I know that 

some of my colleagues and I have had the opportunity to visit 

there and participate in some of the activities, bring greetings, 

and opening it. And annually, Mr. Speaker, they have the senior 

Olympics. Next year, I might be a participant. But the actual 

activities that take place just lend credence to the joy and the 

fun that our seniors are having in some of the residences that we 

have for them. 

 

McEwen house, Mr. Speaker, a new residence for some of our 

most vulnerable. Milton Heights is another one. 

 

One of the memorable experiences that have taken place of 

course this past year was the 100th anniversary of the 

legislature and the grounds. For a long time, Mr. Speaker, and 

long overdue, we had the opportunity to recognize our first 

premier, Walter Scott. And I was at the unveiling of the 

beautiful statue that adorns the grounds in front of the 

legislature. The one Sunday morning, Mr. Speaker, my wife and 

I were taking our usual Sunday morning walk and, as we 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3765 

approached the statue, we noticed a young couple were standing 

lake side of the statue and gazing up at Walter Scott holding the 

diagram of our legislature. And they were trying to line up, they 

were trying to line up the cut-out of the weld of the dome with 

the actual dome, Mr. Speaker. And you could almost read their 

minds with them trying to articulate the vision that Walter Scott 

must have had for this building and for this great province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I’m happy to say that I’m in a 

position today where I’m able to partake in the new vision for 

Saskatchewan, the vision going forward, one of growth and one 

of sustainability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s an absolutely poignant story . . . And another landmark 

for me is the construction of the new Leibel Field on the east 

side of Regina. I had the opportunity when I was a young boy to 

play football on the old Leibel Field, Mr. Speaker. We had 

night games and there was one bulb on a post in the centre of 

the field. We had some shacks that we were able to change into 

our football gear with, Mr. Speaker, and a couple of uprights, 

and we played football. Today, Mr. Speaker, Leibel Field is an 

absolute monument to the work that our community has done in 

terms of being able to provide a facility for our young people to 

play football and soccer. It’s a bowl, Mr. Speaker, that’s second 

to none, that provides that opportunity for our young kids to 

play football. And I know that my colleague from Regina 

Dewdney’s had the opportunity to do some coaching over there, 

Mr. Speaker, and I’m just delighted. That’s just some of the 

activities and progress that is taking place in Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t take a couple of minutes 

now to recognize some of the people that are important in my 

life. First of all of course my family, my wife, my partner, and 

my best friend, Karen, who’s kind of been . . . not kind of. 

She’s been with me every step of the way throughout these . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thanks. Throughout these first two years. 

You don’t ever want to say kind of, do you? You never want to 

say kind of when you’re talking about your wife. I married up. 

I’m hearing that I married up, and she’s . . . Anyway, 

throughout these couple of years, Mr. Speaker, a couple of 

years that have produced some great experiences, some great 

challenges, some laughs, some great insights, and most 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, great friendships — friendships here 

in this House, my colleagues and their spouses, members from 

the opposite side, great friendships, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This business that we do here is absolutely serious business, 

Mr. Speaker, but because of the democracy that we live in, 

we’re able to talk with each other, cajole, argue, and at the end 

of the day, we can walk away from here and say hi to each 

other. And, Mr. Speaker, I respect that element very dearly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I need to mention my constituency assistant, 

Becky Mason, as well as Ron Naidu and Brittany who share our 

offices. You know that three of us share an office over there on 

the east side. I know that the three of them work hand in hand to 

meet the needs of our constituents. And without their 

co-operation and help, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t be where we 

are. 

My brother Pat and his family who still live in Regina Douglas 

Park. My older brother started a paint contracting company 

back in the early ’60s, Mr. Speaker. He’s been delivering paint 

services to families and businesses in and around Regina for 

quite some time. His son Martin now has taken over the 

business, and so we’ve got two generations of paint contractors 

contributing to this economy, Mr. Speaker, and still living in 

Regina Douglas Park. My sister Lois and her husband, Brian, 

who were most instrumental in my election and remain 

supportive as we move forward. 

 

I have also been very fortunate to be surrounded by great people 

all my life, Mr. Speaker, and this experience has been no 

different. I want to thank the Legislative Assembly staff, 

constituency association volunteers, office staff, my cabinet 

colleagues, and my caucus colleagues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you well know, the work that is accomplished 

here happens only because there is a group of people with like 

minds, a team of very committed loyal individuals who look 

after each other, support each other, as we discussed, and as I 

said, debate, agree, disagree, cajole, and bother. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve experienced all of those this year. And so on 

behalf of my family and the constituency of Regina Douglas 

Park, I want to thank all of you for the work that you do and 

your loyalty to helping me along. Thanks, colleagues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank our leader. To the Premier, and on 

behalf of Regina Douglas Park and my family, I want to thank 

him for his leadership. And, Mr. Speaker, I might take a minute 

to just talk a little bit about that leadership. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s many reasons why we’re here where we are, 

why we are where we are in Saskatchewan. Some of those 

reasons we’ve had control over, and some we didn’t, Mr. 

Speaker — the market timing, the weather, the Riders. But, Mr. 

Speaker, key in all of our success, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 

we have a leader who stands up for Saskatchewan — that’s 

right, Mr. Speaker — stands up for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know the ratings. We know where our leader 

stands in the province and in the country in terms of popularity. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s important. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

important part is that we have a leader that stands up for 

Saskatchewan. I can’t say it enough. Every chance he gets, he 

talks Saskatchewan, thinks Saskatchewan, promotes 

Saskatchewan at every turn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think you’ll agree. I think you’ll agree that most 

people that we encounter in our daily lives, most people are 

down to earth. They call a spade a spade, and they expect the 

same in return. Mr. Speaker, the people I talk to appreciate a 

leader who demonstrates those qualities and, Mr. Speaker, 

because this is Saskatchewan, again I have to say, a leader who 

stands up for Saskatchewan, a leader with a plan, 

Saskatchewan, a plan to move us forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to invest in infrastructure. We want to 

educate, train, and develop a skilled workforce. We want to 

ensure our competitiveness, Mr. Speaker. We want to support 

increased trade, investments, and exports. We want to advance 

our resource strength, Mr. Speaker. And we want to do that all 

in a very fiscal and responsible way. Six BB’s — Mr. Speaker, 



3766 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2013 

that would be balanced budgets — six consecutive balanced 

budgets, Mr. Speaker, that’s . . . Mr. Speaker, that record speaks 

volumes about our leader. 

 

And as I said, our plan is about goals and targets. Target: 1.2 

million people by 2020; $2.5 billion in infrastructure spending, 

Mr. Speaker; eliminate wait times in emergency rooms; 

investing in housing; eliminate the wait list for adult basic 

education programs; and the list goes on. Mr. Speaker, 

leadership is about promises made and promises kept — over 

140 promises made, 140 promises kept. 

 

Leadership is about being accessible to the people, Mr. Speaker, 

about being down to earth. Leaders that take a position, Mr. 

Speaker, and let the people know where they stand. Our leader 

has provided our position on Keystone, Mr. Speaker, on potash, 

on uranium, on resource sharing — all based on a common 

sense foundation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We all know the story of the family car and how common sense 

prevailed and the family that lives in our province and had 

difficulties with their vehicle. Common sense prevailed, Mr. 

Speaker, and now those people are in a position to look after 

their family. A leader that is committed and stands up for 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, he also plays the banjo, Mr. 

Speaker. How much more down to earth can you get than that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, a plan to sustain growth and meet the 

challenges of growth, this is serious work. And all those 

mentioned deserve serious recognition for the job they do and a 

job very well done. Again, Mr. Speaker, our plan is about 

growth, economic growth on the one hand and social growth on 

the other, growth not just for growth’s sake, not just for the sake 

of growth but growth so that we will all become the best place 

in Canada to live, to raise a family, and build a future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I and my colleagues have already stated, this is 

the new Saskatchewan. It was really only a matter of time, Mr. 

Speaker. And as our Premier has stated, and I quote: 

 

And I think we can all be pretty proud of what we have 

accomplished together. The lowest unemployment rate in 

the country, a balanced budget, lower provincial taxes, and 

most importantly, Mr. Speaker, a new sense of optimism 

and confidence in every part of the province. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about this new attitude and I want to do 

that, Mr. Speaker, by sharing a story with you. It’s Rachel’s 

story, Rachel Mielke of Hillberg & Berk jewellery, Mr. 
Speaker, and a former constituent of Regina Douglas Park. I 

was introduced to Rachel by my eldest daughter when the two 

of them were in grade 9, Mr. Speaker. They met for the first 

time standing beside each other at their respective lockers trying 

to figure out how to open their combination locks. So picture 

these two 14-year-old girls not knowing how to do this, Mr. 

Speaker. They began a conversation and they have been best 

friends ever since, in fact matrons of honour at their respective 

weddings. Mr. Speaker, for the two of them, high school was 

pretty normal. They were involved in everything: choir, 

cheerleading, fascinators — not the kind you wear in your hair, 

Mr. Speaker; I think fascinators then would have been boys — 

the odd clinking overnight bag, Mr. Speaker, and then of course 

graduation, and the rest is history. 

Today, Mr. Speaker, Rachel Mielkeis undeniably . . . I’m 

reading this from her dossier, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Today Rachel Mielke is undeniably an inspiration to young 

entrepreneurs across the globe. By the age of 29 she had 

been invited to attend a 2008 pre-Oscar Luxury Gifting 

Lounge in Los Angeles, participated in Toronto’s Fashion 

Incubator’s press and buyers breakfast, Canadian Country 

Music Awards, and the Geminis, just to name a few. 

 

Rachel has been being featured in the magazines Lou Lou 

Fashion, Western Living as well as on Sweet Spot.ca, CTV 

news Canada AM, Global TV, and in newspapers 

internationally. With awards and recognition including the 

Regina Chamber of Commerce’s Young Entrepreneur of 

the Year, the YWCA’s Young Women of Distinction, the 

Woman Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan’s Emerging 

Business of the Year, and a Business Development Bank of 

Canada’s 2011 Young Entrepreneur award, Rachel truly 

knows what it takes a small business a huge success. 

 

After winning on the hit television series CBC’s Dragons’ 

Den, she partnered with business mogul and philanthropist 

W. Brett Wilson. Hillberg & Berk is now considered the 

strongest designer jewellery line in Canada and there is no 

end in sight for this brilliant young woman [from 

Saskatchewan]. Rachel is not, however an overnight 

success. She is a marketing and branding guru and has 

used her passion for guerrilla marketing techniques and 

strong insight into branding to set Hillberg and Berk . . . 

 

And I could go on, Mr. Speaker. You see, the rest is history. 

Rachel had a dream and Saskatchewan was where she wanted to 

make that dream come true. And Saskatchewan, the new 

Saskatchewan, is where she made that happen. You see, she 

wanted to stay home, get married, raise a family. And this new 

Saskatchewan has allowed her to do that, Mr. Speaker. She 

married an entrepreneur, has a lovely new daughter, and keeps 

on walking the talk, Mr. Speaker. You see, just recently Rachel 

was commissioned by our Lieutenant Governor to create a 

brooch to present to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, and that 

took place just a few short weeks ago. And so, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan’s artwork now resides in Buckingham Palace. 

 

But that’s not the key to the whole story, Mr. Speaker. Rachel, 

in all of her showings, works with a charity, and in this 

particular case it’s the Malala foundation, obviously in aid of 

Malala Yousafzai who was shot by the Taliban for speaking 

out, for speaking in favour of education for women and girls, 

Mr. Speaker. So you see, Rachel is on the world stage. This is 

the new Saskatchewan and we’re very proud to have that kind 

of impetus to provide that environment for our young 

entrepreneurs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our young people are staying home because they 

can. Our young people are returning because there’s something 

here for them. There is excitement in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. We hosted the Junos, Paul McCartney, Elton John, the 

Eagles, the Rolling Stones, world junior hockey, the Grey Cup, 

and I’ve already mentioned Graham DeLaet, Craig and Mark 

McMorris. 

 

That’s the new attitude, Mr. Speaker. That’s the atmosphere 



October 30, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3767 

that has allowed the people of Saskatchewan to be the best they 

can be and to challenge themselves and to grow personally, like 

Rachel, like Craig, like Mark, etc. We have always known it 

was good to be from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We were 

simply heads bowed, insecure, or embarrassed to proclaim it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit more about our growth 

plan and the Throne Speech in particular. We are all well aware 

of the tremendous growth our province is experiencing. We are 

all very well aware of the challenges that this kind of growth 

brings. Those challenges are the ones that our people face on a 

daily basis, Mr. Speaker — health care, housing, seniors, child 

care, recreation, highways, and other infrastructure demands. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, let me enumerate for a minute, if I may: a 

new program to enable some seniors with complex issues to 

receive house calls from physicians, nurse practitioners, and 

other health care providers; new collaborative emergency 

centres in rural Saskatchewan; hot-spotting pilot programs to 

take the pressure off emergency rooms; a new student-first 

approach in education that will include wide-ranging 

consultations with teachers, students, parents, and 

administrators. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, as I travelled around the province and 

I’ve spent time in my classrooms and schools, Mr. Speaker, 

somewhere in this province every issue that we ever faced is 

being met head-on and solved by a creative group of teachers 

and students and principals in our system. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we have a responsibility to find out where those are and to 

celebrate those across the province and bring those into every 

classroom so that every teacher and every child has the benefit 

of that expertise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Further highway twinning in high-traffic areas, including 

Highway 6 and 39 from Regina to Estevan. New measures to 

improve traffic safety. Significant infrastructure investments, 

Mr. Speaker. A thousand new training seats including 300 new 

apprenticeship seats and 700 new adult basic education seats, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard the members opposite talk about smart 

growth. I’m just not sure what smart growth means. But, Mr. 

Speaker, what do you call it when you set goals and attain 

them? Mr. Speaker, what do you call it when you make 

promises and keep them? Mr. Speaker, when you’re the only 

jurisdiction in the country with a balanced budget, when you 

lead the country in economic development, Mr. Speaker, what 

do you call that? What do you call that, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 

Speaker, I could go on. We’re drawing close to 5 o’clock here 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Talk out the clock? I’ll talk out 

the clock, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is all about growth, not decline; a 

plan going forward, not backward; a realistic plan, Mr. Speaker, 

a plan, not rhetoric, a plan of fiscal responsibility and balanced 

budgets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have seven grandchildren, and I can think of 

nothing better than to have all of them here in Saskatchewan 

with me. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Speech from the 

Throne and not the amendment, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being the time of adjournment, 

this House stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3737 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3737 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Equal Justice for All Reopens 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737 

 Developing a Disability Strategy 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3738 

 Saskatchewan Wearable Art Gala 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3738 

 Thank You to Foster Families 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3738 

 Girl Guides Youth Recognition Ceremony 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3738 

 Trafalgar Day Gala 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3739 

 Regina Youth for Christ Hope Dinner 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3739 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care Conditions and Staffing 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3739 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3739 

 Proposed Closure of Distribution Centre 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3741 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3741 

 Involvement by Senators in Provincial Elections 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3741 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3741 

 Proclamation of Workplace Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3742 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3742 

 Resources for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3743 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3743 

POINT OF ORDER 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3744 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3744 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3744 

 Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3744 

 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3744 

 Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3744 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3745 

 

 



 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3745 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3748 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3752 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3756 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3763 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


