




















































Hansard: April 15, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 46A  MONDAY, APRIL 15, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3193 

 April 15, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, someone seated in the west gallery. 

I’m pleased to introduce Dr. Ty Josdal, the chief medical 

consultant for the Ministry of Health. Dr. Josdal has previously 

worked a number of years as the senior medical officer in this 

province and most recently was the associate chief medical 

officer for the Alberta Health Services. 

 

He is now back in Saskatchewan playing a key role in the 

health system transformation and providing a strong clinical 

perspective and clinical liaison as we focus on our key 

priorities. We’re very fortunate to have his expertise with us in 

this province, back in this province, his home province. And I 

would ask all members to welcome the doctor to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming Dr. Josdal to the legislature. He’s a 

person who has many interests in Saskatchewan as well as 

medicine. And I know that some of us know him as one of the 

best fly-in fishing operators in Saskatchewan in addition to 

everything else, and so he will be happy to accommodate any of 

us that would like that. But most importantly, he has a strong 

zeal for making sure that Saskatchewan people are happy and 

healthy. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

introduce two gentlemen sitting in the Speaker’s gallery today. 

I’d ask that they give a wave. They are Chad Fischl and Dan 

Robinson, U of S [University of Saskatchewan] graduates who 

have developed an innovative athletic cleaning product called 

Shutout. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as part of their entrepreneurship class at the U of S 

Edwards School of Business, the pair was asked to identify an 

underserved market niche, conceive a hypothetical product for 

that niche, and develop a business plan to bring it to market. 

They both shared a passion for hockey, Mr. Speaker, and were 

well aware of the sometimes eye-watering odour that emanates 

from equipment bags. This product is of particular interest to 

the member from Regina Walsh Acres, who I understand has 

had issues in his hockey career. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they developed a product called Shutout, which is 

a line of powerful and eco-friendly athletic cleaning products. It 

cleans equipment and defends against odour. Since graduating 

from the U of S in 2007, Dan and Chad have created a 

successful company with Shutout. Shutout is embedded with 

SilverSync+ technology, which uses the antimicrobial 

properties of silver. They also partnered with Canadian Light 

Source synchrotron for the quality control of their product. 

 

Their product has been used by NHL [National Hockey League] 

players; retired Canadian UFC [Ultimate Fighting 

Championship] fighter Jason MacDonald; and Matt Mazurik, 

former captain of the U of S Huskies cross-country running 

team. Outside the world of athletics, several Saskatchewan 

potash mines now use Shutout products to treat boots and wash 

coveralls. The partners are also pursuing clients in the oil and 

gas industry in Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

 

Chad and Dean, congratulations on the great success of Shutout. 

Thank you for your hard work for bringing such an innovative 

idea to Saskatchewan. Particularly, the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres thanks you. Thank you for bringing it to Canada, 

the world. And I would ask that all members welcome them to 

their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the minister 

in giving a shout-out to Shutout, to Chad Fischl and Dan 

Robinson for a great new product line. Interested to know it’s 

got the athletic applications but also industrial as well. Again, 

two individuals, Saskatchewan proud, Saskatchewan educated, 

and doing that, returning not just to the province but all the 

world over, Mr. Speaker. So again, I join with the minister in 

giving a great shout-out to Shutout. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the west 

gallery, it gives me great pleasure, to you and through you, to 

introduce Max Priebe. Max and I met at the Saskatchewan 

Association for Community Living fundraiser a few weeks 

back. Max, he’s the communication and public relations 

coordinator for the North Central Community Association. And 

previously Max was a freelance integrated marketing and 

communications director in Queensland, Australia and 

completed his post-secondary studies while there. 

 

He moved to Canada, February this year, and he says he came 

for Queen and country. And I think that’s code for girlfriend. 

And he’s taken an active interest in the Canadian way of life 

and is eager to learn as much as he can about Saskatchewan 



3194 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

culture. So I wanted to have the opportunity for Max to be here 

today, and I’d like all members to join me in welcoming Max to 

his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to offer a couple of 

introductions. Mr. Speaker, in your gallery we have Mr. John 

Hopkins, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina and 

District Chamber of Commerce. And we’re delighted to have 

him back in the Assembly today. We know what a significant 

role that he plays, as does his organization, regarding First 

Nation and Métis employment here within the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 

introduce Mr. John Lagimodiere. He’s the proprietor of Eagle 

Feather News. He offers great insights into our First Nations 

and Métis communities and helps to provide a greater 

connection between communities right across the province. And 

so to he and his family, we’d like to have all members join in 

welcoming John and his family to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, I’d like to join with the 

member opposite to welcome Mr. John Hopkins, CEO of the 

Regina and District Chamber of Commerce to his Assembly. 

He’s also the Chair of the Regina Skills and Trades Centre, and 

he certainly offers significant contributions in the life of this 

community and the health and well-being of our economy, and 

always has a focus on labour market development for future 

generations. So I certainly join with the member opposite in 

welcoming John Hopkins to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I know 

you’re likely to make this introduction in a moment, but I had 

the opportunity just a short time ago to meet with the teachers 

who are here with the social studies institute, and it was a great 

meeting. We talked a little bit about the institute. We talked 

more about other issues with respect to the teaching profession 

and had a very candid and, frankly, helpful and constructive 

discussion. And so I know you’re going to welcome them. I do 

want to extend a welcome as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I also would like to say hello to Chad and Dan who are 

sitting in your gallery. I met with them when they were first 

conceiving of this idea. And well, it was already well under 

way, and they were looking for ways to see it expand. They 

wanted very much to do it here in the province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what a testimony it is to the provincial economy today 

— not to the government but to our provincial economy, to the 

environment here — that they were able to make that success 

right here in the province. And how very proud we are that 

these two young entrepreneurs have chosen to do that in 

Saskatchewan. We wish them every success and welcome them 

to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

members opposite in welcoming a number of individuals. But I 

do want to say hello to John Lagimodiere and Deirdre Ness. It’s 

good to see them around the neighbourhood, and it’s good to 

see them here in the Assembly today. And I hope they have a 

good day visiting the legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And before 

you get to make the introduction, I would like to welcome our 

teachers as well. And I’d like to . . . And I look forward to 

meeting with you later on during the program. I’ve had the 

opportunity over the last number of years to be able to work 

with the group, and I look forward to that. A special recognition 

to Brent Toles who’s worked long and hard on this project for 

many, many years. And I’d like to welcome you to your 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I guess 

we’re all getting a bit ahead of you, but while people are 

introducing the teachers and the educators who are here for the 

teachers’ institute, I too want to join in on behalf of the 

opposition in saying what a great thing it is that they’ve come 

down to the legislature and see the work that we do and take 

that back to your students and talk about democracy and how 

important that is. So welcome. We look forward to meeting 

with you over the next couple of days. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I notice in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve just been joined by George Lafond from the 

Office of the Treaty Commissioner. I had the opportunity to 

meet with him this morning, and I’m glad to see he stayed 

around to watch the proceedings today. And I would ask all 

members to please give him a warm welcome to our Assembly. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I will join with 

the minister in welcoming Mr. Lafond as well and thank him 

for the important work he does and thank him for being here 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s my honour today to introduce to you a 

group of teachers who are here in the legislature to attend the 

15th annual Saskatchewan Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary 

Democracy. The institute began on Saturday, April 13th and 

will conclude on Wednesday, April 17th. 

 

This group has already met with a number of people, including 

members of the judiciary and the acting chief electoral . . . the 

Chief Electoral Officer — not acting; somebody pasted here — 

and the Clerk. Earlier today they met with caucus staff from 

both sides of the House, the Sergeant-at-Arms, and the House 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3195 

leaders. Although they didn’t actually get a chance to meet with 

the House leaders; they’re hoping to do that later because the 

Premier occupied them. They are scheduled to meet with caucus 

Chairs, caucus whips, several MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly], cabinet ministers including the Minister 

of Education. 

 

I would ask as I introduce these teachers that they wave as I 

mention their name: Mr. Devin Bernatchez from the Senator 

Myles Venne School in Air Ronge; Ms. Sandra Brookman from 

Pope John Paul II, Saskatoon; Ms. Kirsten Cavanaugh, École 

College Park School in Saskatoon; Mr. Michael Gowan, 

Rocanville School; Ms. Jubilee Jackson, education outreach 

program, Library of Parliament, Ottawa; Ms. Lisa Hermiston, 

Dr. Brass Community School, Yorkton; Mr. Aaron Hiske, 

Lampman School; Mr. Charles Jedlicka, Hartley Clark 

Elementary School, Spiritwood; Mr. Jonas Kiedrowski, youth 

and schools coordinator, Public Legal Education Association, 

Saskatoon; Ms. Kelsey Kuntz, Vibank Regional School; Ms. 

Laurel LaBar-Ahmed, École Massey, Regina; Ms. Val Lees, 

Arcola School; Ms. Susan Legault, Val Marie School; Ms. 

Rebecca McLeod, university student from the U of R 

[University of Regina]; Ms. Kim Nicholls, Kelvington High 

School; Mr. Troy Parenteau, Riverside Community School, 

Prince Albert; Ms. Holly Stasiuk, Aberdeen School; Ms. Wendy 

Vaughn, university student, University of Regina; and Mr. 

Taylor Gunn from student votes, CIVIX in Toronto. 

 

[13:45] 

 

I would like to make special mention of our steering committee 

composed of three teachers who attend past institutes and 

officials from the Ministry of Education. From the Ministry of 

Education, Mr. Brent Toles, Ms. Anna Grumbly. The steering 

committee is Miss Corinne Harcourt from the Englefeld School, 

Mr. Pat Orobko, Unity Composite High School; Mr. Doug 

Panko, Vanier Collegiate, Moose Jaw. 

 

I would ask all members to welcome this group to the 

Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

proud to stand today to present a petition in reference to 

cellphone coverage for northern Saskatchewan. And the prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nation along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

these areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition come from all 

throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular page, Mr. 

Speaker, they are primarily from Cole Bay, including a dear 

friend of mine named Mr. Leonard Daigneault. And if Leonard 

signs a petition, Mr. Speaker, he really means it. So this is a 

great petition, and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. We know 

that this Act was introduced in December 2012, and it’s a 

sweeping rewrite of our labour laws including The Labour 

Standards Act, The Occupational Health and Safety Act, The 

Labour Relations Reorganization Act, and The Trade Union 

Act. If it becomes a new consolidation of labour laws in our 

province, working people, particularly young workers, 

immigrant workers, and other vulnerable workers will suffer 

from a hasty watering down of our current labour standards 

which set the mandatory minimums for all Saskatchewan 

workers. I would like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the Government of Saskatchewan 

to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act in 

this current session before the end of May and to place it 

on a much longer legislative track to ensure greater 

understanding and support for the new labour law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon, Nipawin, Langham, Humboldt, and Ituna. I do so 

present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society Fundraisers 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise today to recognize two great fundraising events 

for the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 

organization. 

 

Last Thursday I had the honour of attending along with my 

colleagues from Estevan, Regina South, Wascana Plains, 

Dewdney, and Wood River the first annual STARS Jewels n’ 

Jeans gala in Regina. This sold-out event included dinner, live 

and silent auction, prizes, and a private performance by 

Canadian country music artist, Gord Bamford. We also heard an 

amazing story from a STARS VIP, which stands for very 

important patient, regarding her life-saving experience with 

STARS. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $165,000 was raised for STARS and this total 

included the live auctioning off of a $50 bill, similar to Melfort. 

This bill was auctioned off by world-renowned auctioneer Jason 

LeBlanc from Ritchie Brothers outside of Estevan, and it raised 

$2,500. Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank all of the event 

organizers, attendees, and sponsors of the first Jewels n’ Jeans 

gala in Regina, and a special thanks go to Rod and Carol 

Gantefoer who have been passionate advocates for the STARS 



3196 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

program since it began. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other event was held during the annual Herbert 

Select Genetics Bull Sale this past Tuesday. Forsyth Ranch of 

Herbert donated a heifer and local producers contributed money 

for a chance to win. Mr. Speaker, approximately $10,000 was 

raised for this event in the small town of Herbert, 

Saskatchewan. I’d like to thank the Forsyth Ranch and all of the 

producers at the sale for choosing to support STARS. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these two events show that people across 

Saskatchewan recognize the value that STARS brings to our 

province and to acknowledge that each successful fundraiser 

contributes to helping save lives. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Saskatoon Entrepreneurs Launch Mobile App 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, April 5th I had the 

opportunity to attend the launch of OneStory, a company 

created by two young entrepreneurs from Saskatoon Centre. 

The young entrepreneurs Dale Zak and Katrina German were 

joined by the mayor of Saskatoon, business leaders, tech 

company executives, community supporters, and friends in the 

collective work space at Two-Twenty to share their new mobile 

app concept. Mr. Speaker, everyone has a story — a love story, 

an inspirational story, a story about loss. 

 

OneStory is a video storytelling platform that empowers 

ordinary people to capture personal stories about love, war, 

travelling, beating cancer, or any other life topic. The app has 

an easy-to-navigate interview process that collects individual 

clips and assembles them into beautiful compilation videos to 

make it easy to share online. Dale Zak and Katrina German 

believe that this app will not only be a vehicle to share stories 

from around Saskatchewan, it will also be an opportunity to 

gather stories from people around the world. The app will be 

available to the public in the very near future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I spoke to the creators of the app, they were 

incredibly appreciative of those who contributed to creation of 

their business through funding, professional services, and 

mentorship. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to watching their 

progress and utilizing the app and sharing a few stories from my 

own experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that my fellow members of the House 

join with me in congratulating Dale Zak and Katrina German on 

their launch of OneStory and wish them continued success. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Grand Opening of Fitness Centre at Elmwood Residences 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Happy to rise in the 

House today to recognize an event I attended last week in 

Saskatoon Eastview. Mr. Speaker, last Wednesday was the 

grand opening of the impressive McNeil Fitness Centre at 

Elmwood Residences. Elmwood Residences provides long-term 

care for people with intellectual disabilities. 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to making 

Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for people with a 

disability to live. Our budget has invested record dollars to help 

achieve this goal. 

 

My wife and I volunteered at Elmwood long before getting 

involved in politics, and last Wednesday was one of my 

proudest moments as an MLA. Elmwood has a great 

recreational program which helps residents engage in the 

community but did not have a dedicated gym or fitness centre. 

This new 5,000 square foot fitness centre will be invaluable in 

helping the residents live healthy lives, Mr. Speaker. This 

$700,000 fitness centre was funded by three foundations: from 

families with members living at Elmwood, corporations, and 

private individual donations. One of the key fundraisers, 

Howard Stensrud, commented that “It is the best time ever to be 

living in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing 

Elmwood Residences’ brand new McNeil Fitness Centre and all 

the people and the organizations that contributed to make this 

important project a reality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Juno Week in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, April 15th, 

is the beginning of Juno Week in Saskatchewan. Juno Week 

will be a celebration of Canadian arts and culture and will 

represent the diversity and range of talent that we have present 

in this country. 

 

There will be events for every fan, with activities ranging from 

a celebrity hockey game to concerts in small venues around 

Regina to the Juno Awards themselves, which will be on 

Sunday, April 21st. CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] is 

hosting a live stream of Juno host Michael Bublé’s new album, 

To Be Loved, and that, Mr. Speaker, would make for some good 

listening as many of us work away in our offices this week. 

 

JunoFest provides a wonderful opportunity to showcase the 

strength of arts in Saskatchewan. Local Regina bands Rah Rah 

and Jack Semple will be playing as well as bands and artists 

from across the province. Even the MacKenzie Art Gallery will 

be hosting an event. This is an opportunity to explore the art 

and art choices of past Juno Award winners and nominees. It’s 

always fascinating to hear how art impacts individuals and 

inspires other artists. Mr. Speaker, I know my daughter Ophelia 

would enjoy the event that is taking place on Saturday at the 

Regina Public Library and Dunlop Gallery where nominees 

from the Children’s Album of the Year category will be 

offering a free concert. 

 

I would ask that my colleagues join me in congratulating the 

organizers of the Juno Awards for creating a dynamic and 

diverse schedule and for showcasing the creativity of our 

province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3197 

Café Success Story 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to tell 

you about another Moose Jaw success story that was told to the 

rest of Canada. On Friday, April 5th, Déjà Vu Café was 

featured on the Food Network’s You Gotta Eat Here. As many 

know, this particular television show has a large following, and 

it was quite a coup for the owners, Brandon and Tammy 

Richardson, to be chosen for this widely watched program. 

 

Taking ownership of Déjà Vu in 2009, the Richardsons have 

created a destination in the friendly city that is constantly chock 

full of regulars and new visitors alike. Located in the heart of 

the city, their menu also includes a variety of items such as 

pickle chips, perogy poutine, along with the new favourite, 

deep-fried banana. The Richardson’s old-school approach and 

energetic attitude have created quite a buzz in the community. 

 

They currently have over 670 followers on Facebook and are 

working on a possible second location, Déjà Tu. I’d like to 

congratulate Brandon and Tammy on this exciting opportunity 

and wish them continued success in the future. 

 

So remember when you’re planning your next trip to Moose 

Jaw, I recommend you stop in to the Déjà Vu Café because just 

as the host, John Cattuci says, “You gotta eat here.” 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hockey Goes On 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this 

month a constituent of mine, Mr. Grant Berger of Central Butte, 

was named the Western Canadian grand prize winner in the 

Kraft Hockey Goes On competition. 

 

Close to 680,000 votes were cast over two days as Western 

Canadians rallied to support their local hockey volunteers and 

provide them with a way to give back to their communities. 

Grant received the most votes, making him the recipient of 

$100,000 to go towards Central Butte Minor Hockey 

Association. 

 

He has served as coach, board member, and association 

president for many years. Grant is described as someone who is 

always available, whether it’s opening the rink, keeping it open 

after hours for someone wanting to skate, filling pop machines, 

or picking up equipment and maintenance supplies. He always 

ensures the job gets done. Grant’s motivation for his hard work 

and dedication is to have a community place that will enhance 

children’s lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing my 

friend Grant Berger for his countless hours of love for hockey 

and pride in his community meeting place and also to 

congratulate him, along with the Central Butte Minor Hockey 

Association, on being the grand prize recipient. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Robust Economy in The Battlefords 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. $81,816,889 — that is 

the increase in building permits in The Battlefords in our first 

five years compared to the last five years of that NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government. But, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed 

sad to see that the Maple Leaf plant has closed, and my heart 

goes out to those families that have been affected by this 

closure. 

 

But the ongoing efforts of so many people to resolve this 

situation, including those of our ministries, is certainly 

hampered when someone like the member from Regina 

Rosemont stands and makes disparaging and negative 

comments about The Battlefords. That member, Mr. Speaker, 

that member whose own constituency is 400 kilometres from 

The Battlefords, references a closure of the Vanguard plant. It’s 

not even called the Vanguard plant by those of us who live and 

work in The Battlefords. That plant now closed, guess when? 

During their time in government. The plant is now home to Grit 

Industries, which was opened under our watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last Thursday that member from Rosemont cited the closing of 

Mifab welding as another in the string of job losses. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, Mifab building is now home to Advantage Powder 

Coating. 

 

Our economy is very robust in The Battlefords, with three new 

farm implement dealers in or soon to be in new facilities, and 

site work has begun for a new tank manufacturing plant. That’s 

the kind of confidence business has in our government and in 

The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before that member for Regina Rosemont tries to 

score political points by making disparaging and negative 

comments about The Battlefords, he had better do a little 

research and gets his facts straight. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Care for Children With Cancer 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region is currently looking at closing the pediatric oncology 

ward at the Pasqua Hospital. This has raised huge concerns for 

parents and grandparents, Mr. Speaker, who want the best in 

cancer care for their children. The pediatric oncology ward is an 

infection-free zone, which is exactly what children who are 

being treated for cancer need. But if the plan goes ahead, 

parents and grandparents are worried about the implications of 

moving children with cancer, children with very compromised 

immune systems, into the General Hospital’s pediatric ward 

where upper respiratory and gastrointestinal infections are 

common. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he share these concerns with 

the parents and grandparents of these children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 



3198 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

Leader of the Opposition for the question. I note the Minister of 

Health met with parents on this very issue here earlier today. I 

think the Leader of the Opposition also met with them. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the region has been looking at this 

kind of a model now for some time, years actually, dating back 

to even under the previous administration. It’s never been 

approved. We do know that other facilities, institutions, for 

example children’s hospitals like Stollery, have actually headed 

in this direction. But, Mr. Speaker, let me just say this: the 

Minister of Health was clear with parents today that unless the 

region can demonstrate to him that this provides at least the 

same or better care for those patients, we’re simply not going to 

allow the health region to go in this direction. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve received many emails on 

this issue on the government and opposition side. An email 

from one parent says: 

 

At the Pasqua, the entire unit is a safe zone and children 

have a large play area that is for their use. There are also 

sleeping nooks in the rooms for family members to sleep 

during their children’s hospitalization. This wonderful unit 

and staff make this incredibly hard journey safe, 

comfortable, less stressful, and at times it even feels like 

our second home. 

 

Another email to the Premier said: 

 

You should be proud of such a facility and trying to 

showcase it. It’s wonderful and the staff is amazing. I don’t 

understand you wanting to ruin a perfectly good thing. 

 

My question to the Premier: this discussion that has come 

forward from the health region has obviously caused a great 

amount of concern for families, families that are already dealing 

with an incredible burden. What is the timeline that these 

families can expect that a decision from the health region 

through the ministry will be provided? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot, as a parent, imagine 

what those parents are going through, obviously, let alone the 

kids, the patients. Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that we’re 

providing the very best cancer care in this province from a 

pediatric perspective, cancer care for everyone in 

Saskatchewan. It’s why we’ve significantly increased funding 

to the Cancer Agency during our term, over 90 per cent 

increase, Mr. Speaker. It’s why we’re actually moving beyond 

talking about a children’s hospital; we’re going to build a 

children’s hospital. It’s funded and under way now for the city 

of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can only repeat my first answer to the Leader of 

the Opposition, which is this: the Minister of Health has 

informed parents that unless the health region can demonstrate 

to him that this will provide a better, same or better care for 

those patients, we’re simply not going to be moving in this 

direction. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re joined in the 

gallery today by Nikki Wagner whose daughter was diagnosed 

with cancer when she was 10 months old. She is currently 

receiving her treatments at the Pasqua pediatric oncology ward. 

In an email that was sent last week, Nikki said: “It breaks my 

heart that anyone would even consider endangering the lives of 

these already fragile children that have done nothing to deserve 

the battle set out before them.” 

 

Nikki is here today, Mr. Speaker, because she knows the good 

care that her child has been receiving in the current pediatric 

oncology ward and she’s greatly concerned about its closure. 

 

So my question to the Premier . . . And I appreciate the fact that 

the minister has met with the families and that they’re 

concerned about the concerns of the families, Mr. Speaker. My 

question was specifically on the timeline. This has caused a lot 

of turmoil in the lives of these families. When can these 

families expect an answer as to the future of the pediatric 

oncology ward? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d expect that the Minister of 

Health is going to be receiving reports back from the region 

very, very quickly, Mr. Speaker. I’ll let the Minister of Health 

talk about specific timelines. But I want to be very clear to the 

Leader of the Opposition, who’s obviously got a set of 

questions that he’s going to continue to ask. Fair enough. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear. The Minister of Health has 

said that unless the region can demonstrate that the changes that 

are being considered by the region, changes that have been 

considered, by the way, by the region and institutions, rightly or 

wrongly now for some number of years and actually adopted at 

some institutions like the children’s hospital, but until the 

minister can be satisfied that those would provide equal to or 

better care for the patients, we don’t see a reason to change. 

 

We appreciate the work of the unit as it exists today. We 

appreciate the work of those on the front line and, Mr. Speaker, 

we understand and very much appreciate what families are 

going through, Mr. Speaker, without any . . . the need for 

unnecessary change if it’s not about putting the patient first. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — It is important, Mr. Speaker, to listen to the 

current concerns from the family. They expressed to me and 

I’m sure they expressed to government members, Mr. Speaker, 

the type of care that’s provided now allows the families to have 

the highest degree of a normal life as possible given the reality 

of the situation, Mr. Speaker. Also the fact that the cancer care 

lodge and the Ronald McDonald House are right across the 

street, this simply makes life better for the families who are 

going through something that no one should have to go through, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my question to the Health minister regarding the timeline 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3199 

then: when can these families expect a definitive answer about 

the future of this oncology pediatric care unit for children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you to the member 

for his question. Certainly in this regards for both this 

government and the health region, the patient comes first in this 

process, Mr. Speaker. That’s why the health region is 

embarking on a plan to engage not just providers and caregivers 

and health providers at the existing units both at the General 

and the Pasqua, but most especially families and patients, Mr. 

Speaker, who access pediatric services in this province. In fact, 

my understanding is that the CEO personally has reached out to 

parents to invite them to be a part of this process. 

 

That engagement and that consultation period will take a 

number of months and I would expect that the administration 

will make recommendations back to the board later this 

summer. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Land Acquisition for Highways 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Sask Party government should be working with people and 

communities and implement the plan of smart growth, but that’s 

clearly not happening. Just outside the city, Mr. Speaker, the 

Ministry of Highways plan a bypass which expropriates land 

and proposing a route going right through people’s property. In 

one case, the plan for the new bypass goes through one person’s 

kitchen table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people east of the city support development 

wholeheartedly for the city and for the region, but they deserve 

fairness in the process. This is especially important because the 

Saskatchewan Party government is expropriating their land. Mr. 

Speaker, why is the Sask Party government expropriating land 

without a fair process and fair compensation for these people 

who love Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 

quite sure on what the member opposite was asking as far as . . . 

He started kind of with the Regina east bypass and then he got 

talking about expropriation. Well there is no expropriation at 

this present time. There is no negotiations, very few 

negotiations going on as far as property on the east side. But he 

finished up by saying about expropriation and why don’t we 

follow a fair process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would probably ask the member opposite who 

was the minister of Highways, who at that time expropriated 

land, and we’re using the same process as what was covered 

under their government, Mr. Speaker. Now perhaps he’s not 

aware of that. We haven’t changed the process. 

 

Expropriation is the very, very last option when it comes to 

purchasing land. We as a government especially do not want to 

get to that point but there are times, Mr. Speaker, where a 

consensus cannot be found. I want to assure the people of 

Saskatchewan that every process up until that point is taken to 

make sure we can come up with a fair value price. 

Expropriation is the very, very last option, Mr. Speaker, not 

unlike when the NDP were in government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s plan for the 

bypass doesn’t include fairness for the people living in the way. 

James Ripplinger joins us here in the gallery, and he’s lived on 

his property since 1972. The Sask Party government 

expropriated his land to build a bypass, but he says they refused 

to offer fair compensation. They cut a cheque for the amount 

Mr. Ripplinger paid for the land in the 1970s value rather than 

today’s fair market value, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These people are in favour of smart growth for the region and 

for the city, but they deserve and demand fair treatment when 

their land is expropriated. Why did the Sask government fail to 

offer fair market value rates for this valuable land when the 

government expropriated it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, there is a 

process that governments go through, that our government and 

the former government went through, Mr. Speaker, when there 

is development. I would say that our government is certainly 

facing more of those challenges as there’s much more growth in 

the province than there certainly was under the NDP. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I know the process that was 

used under the former government. We, Mr. Speaker, try and 

come up with a fair market value. There is quite a long process 

and negotiation. Mediation is offered up. There are a number of 

steps to go through, Mr. Speaker, before we get to the final 

option, I guess I’d say, such as expropriation. 

 

What I would say, Mr. Speaker, that roughly about 95 per cent 

of all the land purchased through the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure, about 95 per cent is reached on an agreement by 

the seller and the buyer. Only about 5 per cent . . . And that’s up 

a little bit, Mr. Speaker, certainly because of a hot economy. It 

was at 97 before; it’s to about 95. So in other words about 5 per 

cent of all the transactions that the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure have to go through to get to property deals with 

expropriation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the issue here is a transparent 

process and fair treatment. That’s the issue, Mr. Speaker. The 

people who may lose access to their homes demand fair 

treatment. These residents once again want to say very loud and 

clear that they support development in the entire region. And 

for that support the Sask Party government should treat them 

fairly. That’s all they’re asking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today we’re also joined by the Kerr family, Mr. Speaker. And 

Ms. Kerr’s property has been in the family home for over 50 

years, has been their family home for over 50 years. The plan 



3200 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

for the bypass goes right through her living room. 

 

When someone is told that their living room, their living room 

will be carved up unless the house is moved, it’s shocking, to 

say the least, Mr. Speaker. Why are families being told to 

accept the bypass through their living room without fair 

compensation and above all else without fair treatment by the 

Sask Party government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure, quite sure 

if he’s meaning the west bypass out by the GTH [Global 

Transportation Hub] or the east bypass, Mr. Speaker. I think 

he’s actually asking for some clarification. 

 

Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, the question regarding expropriation 

and fair market value is a difficult one at times and especially in 

a growing economy, Mr. Speaker. I realize that for the vast 

majority, we can come up with an agreement. But there are 

cases where that agreement isn’t reached, Mr. Speaker, and the 

last resort may be expropriation — only about 5 per cent of the 

cases in the province, Mr. Speaker, but not unlike the members 

opposite. 

 

It’s quite interesting how the member can stand and bluster on 

about fair treatment when I’ve asked him on a personal basis if 

he signed expropriation papers. And when he was a minister of 

Highways, he did, Mr. Speaker. How can it be one way when 

he’s in opposition and a completely different way when he was 

in government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the blustering’s happening over 

there, Mr. Speaker. The minister’s plan for the bypass should 

involve a transparent process. It should be transparent and 

above all else it should be fair treatment to the families affected 

by that development. And it’s clear today that isn’t the case. 

These people and others, Mr. Speaker, deserve better. They 

deserve better, Mr. Speaker. And it starts at the top with an 

apology from the minister for the mishandling of this file. 

 

Will the minister today apologize to these people for the unfair 

treatment that they have received? And will he finally commit 

today to truly work with these families so that they can receive 

fair market value for their land that’s being expropriated, and to 

respect them? So, Mr. Speaker, will the minister do that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to get into 

individual cases on the floor of the Assembly, but what I will do 

is talk about the process from start to finish. These decisions for 

expansion of roadways, whether it’s a bypass or twinning, Mr. 

Speaker, do not come within a month or two. These are worked 

on for many, many years. Landowners are usually notified well 

in advance; then negotiations go on. 

 

It is a difficult time to try and determine exactly what the land 

value is. I know that there are appraisals done, Mr. Speaker, 

independent appraisals, Mr. Speaker, and those are looked at as 

well as negotiations with the individual landowner, not unlike it 

was done in the past, Mr. Speaker. Hopefully we can get to an 

agreement. 

 

If that agreement isn’t met, there is mediation offered up, Mr. 

Speaker. And if that does not settle the agreement, then there is 

expropriation. There is also the avenue for parties that are 

dissatisfied to exercise further processes such as the court 

system, Mr. Speaker. That is not very common, Mr. Speaker, 

but I will say that the process is the same as what was used 

under the former government. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to that 

government’s IPAC [International Performance Assessment 

Centre for geologic storage of CO2] affair, that minister has 

referenced many times an IT [information technology] services 

review completed by Mr. Gerry Wolfe in July of 2010, when 

answering questions about whether value for money was 

achieved with the millions of taxpayers’ dollars sent from IPAC 

to CVI [Climate Ventures Inc.] — that government’s costly 

start-up — with nothing more than a handshake agreement and 

full of conflicts of interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to that report, has the minister herself 

read the review in entirety? The one that she’s referenced 

multiple times, the IT services review that was completed by 

Mr. Gerry Wolfe. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I have read that. It 

was a report by Perform-X management report. I would 

reference page 5, Mr. Speaker, where it says, and I quote, 

“Nearly 1 million of the to date 2.5 million CVI expenditures 

was for hardware and software licences which have been paid 

and vouched by IPAC.” Also from page 5, and I quote, “. . . the 

supplier appears to have materially delivered what was 

promised.” Also from page 5, and I quote, “From our cursory 

review the CVI technical skills and knowledge appear sound. 

Value has been exchanged for services, albeit in some cases, at 

an apparent premium, but within the IPAC schedule.” 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let’s remember that 

millions of taxpayers’ dollars have flowed from IPAC to CVI 

on a handshake with conflicts of interest, millions of dollars that 

have been called mostly waste by the CEO of IPAC. The IT 

review itself that’s referenced by the minister raises alarming 

concerns, yet seems to be held up by that minister again here 

today as somehow an example of accountability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the minister said she’s read that report in entirety. I guess I 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3201 

would ask her to go a little deeper than the surface information 

that was provided here today. What concerns does it raise and 

why hasn’t she shared those concerns sooner? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the concerns that we 

have had has been that it was a sole-sourced contract. It was a 

contract where the individuals from the U of R that entered the 

contract had a conflict of interest and it was a contract that a 

very high price was paid, that was identified by myself. It was 

identified by the previous minister who had this file, Mr. 

Speaker. We have not denied any of those. 

 

I would also like to refer to the Meyers Norris Penny report, 

Mr. Speaker, which identifies over and over again, and I can do 

a number of quotes from that report, that the management and 

the money control at the time that the CVI contract was entered 

into was while it was under the management and control of the 

U of R, Mr. Speaker. There has been statements by the minister 

of the U of R, Dr. Vianne Timmons, that acknowledges that 

there was issues when they had the control of IPAC. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, these are public dollars for 

which that minister, that government have been responsible 

from the get-go. And that IT review conducted by Mr. Gerry 

Wolfe was hamstrung. He makes clear that he was not provided 

the access to information required to properly assess value for 

money. It states, I quote, and actually also from page 5, “In the 

absence of executed contracts and documentation evidencing 

IPAC . . . governance, it is difficult to provide well-founded 

value-for-money assessment.” Not only could he not assess 

value for money; he was also denied access to the information 

and people he needed. He states clearly he didn’t have access to 

the people he needed by way of the IPAC and CVI founders, of 

course CVI being the costly start-up of that government. 

 

It’s clear that the IT review that the minister has often 

referenced here, today once again, was hamstrung, and that the 

review raises far more concerns than it provides answers over 

concerns over millions of dollars being wasted. Mr. Speaker, 

when will that minister stand up, start to fulfill her ministerial 

responsibility, and get to the bottom of her government’s IPAC 

affair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there was a forensic 

audit done. There was an audit done by the Provincial Auditor 

as well. We know that the money went to Climate Ventures 

Inc., Mr. Speaker. We know that’s where the money went. We 

know that there was an evaluation, as the member opposite is 

pointing out, by Perform-X management, Mr. Speaker. We do 

not deny that a high price was paid. We have never denied that 

it was sole-sourced. We have never denied that there was a 

conflict of interest. Mr. Speaker, we have not denied any of 

those things. We know where the money went. The board took 

action. They severed the relationship with the U of R. They 

severed the contract with CVI, Mr. Speaker. They had these 

audits done. They moved forward. Since that time they have 

had clean audits by KPMG year over year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m not sure what steps that this . . . the NDP want us to do 

other than no longer work with the U of R. I think that’s the 

only other step that we could take is no longer have that type of 

management arrangement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Education and Employment for First Nations 

and Métis People 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the final report 

of the joint task force on improving education and employment 

outcomes for First Nations and Métis people was released. As 

I’ve said all along, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been looking forward to 

these recommendations, and I want to thank the task force 

members for their work. 

 

My concern and our concern, Mr. Speaker, has always been 

what the Sask Party government will do with the 

recommendations and the outcomes of the report. We’ve seen 

in past actions from their track record, especially as it relates to 

the Aboriginal employment development program, Mr. 

Speaker, that they’ve been more than willing to cut helpful 

programs. 

 

My question to the Premier: why should we believe, based on a 

track record of cutting good things like the AEDP [Aboriginal 

employment development program], why should we believe 

that things will be different this time? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as is too often the case 

with the leader’s questions, the Leader of the Opposition’s 

questions, the preamble is incorrect. Mr. Speaker, we analyzed 

the program he references and in terms of the level of 

investment required, in terms of public dollars and the output 

for First Nations people, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have said that we want to fund action and not 

processes, and we are grateful as well for the task force report 

that has been, that has now been presented. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Education’s going to look carefully at that report, as 

will the cabinet. 

 

There are some specific actions outlined in the report already. 

Mr. Speaker, I note one in particular. It’s sort of towards the 

end. But in terms of specificity, there’s one around driver 

education for First Nations, which is obviously pretty key for 

young First Nations people, First Nations of all ages, to be 

engaged in the economy. And it’s one small recommendation; 

we might be able to move on that very quickly. 

 

There’s a lot of other general comments in there. But as a 

subset, there’s some very specific pilots that are happening right 

now in the province we’re going to look at. And I’ll maybe get 

into that when the Hon. Leader of the Opposition asks his next 

question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



3202 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

Mr. Broten: — There are a number of recommendations in the 

report, as the Premier points out. Among the recommendations 

is one to have an integrated, comprehensive early childhood 

strategy both on- and off-reserve, with attention to isolated 

communities. Another recommendation is for the province to 

provide interim financial support to close the funding gap 

between on-reserve and off-reserve schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these recommendations will obviously take 

significant resources. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we saw 

in the last budget the Sask Party only earmarked $3 million for 

the implementation of these recommendations coming from the 

report. Yet at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we see them willing 

to spend nearly $6 million on a computer system for 

standardized testing, the results of which would point back to 

the recommendations in this report, Mr. Speaker, and the need 

to do better on a number of fronts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: how is it that in the 

budget, as we have the sound recommendations coming from 

the task force now, how is it in the budget he has $6 million for 

a computer system for standardized testing, but only has $3 

million, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the recommendations coming 

forward from this report? That does not show, Mr. Speaker, a 

willingness to take this matter seriously. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad that hon. 

member asked that question because we’ve been trying to 

portray the importance of a student achievement initiative for 

all students in the province, but especially for First Nations 

students whose graduation rates we want to see rise, whose 

completion rates need to increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the task force asked some university professors to 

write a report called Improving Education and Employment 

Outcomes for First Nations and Métis People. I commend it to 

the Leader of the Opposition to read because in it there are a 

number of specific initiatives done by First Nations, some First 

Nations reserves, and other schools that are bearing results for 

First Nations students, Mr. Speaker, that speak specifically to 

this question, including at Whitecap, Mr. Speaker, where 

they’re working with the Saskatoon public school division on 

the EYE program. That’s early years evaluation. They’re seeing 

better results for First Nations students. Why, Mr. Speaker? In 

part it’s based on assessment. It’s based on exactly the kind of 

principled assessment we’re going to do province-wide, Mr. 

Speaker. That $6 million worth of assessment investment is for 

every student. It will benefit First Nations. 

 

There’s another $3 million, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 

Opposition needs to do some reading, needs to do some 

homework, and I know he’ll come on board with the student 

achievement initiative for First Nations kids and students across 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 94 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 94, 

The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 be introduced and read 

for a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 94, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member for Athabasca come to order 

again. And it might help if the Minister of Highways wasn’t 

egging him on. 

 

Bill No. 95 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 95, The 

Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved first reading of Bill No. 95, The Operation of Public 

Registry Statutes Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 96 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of 

Public Registry Statutes Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3203 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that Bill No. 96, The Operation of 

Public Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved first reading of Bill No. 96, The Operation of Public 

Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 70 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Marchuk that Bill No. 70 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and enter into the debate on Bill No. 70, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). Clearly education is 

taking a real profile these days, and clearly it should. Clearly it 

should because if we are to sustain the economy that we’ve seen 

in this province, then we must have the resources to do that. 

And of course a well-educated community can provide that, but 

there are challenges. And we’ve seen that. 

 

And so as the minister has approved . . . or is moving these 

amendments to The Education Act, we have a lot to say about it 

and a lot of questions about it. And I know many of my 

colleagues have stood and talked about the questions that the 

minister has suggested that would be the things that we need to 

do. 

 

And of course what we’ve really talked about is the lens of 

priority. Some of the things that they’ve been doing over on this 

side of the House of government has made us reflect on what 

are their priorities. What are their choices? And we’ve seen that, 

we’ve just seen that debate now where they are going to spend 

$6 million towards software and standardized testing that 

nobody seems to know an awful lot about, but the government 

sure seems to get worked up about it. They sure seem to get 

fired up about it as if it’s something they have to defend, and 

this will be the hill that they will fight their battle on. 

 

And it doesn’t make a lot of sense in today’s classrooms where 

we’re seeing all sorts of challenges. And the challenge that 

we’ve saw, and today we saw the joint task force report on 

improving education and employment outcomes for First 

Nations and Métis people. And of course there is a final section 

that talks about will this report gather dust? And we saw that in 

fact last week when we were debating assessment on 

standardized testing, I asked a question over there about how 

many of their members had read their own report about the 

panel on student achievement. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And you know, it’s very interesting that the report was 

commissioned in 2008 by the current Minister of Finance, then 

minister of Education. And then we had one minister sit on it, 

and now we see a minister cherry-picking pieces of that report. 

And now they’ve done another one. I haven’t had the chance to 

do a complete read of it, but I do have to tell you that it looks, 

from the first skim of it, it looks very thoughtful and very 

hitting the mark on so many ways. And of course whether it’s 

the idea of dealing with drivers’ licences, and you know, the 

other one that goes hand in hand where the drivers’ licences is 

simple ID [identification] so you can set up a bank account. 

Now I haven’t read that to see what they’re really talking about, 

but it is interesting. But those little things really do matter. 

 

But then it also talks about the holistic approach to education, 

which is so, so critical. And today’s classrooms are facing those 

challenges, they’re facing challenges from classroom 

composition with students with unique and diverse needs that 

must be met, that must be met. And it ranges from students who 

come from families who are living in poverty and trying to 

make those basic needs of life, whether it’s food and shelter and 

clothing, right to the complex needs and especially when we get 

up to those who are in the gifted classrooms. 

 

And we have and we talked about this last week, talking about 

mental health of students and how can we make strong resilient 

students. And that is a huge issue and we need to make sure we 

tackle that problem. We’ve seen that, as I said last week, with 

the Day of Pink on Wednesday, but the Pink Revolution, the 

whole week in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan, how critical it is 

that we get this right. 

 

So I do really want to urge the government to get a sense of 

priorities of what’s facing the students of today. Clearly it in 

many ways manifests itself in how they can connect to the 

labour market, but we have to go deeper than that. And I think 

this report, from what I can tell, does go deeper than that. And I 

know the people on the task force were outstanding citizens 

who, I think, will have offered an awful lot. 

 

But this is the question before us: the government’s priorities 

when it comes to education and what it sees as priorities and 

what can make the biggest difference right off, right off the bat, 

but also talking about systemic change that will make sure that 

everyone participates in our society, that no one is left out, that 



3204 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

it’s an inclusive society both in terms of quality of life, both in 

terms of their work and in their contributions, the resilience of 

their family, their own mental health, and their ability to 

withstand challenges, as we’ve said, from bullying. 

 

So I want to take a minute to review what the minister has 

brought forward in terms of reasons for the changes that they 

have. And the first one is changing the compulsory school age 

that is presently seven years of age to six years of age. And he 

talks about how it hasn’t been changed since the 1940s, not 

consistent with other jurisdictions in Canada. I’m not sure if 

that’s, you know, the best reason. You know, I often think of 

this government having sort of a bit of a Dr. Jekyll and Mr. 

Hyde complex. They like to be leaders but they also like to be 

followers. Sometimes they like to be alone; sometimes they 

want to be in the group. 

 

And so whenever they feel it necessary, they throw out, well we 

want to be with everybody else. And then when sometimes, for 

example, Bill 85 where they create an employment code, no one 

else in Canada has it except for the federal government. So 

there they want to strike out on their own, and they feel that’s a 

reasonable thing to do. So it’s a bit of a conflicted, confusing 

message when they send out that they’re doing this because we 

see other people doing this. And we know that’s not necessarily 

the case. 

 

And so we will take a look at that, and we’ll ask a lot of 

questions. And we do know most students are six years, but 

there must have been a reason why seven. And I think it was 

probably to give parents an opportunity, in terms of parenting 

and different challenges or opportunities that families would 

have, but they had the opportunity to hold back their children 

till seven. 

 

And I know, and there has been literature about kids who go to 

school later, a few years later, that in fact they flourish and they 

do really well. So I’m not quite as necessarily convinced, but 

we’ll see what the research and what they have to say about 

that. And we think it’s an important discussion to have. 

 

The other one is a change of definition of school to reflect the 

kind of pre-kindergarten programs that are provided at school 

sites. So we’ll take a look and talk about the different kind of 

approaches, that this government will be doing that, and how 

will they resource that change. It’s very important that when we 

say we’re going to move into the pre-kindergarten world and 

we’re going to have programming that goes along with it, is that 

programming available across the province? Is it consistently 

offered? And I think this is an important opportunity to make 

sure we ensure that it is, that if it’s going to go beyond the pilot 

stage then we have to make sure that it’s consistent across the 

province. And that’s very important. 

 

Now one that I know, this is one that’s been in the forefront of a 

lot of peoples’ minds, is the change to the school day definition, 

and how the minister caused a bit of an uproar in the beginning 

of this year, talking about instructional minutes and 

instructional time and non-instructional time. And of course, 

you know, I think we actually did see this coming a couple of 

years ago when we saw the massive changes to The Education 

Act at that time. And while schools have worked through this, 

there are consequences to this. And you know, whether it’s 

pension time and the number of days and what qualifies as a 

day, and so we want to make sure that there are no unintended 

consequences to this. 

 

And you know, we did talk a little about this in terms of the 

mixed messages from the government. Yet again that were 

willing to step in at the provincial level and talk about 

instructional time. They wanted to get involved with 

standardized testing, but in no way did they want to get 

involved with the class size debate. And of course that’s a big 

debate as well. And it’s not only class size, but it’s class 

composition, and meeting the unique needs of all children in 

classrooms. So it’s not just as simple as saying, not as simple as 

saying that it’s only about the number of minutes. It’s much 

more complex than that. 

 

And I think as this government takes on more and more of the 

responsibility for these decisions, it’s going to leave the local 

autonomy of school boards in the way that they can make these 

choices and work with what’s best for their kids. Really one 

that we have to question what’s the intention, and is it in the 

best interests of the child, best interests of the family, and in 

fact in the best interests of our province? Because we want to 

make sure all students flourish in this province, and when we 

start to get involved at the kind of levels, micromanaging that 

this government seems intent on or cherry-pick the things that 

they want to be involved in but not take on the challenging 

issues, and whether it’s poverty at the family level or class 

composition, it’s really important. It’s really important. It leaves 

a lot of people with a lot of question marks. And so we have a 

lot of questions around that. 

 

I’ll go on and talk about the other changes he wants to talk. He 

talked about the consultation that, you know, and it is 

interesting how, I talked about the panel report that this 

government had commissioned in 2008. And when we had our 

debate just last week, many of the members over there looked 

as if they’d never heard of this panel report. And that’s 

unfortunate because it’s not that old. But when you do consult 

and you do come up with these major reports like the panel 

report, that you would think the government would have acted 

on it or discussed it or somehow signalled to the stakeholders. 

 

So what’s happening to that report, that consultation that we did 

for two years? They worked on it for two years — all the 

stakeholders — and it was put on a shelf. We sure hope that 

isn’t what happens with this, but we’ve seen it too often. This 

government is falling into that trap of not honouring 

consultation, but in fact causing problems by ignoring their 

consultations. So this is really important. 

 

It does talk about penalties. And some of those, we need to 

definitely ask more about this. It does talk about the 

stakeholders and how they do agree with that, and also talking 

about making it easier for newcomers to enrol in schools by 

clarifying what is a provincial resident. That’s really important. 

We’ll talk more about that, very important. Also people who 

come here on temporary permits. We see the situation at the 

University of Regina where we have students here, but this 

really speaks to more of the temporary work permits — people 

who come here, foreign temporary workers who come with 

children, and how do we make sure that they get the education 

that we’ve all come to expect in this province? So that’s very 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3205 

important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it also talks about the issues about families who live along 

borders of school divisions and the situation when it arises that 

one school may be undergoing major changes where it’s losing 

a high school, losing a school, or even as simple as changing 

bus routes. How does that all happen? So that’s very important. 

There are some other changes here. And I think that, as I said, 

when we move into committee, that there’ll be many more 

questions. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know that, as I said, education clearly is 

emerging as one of the top issues this year and this session, 

clearly because our population is growing, clearly because 

there’s more children in our schools. There’s the overcrowding, 

but there’s the class composition, as I say, English as a second 

language, but also making sure that we do all we can to support 

First Nations and Aboriginal students so those students can 

reach their full potential and all that that means in our society 

here in Saskatchewan in terms of connecting with the labour 

market and whatever situation that may mean, whether it’s arts, 

culture, mining, in the oil sector, whatever. But we have to 

make sure that that happens. 

 

But we also have to make sure that we meet the needs of young 

people who are feeling challenges around mental health and 

school and whether that’s through being bullied, lack of 

confidence, that type of thing. These are the realities of our new 

classrooms. And this is something that we’ve worked hard on 

for many years, and we will continue to meet that challenge, but 

we need to provide the resources for that. And we’ve often 

raised that question, particularly in this . . . [inaudible] . . . in 

this budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I know I don’t have many more 

things to say with this because I am looking forward to having 

questions about this Act, Bill 70. 

 

But again I just want to say that it’s about making choices and 

setting priorities. And we definitely have that with this 

government who seems to be ideologically driven around 

particularly standardized testing at a provincial level and all that 

that means but are not meeting the needs of students in our 

schools, particularly around classroom composition and 

students of First Nations and Aboriginal descent. We need to 

support these students as much as we possibly can to make sure 

that they can do this. So I’m not sure this bill goes a long way 

to do that. But not every . . . We understand there are other 

needs too. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks. Thank 

you. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 

question before the Assembly is the motion by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 70, The Education Amendment Act, 

2012 (No. 2) be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands designated to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 73 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 73, An Act to amend The Municipalities 

Act. This legislation is similar to the legislation, Bill No. 74, 

The Cities Amendment Act and Bill 75, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act. And so I’m going to be making 

some comments about the legislation. 

 

It’s interesting because these three pieces of legislation are 

usually amended in every session because there are requests 

that come forward from municipalities or from the cities or 

from the northern municipalities to correct some things that 

aren’t working quite right in the legislation. So we have 

legislation that’s brought forward for that purpose. 

 

But this year the legislation has some other things that are part 

of it that perhaps cause us to take a little harder look at what’s 

going on. And I say that because there’s a whole section in this 

legislation and in the other pieces of legislation around 

boundary alterations between municipalities or the ability to 

hive out pieces of municipalities for specific purposes. 

 

And I think the most interesting part of it is that it really gives 

the minister and the government a great deal of power over 

municipalities as it relates to some of these adjustments, and I 

think that we should spend some time looking at that as we 

move forward. There’s also a whole area that relates to 

licensing and municipal procurement to make sure that this 

legislation and the activities of municipalities is in line with the 

Agreement on Internal Trade and the New West Partnership 

Agreement. 

 

Now I should point out that Bill No. 73, An Act to amend The 

Municipalities Act relates to all of those municipalities which 

are not cities, so basically it’s the towns and villages and 

organized hamlets. It also I think includes, depending on the 

situation, what would be called some of the recreational 

residential communities. And so it relates to a fairly specific 

group of municipalities. 

 

But what does the legislation do? Well we start right off in the 



3206 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

opening clause of definitions, and you get a hint at one of the 

first things that’s there because the legislation adds another 

definition. The definition is additional service area. And what 

does that mean? It “. . . means a geographical area within a rural 

municipality that includes a residential or other land use 

requiring services or levels of services that are different from 

the services or levels of services provided in areas of the rural 

municipality that are not additional service areas.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think this legislation or this particular 

definition of additional service area is an attempt to try to deal 

with some of the regional planning issues that have arisen as 

various subdivisions have been created in rural municipalities 

across the province. And we have seen these places or these 

communities develop close to provincial parks, close to regional 

parks. We’ve seen them develop along some of our waterways, 

whether it’s the South Saskatchewan River, the North 

Saskatchewan River, and they cause a number of issues for the 

local authorities because they often expect to get services which 

are quite different from the services that everybody else in that 

community receive. For example they will often want to have a 

common water system, maybe a common sewer system, have 

garbage collection, snow removal — and snow removal’s been 

an issue this year obviously — and so they’re willing to pay the 

fees to do that. 

 

But often the structures that we have don’t necessarily allow for 

these special extra services to be provided in the municipalities, 

and so part of this legislation is set out to deal with that 

particular issue. And it’s an interesting way to do it because it’s 

piecemeal. I mean, it’s sort of going along with additions and 

patches and little pieces here and there rather than having a 

broader piece of planning legislation or a piece of legislation 

that would look at the total impact on the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when these communities develop across the 

province, they do put stresses and strains on the ability to 

provide services to them. So rather than end up with a 

province-wide piece of planning legislation like what they’ve 

done in Alberta, we have these amendments to these three — 

The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act, and The Northern 

Municipalities Act. And then we also have the recent 

amendments to the planning legislation. All of them deal with 

the problem by giving superseding or overriding powers to the 

minister and the government, and that may or may not be a 

good way to do it. I think that it has quite a number of 

challenges. It may be more appropriately discussed or worked 

at through having a broader discussion about what it means to 

have regional structures throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan, which would then include how we provide these 

services. But at this stage, we have a relatively patchwork 

solution, and I guess we need to look at what’s being done here 

to see how and what is being set out.  

 

Now some of the first amendments in the legislation relate to 

the ability for the municipality to develop business licence 

frameworks and set up licensing. And I think those things are 

part of the overall system, and basically these are some 

corrections. 

 

But the next section, and it would be section 5 which is an 

amendment of section 18, and it’s effectively putting in place to 

clarify that there can be vehicle weights or route designation 

and that it can be adopted as a broad system through a whole 

number of municipalities. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s I suppose a 

good way to do it. But it begs the question of whether there may 

be even a better way to do it with some kind of regional 

structure, a regional organization, and that then applies to how 

the permits and licences are given around some of the 

overweight issues. 

 

It also then goes into dealing with changes to the problems that 

arise when we have pretty heavy industrial activity, whether it’s 

related to mining or oil and gas or even . . . well and also some 

of the size of the trucks involved with agriculture these days, 

that many of the municipalities have roads that are not up to a 

standard for a really heavy truck, especially during wet 

conditions. And so it’s attempting to give some more powers to 

municipalities to have this kind of overweight hauling stopped 

until there’s appropriate permits in place and licences in place. 

 

Now what’s happened is people have pushed the rules and 

pushed the limits on this kind of hauling, and the legislation is 

attempting to give the municipalities even greater powers to 

deal with these particular charges that are there. And what 

they’ve done is, I think, allowed for some of these charges to be 

added on to the property taxes or other ways of providing for 

this information. 

 

Now in the legislation there’s also a discussion about allowing 

rural municipalities to develop or establish additional service 

areas within the rural municipalities. And this is what I was 

talking about before, but it does allow for the establishment of a 

new area. What has been in place is that if there’s a village that 

decides to dissolve themselves back into the rural municipality, 

they are allowed to have a special structure which is an 

additional service area which allows for the establishment of 

fees for the people that live in that area. 

 

What’s being proposed here is that there be a similar 

mechanism for rural municipalities who want to establish new 

structures. And these are either country residential subdivisions 

. . . They may be recreational residential subdivisions or even 

bare land condominium developments that have special service 

requirements. And what the legislation is introducing is a way 

that the services to these particular restructurings or these 

particular ways of organizing in a local community can be 

charged the appropriate fees for the types of services that are 

being provided for them. I think it also provides for the 

contracting to take place within these situations as well. 

 

Now one of the previous tools that had been put in place was to 

allow for what’s termed restructuring, in other words for 

villages and hamlets to move away from any type of local 

government and put it into a rural municipality. And it’s set out 

some of the rules about how to do this. And effectively it’s 

saying that there are some ways that this kind of a structure can 

take place and that the amendments here will allow for a 

ward-style government. So that what was maybe a former 

hamlet could have a representative; what is a new residential 

community that has some specific interests, together that they 

could be a ward and have particular boundaries, and then 

representation on the municipality government. It’s not, you 

know, it’s not necessarily a bad idea, but it is something that’s 

being developed on the fly and in a patchwork fashion. And it 

raises the question whether we’re not soon getting to the point 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3207 

where we need to have an overall review of our 

municipalities-type legislation to cover all of the various 

options that we do have in Saskatchewan right now. 

 

[15:00] 

 

I know that over the years, some of the issues that have arisen 

with residential communities within regional parks and their 

access to services, also the residential communities within 

provincial parks and their access to services, relate to this 

particular legislation. But I’m not sure this legislation applies to 

them because they’re not necessarily directly part of the rural 

municipality. There’s also situations with respect to the national 

park at Prince Albert, a national park where there are concerns 

as well that they have a residential-type community, and how 

do they fit into the overall structure in the province. 

 

Now as the numbers of these smaller communities develop 

across the province, there will be issues that arise, and I know 

that we’ll have to continue to ask questions about that. I think 

the legislation has a number of other sections that are here at the 

request of the rural municipalities, and I think they are 

relatively straightforward. I think we will be able to ask some 

questions about them when we get into committee. And so, 

other than pointing out that this legislation and Bills No. 74 and 

75 all relate to the regional planning legislation that’s here, and 

they all deal with this changing nature of municipalities in the 

province, and with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no further 

comments. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 

73, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 74 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 74 — The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just to join 

in on the debate on Bill 74, The Cities Amendment Act, 2012, 

and just to give some brief comments about it. And I know later 

on a few of my colleagues have made comments. 

 

And the minister talks about a number of different areas where 

he’s going to bring in some amendments and whether these 

amendments have been asked by municipalities, by the cities. 

And like in his opening remarks he talks about the province 

having 16 cities now, and we know that that’s a good thing. 

And as we move through, we want to make sure we provide the 

provisions and legislation that allows them to operate. Whether 

it comes to permitting, whether it comes to the boundaries, we 

want to make sure that we’re not creating more problems. And 

by making these amendments, it’s going to clear up some of the 

situations that I assume have risen from some of the challenges. 

 

Municipalities, whether they’re cities, RMs [rural municipality], 

they’re running into situations where they have to have 

clarification. And to me it looks like that’s some of the areas 

where they’re going to try to amend some of the legislation, to 

give those powers to make sure that government can work with 

municipalities and the cities, whether they’re, you know, rural 

municipalities, cities, to make sure that when they’re looking at 

boundaries and they’re having issues, that they can address that. 

There is provision in here to address some of that area. 

 

They’re also talking about provisions when you look at utilities. 

And cities now have the ability to I guess charge utility, 

whether it’s water and sewer. There’s provisions in there for 

them to charge homeowners, residents, whether you’re a 

business or not. There is a provision in there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to allow . . . And I believe they’re going to amend it so 

that in serving the tax notice to those I guess whether they’re 

residents or business, it can show on the tax rolls that they owe 

not only back taxes but utilities to the cities or municipalities. 

So I know that they’re talking about those provisions in there as 

well. 

 

They’re also talking about some of the taxes that they were 

referring to, but in there they’re also referring to permits and 

certain powers taken away and adding. And I know that they 

are going back and forth with these provisions and making 

these amendments, and I’m hoping that they’re consulting. 

 

And if you look at the bill itself, it’s quite a large Act. The 

Cities Act is a large piece of legislation with a lot of areas to it. 

But having said that, they’re asking I think it’s about four areas 

where the minister has made some response to certain 

amendments he’s proposing. 

 

And like I said earlier, we have to make sure those amendments 

that he’s proposing and asking us to consider here, and that we 

need to work with, are . . . and I hope are coming from the 

municipalities, the cities, to deal with some of their issues. And 

there might be housekeeping items that, you know, sometimes 

we have to address. But these might truly be areas where 

they’re impacting residents, business with some of the changes 

and amendments that they’re proposing in here. 

 



3208 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

Now having said that, I know that in committee . . . And I know 

some of my colleagues have made comments and have referred 

to some of the changes in here and some of the proposed 

changes. But if you go through the document itself, it’s quite 

lengthy. And I know the critic in committee and with my 

colleagues, we will ask a lot of questions. And that’s where 

we’re going to have to go through asking those I guess 

individual questions on certain areas. And we can give an 

around-and-about general conversation here in talking about it. 

 

But I guess I want to be clear on that process, the process to 

make sure that we’re talking with the municipalities, the cities, 

and anyone that’s going to be impacted to make sure, you 

know. And we have to give opportunities to our municipalities. 

And I know the critic will make sure that he’s in contact with 

them and making sure he’s giving them the opportunity to raise 

their concerns. Whether it’s this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or 

it’s other bills that we discuss in this House, it’s given residents 

and those that are going to be impacted an opportunity to come 

through, whether it’s the critic, whether it’s government, 

whether it’s the ministry, however an organization, association 

that represents those individuals who have concerns. 

 

There has to be that process where those individuals have that 

opportunity to raise their concerns. And sometimes they might 

bring those concerns forward, saying it’s a good change; they 

agree with the amendment; that it makes sense; they’re 

supporting that. And that’s good. And sometimes they may find 

areas where they’re saying, well we agree with this area for the 

amendment and this area, but we don’t agree on this area. And I 

think that’s sometimes the point where we have to make sure 

we’re doing our due diligence and the critic is doing their . . . 

and the ministry, the ministry and the minister is doing their due 

diligence. And that’s clear needs to happen. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no further 

comments on this bill as it moves to where it needs to go for the 

next part of the business. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 

74, The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 75 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 75 — The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Good to be recognized in the debate this afternoon. Good to rise 

in my place to speak to Bill No. 75, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act. Of course this is part of a bit of 

a trilogy, legislatively speaking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms 

of the changes brought forward to The Municipalities Act and 

changes brought forward to The Cities Act as well. 

 

So what does this piece of legislation do? Three main things, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Referencing the minister’s second reading 

speech and the legislation itself, the first objective of the 

legislation is to “ . . . support government’s competitiveness and 

growth strategy related to business licensing, overweight 

vehicle permitting, boundary alteration, and municipal 

procurement.” You know, seems to be a fairly straightforward 

set of objectives, but we’ll get into that at a bit greater length 

coming up here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Second up, we’ve got the provision for: 

 

. . . northern councils with greater ability to deal with 

inactive municipal development corporations, clarify 

provisions regarding northern hamlet incorporation and 

northern settlement dissolution, and make terms of office 

for members appointed to the northern municipal trust 

account management board consistent with those for 

municipal councillors, which is four years, [moving it up 

from three, Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And the third objective of the legislation before us is to: 

 

. . . address other requests from across the municipal sector 

to clarify wording and improve consistency among the 

municipal Acts regarding primarily administrative matters 

. . . [to make] other changes identified by the ministry to 

clarify areas such as education property tax reporting, 

licence fees, and purchasing policies. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the first objective of the 

legislation, the purported support for growth and enhancing 

competitiveness in Saskatchewan, making amendments to the 

business licensing provisions to enable municipalities to 

establish and enter intermunicipal agreements and 

arrangements, to reconcile business licensing requirements such 

that business or certain types of businesses may operate across 

participating municipalities under a single licence — again, Mr. 

Speaker, the North is a place of great co-operation, a place of 

certainly vast distances and great beauty and tremendous 

opportunities, tremendous challenges. But certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the things that is the hallmark of the North is 

certainly that co-operation that exists between communities, 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3209 

between First Nations, between Métis settlements, between 

other municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of the great work done throughout the years by New 

North. I think of the great work done by the Saskatchewan 

Association of Northern Communities. And certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, if this further fosters a greater co-operation amongst 

those entities as they set out to serve northerners at that 

municipal level, then this will be a piece of relatively decent 

work. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, any time I guess we see this government 

talking about the importance of the North and the way that 

different priorities of the North purportedly align with the 

express goals of this government, we can’t help but think in 

these benches, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the misadventure that 

went on with enterprise regions and certainly the way that — 

you know, year in, year out — the government says, well the 

enterprise regions are coming and that’s going to be a great 

boom to the North, and what a wonderful era that will usher in. 

And then finally, the enterprise regions were set up and running 

in the North, and then they said, well you know, two isn’t 

enough. We’ll give you three enterprise regions, I believe it 

was. 

 

And then of course, you know, for all the fanfare and ballyhoo 

and plans to make plans and the way that that was, I think, put 

in the window as a bit of a light to distract from the need for 

real action in terms of that northern agenda — and my 

colleague from Cumberland knows this very well, in terms of 

the way this government has done its business as regards to the 

people of the North — that those enterprise regions, Mr. 

Speaker, last budget of course, what happens? These 

long-hyped, long-promoted, long-ballyhooed enterprise regions, 

they packed them in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so again, when they bring forward legislation like that 

which we have here today, again on the face of it, you know, 

seems to be fair enough and some fairly, I don’t know, banal 

recommendations coming forward in parts of this legislation in 

particular. But you put that in the broader context of what’s 

happened and you say, the enterprise regions, and you know, 

where again we had a government talk for six long years about 

the importance of fostering competiveness and supporting 

growth and yada yada yada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Again, what do we see? You know, we saw a lot of talk, and we 

saw a lot of plans to make plans, and then at the end of the day 

in last year’s budget, they chopped those enterprise regions 

right down at the stump, Mr. Speaker. So you know, here comes 

the government again with great offers and pledges of support 

and fostering and fine language like that. So, you know, good 

luck. We’ll see how this all works out. 

 

But in some regards, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen this 

movie before. We weren’t real big fans of it, and I don’t think 

the people of the North were real big fans of it. But we’re also a 

hopeful people, Mr. Speaker, so we hope it works out better 

than the last round of claims and promises that were made. We 

hope it works out better than the press release that was put out 

for that vital piece of economic and social infrastructure that is 

the road to Wollaston, again something that I know Mr. Deputy 

Speaker is very familiar with in terms of the need for roads, to 

ensure that that prosperity is not just there for the few or to 

make sure that you’ve got that fundamental transportation link 

that should be there. 

 

Again this is a government that felt free to put out a press 

release saying that the road to Wollaston would be built. And 

that unfortunately ends, in some cases tragically, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is not the case. So again there’s the proclamation, and 

then there’s the real evaluation of what was hyped and what 

was a real benefit for the people of the North in this case. And 

you know, we’ll be there keeping a close eye, Mr. Speaker, but 

we’ll see how it works out. 

 

The second category of amendments in this particular piece of 

legislation concerns the supporting of greater accountability 

wherein “. . . amendments to assist northern municipalities to 

address inactive municipal development corporations. The 

municipalities involved have primary responsibility to address 

these issues by either dissolving the corporation or remedying 

any non-compliance issue.” Again you know, pretty 

straightforward proposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of 

making sure that you can clear out the structures that are no 

longer purposeful, no longer working, and clear the way to 

ensure that those vital institutions such as the New North are 

doing the job. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but think about that 

intermunicipal co-operation and the way that development 

corporations, certainly those kind of activities, those kind of 

endeavours took a back seat while this government again 

proclaimed the importance of the enterprise regions and said, 

you know, there’s a new day coming and it’s called the 

enterprise region, Enterprise Saskatchewan, and all of those 

good things. 

 

And the way that communities entered into good faith 

negotiations, good faith co-operation with this government — 

and not just for one year, not just for two years, but over a 

period of years, Mr. Deputy Speaker — where that government 

said, the bid play for the North is the enterprise region. And 

then, you know, when two wasn’t enough, they were like, oh 

well, how would you like a third enterprise region? 

 

And you know, again in terms of that development capacity that 

is there in the North, and you see the great leadership out of 

First Nations, out of Métis communities, out of the New North, 

that vital role that is being played in terms of working with 

business and labour to make sure that opportunities are realized, 

working with vital social infrastructure in terms of health and 

education, calling attention to the need for that economic 

infrastructure, again you think about that all work and the way 

that this government came to the table with the enterprise 

regions. 

 

And you know, they were very bullish on the enterprise regions 

until they weren’t. And so now what, Mr. Speaker? Well now 

they have to clear the decks and provide better tools for the 

northern communities to wrap up inactive development 

corporations. Well, you know, great. And you can’t help but 

think about the way that we’ve had six long years of something 

very different being, you know, put before northern 



3210 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

communities as the way to go and how ultimately it was done in 

with the issuance of a single budget last year, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The last main category of amendments, and again this is where 

it gets back into sort of the picayune, the banal, in terms of the 

pieces of effort in this particular legislation but: 

 

The last main category of amendments addresses other 

requests of stakeholders to clarify certain administrative 

matters such as the signing of council meeting minutes, 

consistent terminology regarding service or filing of 

assessment appeal notices, and adding contact information 

for appellant agents to assessment appeal notices. 

 

And again, you know, in and of themselves, important 

initiatives, Mr. Speaker, but in terms of working with the North 

to make sure that northerners have the tools to get the job done, 

to succeed and thrive in this prospering economy, Mr. Speaker, 

again, great. I’m glad to see the effort here, but it’s not exactly 

earth shattering. But you know, it’s hard to figure out what’s 

worse sometimes, Mr. Speaker, in evaluating the actions of this 

government because of course, as I’ve referenced in this speech, 

when they come along with the big idea and say, you know, hey 

the enterprise regions, that’s going to make everything so much 

better, until we chop them down in one fell swoop in a budget, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well maybe it’s better to have just sort of relatively minor, 

thoughtful initiatives such as this coming forward to help 

municipalities do what they do best, which is look to their own 

interests. But, Mr. Speaker, we can’t help but think that again, it 

draws a pretty interesting contrast with rhetoric and plans and 

busywork that’s gone before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what is 

being brought forward in this piece of legislation here today. 

 

That the amendments were developed in consultation with 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], with 

New North, and the Northern Municipal Trust Account 

Management Board, you know, great. Glad to hear it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And certainly we’ll be making certain that that 

is in fact the case.  

 

Because of course we’ve seen other consultation exercises that 

northerners entered into in good faith with this government, 

only to have that good faith rewarded with a budget where, you 

know — be it the freshwater fish marketing or trappers 

association, roads, education, critical education infrastructure, 

housing infrastructure, health infrastructure, long-term care 

infrastructure, you know, mental health care — there’s a list as 

long as a northern arm in terms of actions that haven’t been 

given their due by this government, haven’t been given their 

due by a government that would be genuinely listening to 

northerners. 

 

And you know, the height of it is where we get the Premier in a 

speech up in Prince Albert saying that there is in fact a program 

for First Nations and Métis, and it’s called Cameco. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s nothing against Cameco. Cameco is, you 

know, a vital part of the mining sector and has been, in the 

main, a valuable contributor to the economy. And in certainly 

the northern jobs that it represents, that’s great. 

 

And I guess what I’d do is echo the comments of the northern 

communities that came forward and said, as fine as that is, as 

good as that is, you know, is that it? Is that the sum total? Is that 

the extent of this government’s interests when it comes to 

working with northerners to bring the prosperity of 

Saskatchewan fully to bear in the North, to make sure that the 

wealth that is extracted from those communities benefits those 

communities as well, Mr. Speaker, and that the different sort of 

problems that are confronted by northern communities on a 

daily basis, to make sure that those are dealt with in a way that 

makes that progress that we need to have in this province if 

we’re going to live up to our motto, if we’re going to succeed as 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

If that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, then you know, you’re not going 

to spend half a decade hyping up the enterprise regions only to 

cast them aside with the stroke of a budget pen. You’re going to 

have measures that come forward in a much bolder fashion than 

what we have here with these relatively, you know, again 

important technical changes being made in terms of the overall 

scheme of things in the North and the challenges that are being 

faced. And again the way that it plays through infrastructure — 

through economic infrastructure, the roads, the 

telecommunications infrastructure that needs to be in place, the 

social, the health, the education — you know, pick your front 

where northerners are not well served by this government or 

need to be better served by this government or where this 

government needs to do a better job. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we await the day when that work gets 

the attention and the effort that it is so richly due. With that, Mr. 

Speaker, I know that we’ve got perhaps . . . We’ve had a 

number of speakers up on this piece of legislation. We’ll have 

more to say come committee when this legislation goes forth. 

And at this time I would conclude my remarks on Bill No. 75, 

The Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? The question before the Assembly is the motion by 

the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 75, The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 78 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3211 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 78 — The Social 

Workers Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to wade into the debate and discussion on Bill No. 78, 

The Social Workers Amendment Act. I think some of the things 

we think about or need to think about when we debate and 

discuss the merits and the pitfalls of bills, we have to think 

about why is this bill before us. What is it proposing to do? 

Who requested these changes? Is it a government initiative? Are 

there stakeholders or are there individuals who’ve asked for 

some of these changes? 

 

We need to look at consultation. Has consultation been 

thorough and meaningful with all parties impacted by the 

changes? And we have to also think about push back or 

problems, and that comes from the consultation process. We 

learn what some of the pitfalls are, and we look and find out 

what may or may not work. So I want to just take a little bit of 

time talking about Bill 78 and what it’ll do . . . well those 

particular topics. 

 

So what will Bill 78, The Social Workers Amendment Act do? 

Primarily this: these amendments will “. . . allow qualified 

clinical social workers to diagnose mental health disorders.” 

And I think we have to go back in time here a little bit to 2002. 

Social workers, prior to 2002 and the passing of The 

Psychologists Act or when it came into force in 2002, social 

workers used to be able to diagnose mental health disorders. So 

those abilities were taken away in 2002. So since that time, 

since about 2003, the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers in its own internal bodies has been pursuing and very 

interested in having that opportunity for qualified clinical social 

workers to have the ability to diagnose mental health and 

addictions illnesses, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So Richard Hazel, who is the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers — although I 

know he is very near, slated to retire sometime this spring, so 

we’ll see when that happens — but he points out in his report to 

social workers in the newsletter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

current proposal for change to The Social Workers Act came 

last spring after the Minister of Social Services approved a 

package of changes to the Act. And the Saskatchewan 

Association of Social Workers is a self-regulating profession 

and a professional organization and reports to a minister of the 

Saskatchewan government, which is the Minister of Social 

Services in this case. So the government was ready to go ahead 

with this. 

 

So this has been something that the Association of Social 

Workers has wanted shortly after they lost that capacity in 2002 

and have been working towards this. So this is coming from 

people who work in the practice. So we know, we know who 

requested it, and we know a little bit about, well some of the 

whys, Mr. Deputy Speaker — lack of services. 

 

[15:30] 

 

I know from my own family’s experience, we have some 

mental health challenges in my family, some family members 

who have some very big difficulties and have seen first-hand 

how access to service is a huge barrier to people’s health and 

quality of life, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I think it’s recognized 

across the province that we have some huge mental health holes 

and gaps in services, and so that’s something that needs to be 

addressed. But in rural Saskatchewan . . . And Richard Hazel 

again points this out as did the minister and as would anyone 

working in social work or psychiatric services, anything like 

that. 

 

So what about rural populations? So we see that there’s fewer 

and fewer . . . access to fewer physicians. We’ve heard from 

social workers practising in rural Saskatchewan that there are 

many people who have trouble accessing services. My 

experience has been in an urban setting in Saskatoon, and it’s 

been hard to access services. Actually the minister pointed out 

that in Saskatchewan, when she first read this bill in December, 

there were 78 psychologists and 36 psychiatrists working in 

Saskatchewan in mental health outpatient services. 

 

There are big problems with the lack of services everywhere 

you go, but rural Saskatchewan has . . . That’s been an 

increasing challenge for people. Smaller health regions in rural 

remote areas of the province who don’t have a psychologist on 

staff really struggle getting the services to their citizens. And 

that’s where authorized and qualified clinical social workers to 

diagnose conditions — which would include things like 

depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, intellectual 

disabilities, or autism spectrum disorder — can help people in 

the regions to get the mental health services much neater, much 

more quickly than they normally would. So we are lacking 

mental health services, and the minister is proposing this as a 

bit of a fix. 

 

In terms of consultation — I’m all over the place here — but in 

terms of consultation, I’ve had the opportunity to sit down with 

the Association of Social Workers and also extended a letter to 

all the organizations that the Ministry of Social Services and the 

Association of Social Workers consulted with directly or 

invited to receive submissions. And it was a fairly 

comprehensive list. 

 

And actually in opposition, we did hear back from some people 

who have some concerns actually. The Registered Psychiatric 

Nurses Association of Saskatchewan had some concerns. They 

initially . . . I saw the list of those who were consulted, but I 

know consultation needs to be . . . We need to make sure that 

people have the opportunity to participate, and it looked like a 

fairly thorough process. But I know the Registered Psychiatric 

Nurses Association of Saskatchewan had some concerns about 

the changes to the bill. 

 

They also actually flagged that as the largest group of service 

providers in mental health, as registered psychiatric nurses, 

they’re very well aware of the issues regarding the lack of 

access to services and the fragmented system which exists. But 

they point out that band-aiding with a profession which does 

not have the education — i.e., diagnostic, medical, and 

pharmacological background — is a dangerous precedent. So 

that’s some of the concerns the Registered Psychiatric Nurses 

Association of Saskatchewan have flagged. 

 



3212 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

And they’ve also said that social workers diagnosing clients 

will not change the problems with access and lack of services. 

I’d agree actually. I think this change will mitigate some of the 

problems, but it won’t change it. 

 

So Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers have identified 

that there will only be about 50 of its members, current 

members, who will likely have the opportunity or the capacity 

at this moment in time to pass and get the qualifications. So 50 

more people being able to diagnose is a good thing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but it is a drop in the bucket. 

 

So this will mitigate the problems, but it won’t change the 

overlying reality that we don’t have a mental health strategy. 

And actually that’s what the psychiatric nurses go on to say is 

that changes that are being made should be part of a 

comprehensive mental health strategy for the province and all 

those providing the services. So we need to think about the 

whole spectrum of those who provide mental health and 

addiction services and think about how we could better provide 

mental health and addiction services to all people in 

Saskatchewan and not just picking and choosing one little 

element of it. And I know that is one of our concerns as well. 

 

I am a registered social worker, although I’ve never worked in 

clinical practice. I’ve always done community development and 

policy work, but I’ve a great deal of respect for those who do 

clinical social work. And social workers are a self-regulating 

body but governed by a code of ethics. And I wouldn’t dispute 

their professionalism at all or their ability to carry this out, but it 

is just one small piece of a mental health strategy that I think we 

need here. 

 

I know one of the other concerns — and the Association of 

Social Workers identified this for me; I didn’t have the 

consultation paper myself — but in social work there’s 

something called anti-oppressive practice which actually 

encompasses all different kinds of theories. It’s more of an 

umbrella. But I know some anti-oppressive social workers were 

concerned about diagnosis. They don’t like to focus on 

diagnosis. 

 

Anti-oppressive social work is about the debate between 

individual treatment versus social reform, or private versus 

public issues. So anti-oppressive social work looks at the 

structural issues that create problems in our lives. Racism is one 

of them, classism, sexism, those kinds of things — all the isms, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Anti-oppressive social workers, so I 

understand, had raised some concerns with diagnosis and ability 

to diagnose, and that is . . . I believe the Association of Social 

Workers acknowledged that, but the majority of its members 

believed that this was the right way to go. 

 

I think some of the things that I’ve heard directly from people 

who are currently in the midst of our fragmented mental health 

system here in Saskatchewan is that we see silos; we don’t see 

information sharing. Whether it’s between health, the justice 

system, social services, there’s huge problems around silos in 

mental health. We have long waiting lists. I believe it’s about 

six months to get to see a psychiatrist here in Saskatchewan. 

And we are lacking a broad range of services, step-down beds 

for people who still need care but not quite the same care as 

they might receive at the Dubé Centre, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

what we really need here is a mental health strategy. Mental 

health and addictions often go hand in hand, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

You know, another thing that I need to flag here is the reality 

that . . . So there were, last year in the consultation phase, the 

draft got . . . That apparently included draft bylaws that were 

included in the consultation process. So I understand that this 

bill, once it passes . . . And I’m pretty sure that it will pass here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a month’s time from now, that they will 

go to the table and put in place and work on the regulations. 

And actually Richard Hazel says this in his report, that 

advanced work on the draft bylaws would proceed when the 

legislative proposal receives approval, and they will do a very 

thorough job on those bylaws. 

 

But I know we flagged this as a concern on other bills that have 

come before the House that the regulations don’t come into 

force or come in, not even into force obviously but into 

existence, until after a bill is passed. But regulations often have 

a strong impact on how things go forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I know perhaps the registered psychiatric nurses might have 

been more comfortable with this proposal had they had an 

opportunity to see what exactly was going to be in place once 

the bill was passed. And I do know that it’s been flagged for me 

that this bill will not be proclaimed until after all those bylaws 

are in place, which could take up to a couple years. So this is a 

pressing concern. 

 

So I would just like to put that on the record that it might have 

been worthwhile to continue to work on those bylaws all year, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, just in terms of the consultation process 

but also in terms of speeding up the process. This is a pressing 

issue here in Saskatchewan — people’s lack of services or lack 

of access to services. So perhaps that piece could have been 

done in tandem and perhaps easing some people’s concerns 

because when the regulations come after legislation, the 

regulations in fact have more of an impact on people’s lives 

than sometimes the legislation. So that I would’ve liked to have 

seen happen throughout this past year working on the bylaws. 

 

So it’s interesting. I understand that it will be . . . So social 

workers, of the 50, or so I’ve been told, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that it will be . . . You will not be able to diagnose unless you 

have a master’s degree and quite a level of number of years of 

clinical experience as well. So this will not apply to all clinical 

social workers. You would need a master’s and more 

experience as well. But these are all things to still be completely 

worked out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I believe that they’ll be 

using the Association of Social Work Boards, whose clinical 

examination is intended to be part of the qualification process. 

 

So again it would have been nice to have some of these in place 

before the legislation was passed so it could be implemented 

more quickly, and perhaps we could’ve put people’s minds at 

ease. And again I just want to mention that although this is I 

think a positive step to provide some services to some 

underserved areas, we are lacking a mental health and addiction 

strategy here in Saskatchewan, and it’s a huge problem. I know 

in the short time . . . 

 

We see addictions issues here in Saskatchewan as a huge issue. 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3213 

We see in Prince Albert, alcohol calls being far higher than 

Saskatoon and Regina combined. Addictions and mental health 

struggles or challenges are I think a big problem here in 

Saskatchewan. And I think the government needs to take . . . 

Well I know the government should be taking a more 

comprehensive approach to ensuring that all Saskatchewan 

residents have an opportunity to lead healthy and fulfilling 

lives. And we need to put in place the structures and then the 

services and programming to allow people to be able to do that. 

So we need to address the silos. We need to address the long 

waiting lists. We need to ensure we have a broad range of 

services. And we need to involve all those people who provide 

those services in the consultation process in developing that 

mental health strategy. 

 

I believe actually that . . . Actually Dave Nelson of the 

Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Mental Health 

Association said in a StarPhoenix or a CP article, Canadian 

Press article, had said that “. . . the changes are good if there are 

adequate minimum standards and the social workers operate on 

teams with psychiatrists.” He says, “‘It will make a difference 

in getting people into service but . . . the actual services they 

will get into are woefully underdeveloped and underfunded.’” 

 

So we need to do some serious work in that regard here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I do hope that’s on the 

Health minister’s agenda but also working in tandem with 

Justice, with Social Services, with all . . . and then with all those 

who do provide those services. 

 

So I know we’ll have some questions in committee, and I have 

colleagues who will be asking some questions there. But with 

that, I would like to conclude my remarks. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Social Services that Bill No. 78, 

The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — The Standing Committee on Human 

Services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Bill No. 81 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 81 — The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in on the 

Bill 81, the transportation global hub authority. Looking at the 

bill and just, I know, comments from the minister and 

individuals that have commented on it already and some of the 

concerns, it looks like there are starting to be quite a bit of 

concern raised about this legislation and about the I guess just 

the way the government’s going ahead with the legislation, 

GTH, the Global Transportation Hub, and just about some of 

the . . . It looks like there’s almost . . . 

 

You have to stop and look at this bill for what it is, and it’s 

raising its own concerns. And just some of the comments made, 

and I’m going to go through some of those because it’s clearly 

. . . It’s important to stop and look at some of the concerns that 

have been raised and also some of the questions being asked by 

our Privacy Commissioner, clearly his concerns and where he’s 

going with, if you’re using public dollars and it’s a Crown, 

which way is it going to go? Just in some of his opening 

comments, and I look at that one just right away; it really 

wonders where the government is going. And with the GTH, 

exactly what are their plan and what is the long-term plan? And 

will they be reporting as they do like a Crown? Will they be 

making sure that there’s an opportunity for the Privacy 

Commissioner to request or for the public under, you know, 

freedom of information to provide to individuals or to him 

when you’re dealing with the public’s dollars and where you’re 

going. And that’s just one area where, you know, you look at it. 

 

But you look at this, and right from the start it almost, like, 

there’s something that’s been flawed. There’s something wrong 

here just the way the government’s handling it. And you’re 

starting to see I think situations arise and, maybe, I don’t know 

if it’s a conflict or misunderstanding, whether it’s the 

municipalities, the city of Regina. So people are starting to 

obviously have some concerns. This legislation and just the 

plan that the government has and the way the government’s 

wanting to take this over, it’s starting to really raise some 

concerns. And I think people are watching, and I think people 

have some true concerns. And I don’t think it’s on any part of 

anyone trying to mislead here. I think it’s clear. There are some 

true concerns from individuals and from municipalities and 

from the city of Regina itself that, you know, they’ve got some 

areas where I think there’s miscommunication or 

misunderstanding. You know, I don’t know exactly what it is, 

but I hope they get an opportunity to raise those concerns that 

they’re having. 

 

And the way this government is handling this, whether it’s the 

municipality or whether it’s the city of Regina, that they get a 

chance as, you know, mayor and council and their 

administrators do, to raise the concerns, and the developers that 

they use, and how they’re saying . . . We know that they want to 



3214 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

work with the government, and they want to work with 

industry. They want to make sure that this is a fair process, that 

they want to be a part of the growing province, and they see the 

plan to be very good. I know that. You watch the way they 

handle things and the way they work with industry, whether it’s 

a small company, a large company. So you have that. 

 

So right now just looking at that area in itself raises some real 

concerns, the way the government’s taking control of that. And 

if that’s the way they’re going, I’m wondering why, why the 

government wants to take control of the GTH in that way. Why 

would they want to take over the authority of it . . . [inaudible] 

. . . whether it’s going into a Crown or a board. We’re not sure 

what exactly their plan is and where they’re going. 

 

And I think there’s a lot of questions and I think people are 

confused. And I think the government owes an explanation and 

to make sure that those authorities have a chance to express 

their concerns. And I’m hoping the government will allow that 

provision to happen because they’d better be allowing that. 

Because you have municipalities and our cities who are 

supposed to be our partners, who we’re supposed to be working 

with as a government when we’re expanding or going into an 

area like this. It’s supposed to be beneficial for all 

Saskatchewan residents, and just some of the concerns that, you 

know, are being raised here. 

 

And I want to make it very clear. I hope there is provisions for 

the government to allow that whether it’s in committee, whether 

it would be here to voice their concern to government. There 

has to be that opportunity for people that are concerned in our 

province and whether they’re leaders, whether they’re a 

municipality, whether they’re business people, if they have 

issues and concerns, whether they’re residents who own land. 

 

And that takes us to another area. There’s some legal actions 

sounds like is going on here in this file where land was taken 

over by individuals and whether they were told one thing, 

whether it’s a misunderstanding. I guess it’s going to be going 

to the courts. And it looks like there’ll be a lawsuit here could 

be going. And is that the way it’s going to be . . . you’re dealing 

with your residents of our province? And if you’re sharing stuff 

with them and you’re sharing information with them and if 

they’re understanding it and they’re being dealt with, that’s all 

we’ve asked. 

 

And we see today an example, you know, the member from 

Athabasca raised some concerns for residents about the way 

they’re being dealt with, with their land and the way their land’s 

being . . . All they’re asking for is to be treated fair. They want 

a fair value. They have nothing against growth. They’re there. 

They’re saying yes, we agree; we understand that. But I guess 

it’s the way this government handles things. 

 

And it goes to show again the way the Sask Party government 

deals with . . . When they want something, it doesn’t matter. 

They don’t have to consult you. They’ll just go ahead and do 

what they want. And we’re the government; we’ll do what we 

want. And that attitude is what’s going to get this government 

in trouble. And it’s showing that, you know, and I keep saying 

this: it’s a stone in the backpack. But carry it on, carry on. If 

that’s the way they want to carry on the business and they want 

to talk about the growth plan and all that stuff, people and these 

individuals, I don’t see them being opposed to growth and the 

provisions in here. 

 

I think it makes good sense to make sure that we’re working 

with individuals when we are going to take over their land; 

when we’re working with municipalities, to make sure that 

we’re communicating with them to make sure everybody 

understands what’s the intention of the government by the 

provisions that it’s passing and legislation that it’s bringing in. 

What is the whole plan? And you better make sure that you’re 

being fair, honest, upfront with those organizations because you 

will get a backlash from that. And I think that’s starting to 

happen, and I think this government is starting to see. 

 

Now you also look at some of the stuff and I think some of the 

companies that have said they were willing to come here, and 

you look at some of those companies. Kal Tire was the one I 

know the minister had to head off, and he went off to BC 

[British Columbia] to try to deal with the situation that . . . you 

know, to try to make sure that that wasn’t lost. And we’ll see 

where that all goes at the end of the day. Will they be in there or 

are they going to choose to go somewhere else? It’s going to be 

interesting to see. Do they stay in Saskatchewan? Are they 

going to another province? Or are they going to be, you know, 

around the hub, or where exactly are they going to go? And 

we’ll see exactly where that is. And until that plan is definite, I 

guess we’re not sure. So that just goes to show you some of the 

challenges that are going on here, the handling of this whole 

file, and that’s the concern I think that people are expressing. 

 

And when you see this many different, whether it’s business, 

the industry, whether you see the municipalities, whether you 

see individuals with the kind of concern they’re raising and 

some of the action — and you look at the media and you look at 

the Privacy Commissioner — people are weighing in on this. 

There’s something, something . . . Something’s wrong here. 

There are concerns. People are raising legit concerns. And I 

don’t know that this government is listening. They’re just, you 

know, bullheaded, going ahead with what they want. Somebody 

wants this for some reason. And you know, you’re looking at 

different things. So it’s not clear in here, and I think we’re 

going to get a lot of opportunity yet. And like I said, individuals 

want to make sure that they have an opportunity. 

 

Now you talk about an opportunity, and it’s quite a large area 

where, you know, 2,000 acres of land, and we see some of the 

work going on already, you know, with the I guess the . . . Is it a 

bypass? And they’re talking about the lanes and I guess if it’s 

twinning or they’ll have four lanes in that area. It’s by the 

airport. And I just look at some of the comments that the 

minister made and where they’re going. And I was actually 

through there today. And it’s interesting. There’s an overpass, 

and you see them going ahead and doing some activity over 

there and moving ahead with that. 

 

And I guess nobody’s opposed to growth and, you know, we 

want that to be because it creates jobs, and we want industry to 

come here. But we want to make sure that we’re working with 

industry, we’re working with the municipalities, and whether 

that’s, you know, the municipal mayor and council, you know, 

Sherwood. You look at different ones. Whether it’s the mayor 

of Regina and council, you want to make sure that those 

individuals and those municipalities are working and good. 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3215 

And it’s not that the government’s taking over and trying to say, 

well we want this, and we’re going to take over, and we’re 

going to charge. We’re going to have the authority, and we 

want to make sure that we have the provisions to say how we 

want it to be. And whether it’s an authority or whatever they’re 

going to do, it’s very concerning. And I think people are raising 

those concerns right now. So this legislation is not . . . I don’t 

think those individuals are done with it. And I know my 

colleagues aren’t done with it. 

 

And you know, you look at, clearly, fair value. And that’s what 

people are asking for. And you see some of the reports here, 

even some of the councillors saying that the people that own 

that land, that property belongs to them, those individuals. 

Whether they’re families, whether they’re farmers, whether 

they are running a business out there, they want a fair market 

value. 

 

And when you have councillors, you know, and news articles 

that you talk about . . . Councillors of the RMs are saying, you 

know, that they are not getting the fair market value for that 

property. The government’s not dealing with them and fair. 

Then you know that clearly — and that was raised today — that 

you better start paying attention as a government that you’re not 

treating people fair. You can’t go off and do the way, the 

handling, and think you can get away with that. It’s just not 

going to . . . It’s not the way it is. 

 

It’s no different than I look at my grandfather and when we 

were on the farm. And as a veteran and very proud Métis 

person, there was no way my grandfather would have stood by, 

and I know that. And his family would have supported him and 

the people around. But somebody was going to come and just 

take his land and tell him, this is the way it’s going to be and 

we’re going to take it. There would have been a heck of a fight. 

Now he is a . . . 

 

You know, when I think about it, a well-respected man in our 

community, my grandfather was. He was a Métis leader. He did 

lots. He worked with people and he helped people, but he just 

wanted to be treated fair. And that’s the type of man he was. 

And I give a lot of respect to that. That’s the values taught. 

You’ve got to make sure you’re talking with individuals. When 

I see his land today . . . And my mother owns that land. She 

retains that land and that was, you know, what he left her. And 

I’m very proud as the oldest child he had of 13, very clearly. 

 

So when we look at that and those areas, the way of the 

handling of it, you see the concern and the frustration of the 

individuals that were here today. And I know we met with some 

of them and my colleagues met with them and listened to their 

concerns about, they just want to be treated fair. They want to 

be treated with respect. And I don’t think that’s happening; this 

government is not doing that. And they have to do a better job. 

You know, you talk about the growth and you talk about 

working with Saskatchewan people, but be careful. Don’t take 

Saskatchewan people for granted. Don’t. You know, they 

deserve better. They deserve respect and they deserve to have 

their land valued at fair market value and compensated that 

way. 

 

Government sees it as the plan, and they’re willing to work with 

you. And I think these individuals are willing to work with 

government and work with the municipalities and work to make 

sure that there’s growth. And I never heard that they are 

opposed to that. They are making it very clear in this provision, 

in here, they want fair compensation and that hasn’t happened. 

 

Now you know, you go back. And I want to think because I 

think it’s important — the letter, you know — and looking at 

the minister receiving the letter from the Privacy Commissioner 

about the provision. And he makes it very clear. You’re using 

public dollars. How are you going to report that? And how will 

the public have access to the information and the plan that 

you’re going out and the way monies are going to be spent? 

And if it’s public dollars being used, then the public has a right. 

And I think clearly if you’re going to make it a Crown or 

authority or whatever and if government is going to have the 

power over that and hire staff — and they’re looking at that and 

that provision — and if that’s how they’re going to operate this 

thing, then they have to make sure that they have provisions. 

And again I think this is good then. And it’s timely that the 

Privacy Commissioner is asking for clarification on this. And I 

think it’s only right. And it’s public dollars; that needs to 

happen. 

 

Now I know my colleagues and I know the member from 

Rosemont has made it very clear, his concerns, you know, 

whether it’s in questions he’s asked the minister. And we’ve 

talked and asked for clarification on some of that, whether it 

was Kal Tire and that stuff, when we seen the minister heading 

off and doing what he was doing, damage control or whatever. 

But it goes back to making sure, making sure that the industry 

and the partners that are going into that area feel that you’re 

doing the right thing, that provisions are there for them to make 

sure they want to go in that area. So we don’t know what all the 

details are. And I know there’s more, there’s going to have to 

be more questions worked out. And there’s a lot of questions 

and a lot of concerns people are raising. 

 

So I talk about a number of different groups that are raising 

concerns — talking about lawsuits, you’re talking about 

municipalities that are not real happy, that they have issues and 

concerns that they want to address. You see a government just 

taking over or being heavy-handed. You see the Privacy 

Commissioner weighing in on it. That’s good, and I’m glad he 

is. So you see so many different individuals talking about it, 

whether it’s councillors talking about fair market value and 

people being . . . 

 

So I think this government needs to make sure. They need to go 

back to the draft paper and maybe truly consult with individuals 

in making sure that this is the right way to go and that they are 

respecting the individuals that should be shown the respect by a 

government. And this government is not doing that, 

unfortunately, clearly by the information that’s in front of me in 

this folder. And I know there’s going to be lots of questions in 

committee. That will definitely happen. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But I know there’s more discussions. And I know we have more 

questions and, you know, we want to debate this bill more on 

the floor here. So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 

prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 81. 

 



3216 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 81, The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 83 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 83 — The Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 83, An Act respecting 

Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this is brand new legislation. It is quite lengthy 

in that it tries to deal with a whole number of the issues that 

arise around the recruitment of foreign workers and then the 

immigration services that relate to those foreign workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to try to trace a bit of the history of 

this legislation in Saskatchewan. It was introduced by the 

minister here in this legislature just last December 4th, about 

four months ago. But we note that in October of 2009 there was 

a story in Manitoba that involved four Filipino workers who 

were having trouble with immigration issues, and as it came 

out, it appeared that there was a connection to Saskatchewan. 

And so at that point the Manitoba Labour minister, Nancy 

Allan, identified this issue. And it says here in the news story 

dated October 7th, 2009 that she talked with the Saskatchewan 

Labour minister who was then, in October 2009, starting to 

work on legislation to deal with these registration of 

immigration consultants and dealing with mistreatment of 

foreign workers. 

 

So that’s three, three and a half years ago that this issue arose. 

Now it came forward again in April of 2011, which is two years 

ago, and at that point there was a suggestion that legislation was 

being developed by the Saskatchewan’s Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. And at that point, 

employers and . . . Well employers specifically were 

encouraged to send any comments that they had to the Ministry 

of Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration around 

legislation and regulatory protection for foreign workers. And at 

that point the suggestion was that it would include the whole 

issue of immigration consultants. And so that work obviously 

continued. 

 

And so then last fall we had the introduction of this particular 

legislation in December of 2012. And so, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Immigration who brought this bill forward says that 

it’s some of the most comprehensive legislation to try to protect 

workers. And he’s indicated that the whole bill’s purpose is to 

balance the rights and obligations of recruiters, immigration 

consultants, and employers, and the newcomers — the new 

employees — during a process of recruiting and then their 

immigration to Saskatchewan. But he pointed out quite clearly 

that it doesn’t affect their rights as workers in the workplace. 

 

And it’s obviously quite timely legislation given all of the 

concerns raised on a national level about the temporary worker 

situation. And I think there are some issues maybe in this 

legislation that we may have to look at more closely in 

committee to see how the legislation deals with temporary 

foreign workers as opposed to foreign workers who are 

recruited and are coming here as immigrants. As we all know, 

the traditional method of foreign workers coming to Canada 

was as new immigrants with the goal that they would bring their 

families and integrate into the community. But what we’ve seen 

over the last number of months now is that there’s been a 

substantial increase in the numbers of what some other 

countries call guest workers, or people who are here on a 

temporary basis, and they are treated differently than somebody 

who is coming here to live and develop a long-term relationship 

with the country of Canada. 

 

We know that there have been different types of legislation 

developed around the world to deal with guest workers. The 

most prominent example I think relates to the country of 

Germany, where they have, for example, about 2 million guest 

workers who came from Turkey to be part of their economic 

activity probably 30 to 40 years ago. And it’s taken a long time 

for some of those initial issues around the role of guest workers 

in a society to be resolved within the country of Germany. 

 

I think that you can look at other countries around the world. 

There’s I think some similar issues in France, also in Great 

Britain and in the Netherlands, where issues around the role of 

the foreign worker and how their rights are protected within the 

community become broader issues for the whole community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at Bill No. 83 it seems, well it 

attempts to be quite narrow in its application to effectively talk 

about foreign worker recruitment and immigration services. 

And it has quite a number of definitions and it sets up a director 

whose job it is to monitor all these activities. But the prime 

focus of the bill is the licensing of foreign worker recruiters and 

immigration consultants on one side, and then I think it goes 

further as we move along to register employers of foreign 

nationals. 

 

So the scheme that has been developed is that you would end up 

having anybody who wants to have foreign workers employed 

in their business, that they would have to get a particular 

licence. They would have to register. And then if they in turn 

used a recruiter or an immigration consultant or some service 

like that, they would have to make sure that who they were 

dealing with was properly licensed in Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is a method of regulating an activity that has worked in 

quite a number of instances, but it is a fairly expensive way to 

do that. And I know that the minister was quite clear in saying 

that it would be the employers who would pay for the fees and 

licences related to this whole service, that it wouldn’t be 

something that would be borne by the general taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. And that’s not a bad thing, but it is a factor in 

how this whole service is developed. And it also then affects the 

robustness, if I can use that word, the strength of the regulatory 

organization that’s set up. 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3217 

I’m not sure how many people would be using this particular 

bill or this particular system in Saskatchewan. I know that in 

some of the information provided by the Government of 

Saskatchewan, they indicate there’s about 4,000 foreign 

workers who would come to Saskatchewan in a year. It may be 

more than that; it may be less. I’m not totally certain. But if this 

is a fairly extensive and large system that’s created, and all of 

the costs are being borne by the employers of these foreign 

workers, I can see that there may be some tension around the 

cost. 

 

What we also know, and sort of one, well one of the biggest 

issues that arises in the various stories of temporary foreign 

workers who are here is the kinds of costs that are imposed 

upon the foreign workers by their new employers, whether it’s 

reimbursement for transportation costs to get to Canada, 

reimbursement for the consultants if it’s an immigration 

consultant or the foreign worker recruiter, and all those costs. 

So I would suspect that there may be some attempt to collect 

the fees related to this whole licensing and registration system 

from the foreign workers as well. 

 

Now I don’t know if there’s some direct attempt to deal with 

that, but ultimately we know that people who are coming to 

work here want to work here. They want to receive the wages. 

And I think it may be a fairly difficult thing to monitor and 

control as the system is developed. 

 

So one of factors obviously in this legislation becomes what are 

the penalties or what kind of things can you do wrong or what 

kinds of things can you get charged with — if I can use that 

term — if you are going to breach this legislation. And those 

offences are set out in section 40 of the bill — it’s on page 15 

— and it’s got everything from failure to provide notice of 

documents or providing information, false statements. Those 

are all those kinds of things, but also being basically if you 

unlawfully obstruct or interfere with the director or the system. 

 

And when you look at the types of fines, they go up to $50,000 

if it’s an individual that’s made a breach, or imprisonment of 

not more than one year, or both, and if it’s a corporation, a fine 

of up to $100,000. So clearly the intent is to show that this is 

serious and that we don’t want people to be breaking these 

particular rules. But once again we’re dealing with people who 

. . . Well you hope you get them licensed and maybe even have 

a bond or something in place as it relates to the foreign worker 

recruiters or the immigration consultants, but if there are 

offences by some of the individuals, it probably is something 

that’s going to be quite difficult to enforce. 

 

So we have a fairly long piece of legislation. It’s got lots of, lots 

of rules in there. It’s got the appeal processes which it should 

have, including appeal finally to the Court of Queen’s Bench 

and then obviously from there to higher, up the courts, Court of 

Appeal and to the Supreme Court if necessary. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And so practically we have a whole system that’s being 

implemented to deal with the foreign worker recruiters and with 

immigration consultants. And the goal is good — protect the 

foreign workers, the temporary foreign workers — but it’s a 

fairly big initiative and it has costs attached. 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the legislation has 

been developed after a number of years of work. It covers many 

different areas, but it does still end up, I think, having questions 

here in the legislature and most certainly in the committee. And 

so my intention at this point, Mr. Speaker, would be to request 

that debate be adjourned and so that some of my colleagues 

could speak to this as well. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and 

Immigration Services Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 89 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 89 — The 

Creative Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today and enter into the debate on Bill No. 89, 

An Act respecting Creative Saskatchewan. And it was 

introduced just last week it looks like, April 8th, about a week 

ago today. Monday it came forward. So we haven’t had much 

time to take a look at it. 

 

There certainly has been a lot of attention paid to this file and 

clearly there should be. This represents our culture. It represents 

who we are. And we have such a proud history here in 

Saskatchewan that we really need to make sure we do the right 

thing here. And so clearly this is one that’s going to cause a lot 

of interest from our side because we have seen some, I would 

say, bungling of this file when it comes to the film tax credit 

and how that was handled. It was clearly an ideologically driven 

decision where you have reports and then after the fact and then 

you have ministers, and more than one minister and the Premier 

who cannot explain fully why is it when you see a healthy, 

thriving industry, creative industry, that seemed to be singled 

out and attacked the way that it was. And so we have lots of 

questions. We have lots of questions about this. And I know 

that as we move forward, this will unfold more. 

 

And I think in our 65th anniversary of the Arts Board, of which 

we are very proud here in Saskatchewan, the first outside the 

first that was set up in Britain . . . And so we have a proud 

history of creating an environment where artists are respected 

and they can thrive. But it is a challenge, and so clearly we need 

to make sure as a government we recognize our role to be 

supportive and make sure that artists receive the training, the 

education, and then the environment in which they can thrive 

and in which they can be also viable. 

 

And I know that this government likes to think that everything 

is all about entrepreneurship, but there is an artistic value. And 

sometimes that is a challenge. I think about in my own city, in 

my own riding, where we have the Remai Art Gallery coming 

up in a few years to be built. And we’re looking forward to that, 



3218 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

and already Mrs. Remai has bought 20 prints by Picasso. And 

of course Picasso, in many ways, was driven to do his art and it 

wasn’t about being an entrepreneur. It was about seeking his 

fulfillment of his artistic vision and what that meant, and I think 

that’s an important element. And I’m not actually seeing it from 

this government. 

 

I see a government that views the world through the business 

lens, which is appropriate. In many instances it is an 

appropriate, it is an appropriate world view for sure. The 

entrepreneurial drive is an important one. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I 

spoke about one story today in a member’s statement that it can 

be and it should be honoured and allowed to thrive. 

 

But I am concerned when we see a government that is picking 

winners and losers and then coming up with after-the-fact kind 

of initiatives. And we I think have a lot of questions, will have 

lots of questions about the work here, and considering too that 

this bill will only be able to be debated a few short weeks 

before it becomes law and we really won’t get to know it in the 

detail that we should have. And I know the minister and his 

government often talks at length about its consultation process, 

but clearly if there’s an area where you can see . . . And I 

actually can point out very, very many instances where this 

government has failed in terms of consultations. We can add the 

cultural community as yet another one. 

 

And I think that whether it was environmental or whether it was 

when we talked a few years ago about the world or The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act and the lack of consultation on that and 

whether that was the Bill 85 and the lack of consultation on 

that, and the list goes on. The list goes on. And we saw it with 

the film tax credit that all of a sudden it came out of nowhere. 

And that was a real problem. So these folks suffer a major lack 

of credibility when it comes to consultation and how do they 

pick winners and losers. And clearly this is yet another example 

that we are concerned about. Will this follow, go down that 

road? And what does this mean for the cultural community? 

 

So we’ll have questions but we want to make sure we talk a fair 

bit about this because not only when we talk about the artistic 

vision and how we make sure people in their drive to 

commercialize their initiatives, it’s not only about being a 

commercial success. It’s about artistic success and that 

sometimes is an uncomfortable thing because we often think of 

artistic things as only the sense is it pleasing to the eye. It has to 

be much more than that. It has to represent who we are and it’s 

about honouring and respecting the artist’s vision of the world 

before us. 

 

The minister has in his remarks, and each of us will probably 

take different perspectives on this, but I do want to talk about 

one that is near and dear to my heart and that is from the worker 

point of view here. The minister talks about microenterprises. 

And I know that over the course of the past several years, folks 

that are involved in the cultural community have raised 

concerns about what does it mean to be a worker in these 

enterprises, and whether it’s having a pension at the end of their 

work, their careers, and some sort of stability and predictability. 

That’s a big deal. That’s a big deal for everyone. And for those 

who are in the arts, it’s a very significant deal because they 

don’t get regular paycheques and so how do we make sure, well 

how do we make sure that happens? How do we make sure? 

One of the biggest areas . . . Well there’s many and I want to 

talk about a living wage and what does that mean for those 

people who are in the arts. What does it mean to have a living 

wage? Not just the minimum wage but a wage in which you can 

support your family, have your kids participate in our 

community activities, that type of thing. And why is it that they 

must pay a certain price because their work is not being 

honoured? So how does that meet this? This is very, very 

important work. 

 

A few years ago we did, when we were on government side, we 

did a project around the vulnerable worker. And many people in 

the arts feel themselves as vulnerable workers because they’re 

at risk in terms of so much that many of us who are in the 

regular workforce take for granted — the regular paycheques, 

the protection particularly around labour standards. Quite often 

labour standards does not meet the unique needs of the cultural 

community. And so it would be very interesting to read how 

and talk to the minister about his world view of how does he 

view protection when he talks about microenterprises for those 

who are engaged in the cultural sector. 

 

The other one that is very, very, very important of course is 

occupational health and safety and the protection from injuries 

that may occur in that circumstance. And I think of two that are. 

And it’s the visual arts, both as sculptors who are dealing with a 

lot of dust in studios that are not vented properly, that type of 

thing. How do we deal with that? That’s really important that 

we make sure that we do that. 

 

Folks who are involved with the visual arts, particularly 

painting, that’s really critically important because again it’s the 

studios and workspaces that really should be upgraded and that 

because of poor ventilation or different circumstances that they 

don’t meet safety standards. And somehow we have to be able 

to meet that and help artists be able to do that — have safe 

workplaces. And it’s not an easy thing to do because these folks 

don’t have a lot of money, a lot of resources. And how do we 

make sure that’s the case? 

 

And you can go through several, several examples of where, in 

terms of occupational health and safety, it would be an 

important area that we should look at. Now clearly in a 

province that has been talking about Mission: Zero, that this is 

one area I think that we should really take a look at, you know. 

 

And unfortunately I don’t know in fact if this industry makes an 

impact on our WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] stats just 

because of the size of the industry, but also that many are just 

not registered. And it’s one of those kind of circumstances 

where you don’t really, you’re not having the kind of impact 

that maybe, say the construction industry is; whether it’s 

commercial or residential, it’s just not the same size so it 

doesn’t have the impact. But we know it’s there. And when we 

have legislation like this, it is our responsibility as a 

government that we do the right thing, that we think about the 

needs of everyone. And when we take pride in our arts, that we 

know it’s been done in a safe process that has not been 

exploitive, but in fact it’s one that we can all share in pride. And 

that’s very, very important. 

 

And it used to be, well that’s just an artist’s life. Or, I think, in 

many ways they were referred to as the starving artists. And I 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3219 

think we’ve come a long way in appreciating that just isn’t on 

anymore. That might have been quaint at one time, but it’s not 

on anymore. And we have to make sure people of all walks of 

life have a living wage, a safe place to work, and that when we 

talk about this kind of work that we’re making sure that there is 

a standard, that there is a standard. 

 

And when we had talked about actually, in our consultations in 

the fall on Bill 85, one of the concepts that came up was how do 

we protect individual contractors or the small contractors? Now 

artists may not think of themselves in that way, and I know the 

minister has raised the concept of the entrepreneur, and in many 

ways that is the reality they find themselves in. But is there 

protection for them and does this legislation do that or is it a 

vehicle for funding? And while that may be good and that may 

be what part of the answer is, we need much more rigorous 

work around this area. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to just review what I’ve said, that in 

fact we believe this government suffers a significant, significant 

gap in terms of their integrity in terms of the work in the 

creative field, the cultural area, just because of the kind of work 

that’s gone on, particularly last year with the film tax credit in 

the film industry where we’ve seen a gutting of an industry and 

people moving away. And it’s so tragic when you see that and 

you know people who have moved away, that when they talk 

about how they’re going to do the right thing, well the proof 

will be in the pudding. And we will see what this means. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So they have a lot of work, a lot of work to do this. And you 

know, for a government that often talks about how people 

should admit when they’ve done wrong, we’ve not seen this 

from this government, not even when the chamber of commerce 

says, you know, I think they were wrong headed about the film 

tax credit. This government will just not admit that on that one 

they did the wrong thing. They did the wrong thing. And it 

shows a certain lack of class, and it hits them in integrity. And it 

doesn’t make a lot of common sense, does it? 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, with that, you know, I think that we will 

have many, many questions about The Creative Saskatchewan 

Act, particularly in terms of their world view of what does it 

mean from an artistic point of view or is everything going to be 

driven by a commercialization entrepreneur world view, which 

in and of itself is not a bad thing. But if you apply that to 

everything you do, then we have problems and we have 

problems. It’s not the type of Saskatchewan that I know many 

people value and think highly of and, as I’ve said, particularly 

when it comes to the Arts Board and how it’s been arm’s length 

and supports arts in a full way with respect and integrity. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we will have a lot of questions. And I will 

be asking the minister especially when it comes to the labour 

perspective because I know that there is been a lot of concerns 

that’s overlooked, that’s overlooked, that the government thinks 

if you send a cheque, you’ve got the grant. There’s no need for 

labour standards or occupational health and safety discussions. 

And that clearly is not the case. It clearly is not the case. 

 

We need to do more to protect our artists and make sure that, 

like any other person who works in this province, whatever 

their work is, that they’re safe and they’re not exploited. So 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I know there’ll be many people who 

want to speak on Bill No. 89, The Creative Saskatchewan Act, 

and therefore I adjourn debate on Bill No. 89. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 89, The Creative Saskatchewan Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 90 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 90 — The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

always great to be recognized in this Assembly, on this floor, to 

be able to rise in my place and participate in the debate on Bill 

No. 90, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

You know it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, for fans of the history 

of local governance, this one bears particular interest, I would 

submit, to the Assembly’s attention. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting the way that this bill has come forward. It’s 

interesting the way that the different sort of commentators that 

have weighed in on it to date, and it’s going to be very 

interesting to see what sort of use is made of this piece of 

legislation. And you know, all that on top of what is a $250,000 

expenditure in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The way this has come forward of course, contending in terms 

of the defence made by the minister in his second reading 

speech, to deal with the planning and development concerns 

that arise in the province of Saskatchewan and that need for 

inter-municipal co-operation, that need for regional 

co-operation, how do you foster that? And I guess again, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the history of local governance in this 

province, the fact that we have 786 municipalities in this 

province, the different efforts made by governments of different 

stripes historically, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the question of 

how do you, as the provincial government, work with 

municipalities to bring about greater regional co-operation, 

greater inter-municipal co-operation? 

 

And believe me, Mr. Speaker, I think you’re making exactly the 

appropriate gestures here in terms of what this may entail if the 

government falls off the tightrope that they’re trying to walk 

here as regards regional co-operation. 

 

Of course last year in the raft of legislative secretary 

appointments, the number escapes me in terms of how many 

legislative secretaries were appointed. But I don’t know if it 

was a baker’s dozen or a round dozen or, you know, it was 

some significant number as such. 

 



3220 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

An Hon. Member: — Fourteen over there. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Fourteen, it could have been. How do you deal 

with . . . A nice round number perhaps. But one of those 

legislative secretaries, Mr. Speaker, was of course the member 

from Melfort who was appointed as the Legislative Secretary 

for regional co-operation. And I can’t help it if he’s been taking 

counsel from his seatmate, the member from Melville — or the 

member in front of him, Melville-Saltcoats — who of course 

had some very well-articulated views on the whole matter of 

regional co-operation, regional amalgamation, how all these 

things work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, it’s I guess another sort of criticism I’d have of 

the way that these members have dealt with the whole question 

of legislative secretaries. In the past, ministers have had 

ministerial mandate letters, and you got some of the marching 

orders. You got a sense of what their task is, laid out in front of 

them by the Premier. And you know, I’m on record, and I’ll say 

it again, Mr. Speaker: I thought that was an improvement to the 

kind of accountability that we should be pursuing here in the 

legislature in terms of having that yardstick to measure 

performance alongside in terms of having greater understanding 

on the part of the people of Saskatchewan and the official 

opposition as to just what members in government are up to, be 

they ministers or in this case legislative secretaries. 

 

So where they’re at in terms of the whole question of 

ministerial mandate letters, you know, it’s a bit of an open 

question right now, Mr. Speaker. But as regards the legislative 

secretaries, it’s an even broader question in terms of what are 

the specific marching orders for those individuals. What are the 

performance measures? What will they be held to account on? 

And what are their objectives? 

 

So the member from Melfort, being appointed as Legislative 

Secretary for regional co-operation, we’re interested to see that. 

And we’re also, you know, left wondering, just what the heck is 

that member going to be up to as the Legislative Secretary for 

regional co-operation? And apparently, you know, the work has 

resulted in or has been complemented perhaps by a $250,000 

expenditure in the budget as regards regional co-operation. How 

that’s going to be spent, how that’s going to be deployed, well 

you know, we’ve got some questions that we’ll surely be asking 

in estimates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it does, you know, in terms of the legislation that’s in front 

of us here and the way that it now gives the minister a hammer 

to force regional co-operation, it’s going to be interesting to see 

if the Legislative Secretary gets near the hammer or if he’s 

going to be carrying the hammer for the minister as the minister 

sets about to lower the boom. Or will he be a czar? Or will he 

be a mini czar? Will it be a good cop/bad cop scenario, Mr. 

Speaker? We’re very interested to see how this all works out. 

 

You know, will they be swooping, from an incident of lack of 

co-operation, in a motorcycle and a sidecar? How’s this 

relationship going to work? Who’s going to be writing the 

cheques on that quarter of a million that they’ve set aside for 

regional co-operations? It’s going to be mightily interesting to 

see how this all unfolds, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I guess the thing that is of greatest interest to us in the 

opposition benches is the power that is invested in this 

legislation for the minister to direct regional co-operation. So 

again is it really co-operation if it’s directed by ministerial 

mandate, Mr. Speaker? Well you know, I think there’s some 

longstanding opinions on that matter in this House, and it’ll be 

interesting to see if it’s just a matter of people saying one thing 

in opposition and then something else when they hit the 

government benches. Because I guess, not to lean too heavily 

on the member from Melville-Saltcoats and I’ve followed him 

with great interest over the years because he’s had a lot of 

interesting things to say, but I think the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats is on record as saying, you can say just about 

anything in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And apparently, apparently he did particularly, particularly with 

regards to this subject, Mr. Speaker. And so how this all works 

out in terms of, you know, is it co-operation if the minister has 

to direct it? You know, how this all squares, how this comes out 

in the wash, we’ll be mightily interested to see how this works 

out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ll be interested to see who they’re going to be listening to in 

terms of the kind of balances they’ve got to square here, Mr. 

Speaker. Will it be the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities? And I should also state, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting. Usually with legislation of this magnitude, there’s a 

fairly long list of people that have been consulted in terms of 

the construction of the legislation. And it seems to be kind of 

absent in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And maybe we 

can get that cleared up in committee or maybe members 

opposite have some information that they’d be able to relate or 

maybe the Legislative Secretary for regional co-operation has 

got the inside track on how this all works or doesn’t. You know, 

I guess we’ll see how this all shakes out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it was interesting to note than when this $250,000 

expenditure came forward in the budget, it was interesting to 

see the commentators that weighed in. One of them of course 

was John Gormley — you know, a fairly constant friend of that 

government opposite and often given to writing glowing 

critiques of actions of the members opposite. And what 

Gormley had to say on the day after the budget in the pages of 

the Saskatoon StarPhoenix was: 

 

. . . a regional planning approach where local governments 

in the same area, in particular cities and adjoining 

municipalities, should do their development planning as an 

overall region, rather than as individual and often 

competing entities. 

 

. . . The warning is that they can choose to play nice or 

government will be snapping into line unco-operative and 

difficult RMs that are impeding progress. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, you know, does John Gormley know 

something that hasn’t been fully communicated in this Chamber 

or in terms of the way that this legislation is coming forward? 

Was there some kind of consultation that went on in terms of, 

you know, the highlights of the budget that, you know, the Tory 

insiders got in terms of the talking points? Or is there something 

else afoot here? Or is he just that good, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

figuring out the agenda of this government and having the 

finger on the pulse over there? I guess we’ll have to wait and 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3221 

see. 

 

But another commentator, the very next day in Saturday’s 

Leader-Post is where I read it, certainly an individual that’s 

made a great contribution to various pursuits in public policy 

around this province but, you know, one-time Sask Party 

appointed head of the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Sciences and Technology, SIAST. I’m speaking of course of 

Alan Thomarat. You know, nice individual. But it was 

interesting what he had to say in the Leader-Post. And it was as 

follows, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Regional collaboration will allow many urban and rural 

municipalities to combine resources to make planning and 

development more efficient and economically sustainable. 

Currently, Saskatchewan has 786 municipalities, which 

reduces the economic benefits of population density and 

critical mass. Reorganizing the existing municipal model 

to a regional governance model can increase planning and 

funding efficiencies for municipalities . . . 

 

Adopting Regional Planning Authorities will serve where 

necessary local, rural and regional interests, but moreover 

they will enhance provincewide efforts to grow the New 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. If that was in some kind of 

mandate letter for the Legislative Secretary for regional 

co-operation, you know, it would have pointed out certain 

matters of irony to be dealt with, Mr. Speaker, but that would 

have been helpful in terms of figuring out what the agenda of 

this government is around regional co-operation. 

 

But when it comes forward from two, you know, fairly closely 

aligned voices when it comes to the affairs of this government, 

around a more, how shall we say, directed approach to regional 

. . . to use their phrase, co-operation, Mr. Speaker — and again 

the whole matter of, you know, is it co-operation if it’s been 

dictated to you by the minister? — and you know, how that 

squares with their historical record on these matters, Mr. 

Speaker, well I guess we’re going to see how that all comes out 

in the wash. 

 

But it would have been good to have those kind of insights, you 

know, hard-wired into the mandate for the Legislative 

Secretary. It would have been good if they’d drawn that kind of 

attention to this big quarter of a million dollar expenditure in 

the budget. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And I guess, you know, with all respect to the member from 

Melfort, the Legislative Secretary for regional co-operation, 

with all respect to the quarter of a million dollars of 

expenditure, Mr. Speaker, you know, not to dismiss the merits 

of those markers on the table here, Mr. Speaker, the real power 

is in this legislation. The real showstopper is in this legislation. 

 

And in terms of the minister having the authority to direct 

whether or not municipalities get along, whether or not they’re 

going to be working together in a common planning model, the 

myriad of powers that are carved out for the minister in this 

piece of legislation, it’s pretty interesting to see. And it’s pretty 

rich to see this coming forward, particularly given some of the 

ways that members opposite have gone on the record over the 

years as regards whether or not we should have, how many 

municipalities we should have in this province and how 

economic that is and how we balance these competing interests 

of local governance and local democracy off in terms of a 

rational regional planning model, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, how this all comes out in the wash, we shall 

see. But I guess one thing that is instructive is the way that the 

members opposite and way members of that cabinet have 

approached local people in terms of . . . And you know, the case 

that we saw here today in terms of whether or not the Ministry 

of Highways uses the powers, the huge power of expropriation, 

and what leads up to that, Mr. Speaker. And again, the minister 

tried to say, well you know, this is the same model as the NDP. 

So you know, yet again it’s the NDP’s fault, you know. Like 

when does that come to an end? When does that hit the 

best-before date? I guess, you know, six years on and it’s still 

going strong, Mr. Speaker. But I don’t know when they’re 

going to look in the mirror and realize that they’re responsible 

for their own actions. But we’ll see how that all shakes out. 

 

But as regards the way that they’ve wielded this powerful tool 

such as expropriation as the Ministry of Highways and the way 

that we hear from citizens in this province who feel like they 

have not been dealt with fairly, who feel like they have not been 

dealt with squarely in terms of the approach of this government, 

well you know, the proof is in the pudding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we heard members opposite say just about anything in 

opposition over the years in terms of regional co-operation or 

regional planning or those kind of things, or the importance of 

local governance or local democracy. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, I guess this is where the rubber hits the road. You 

know, it’s interesting to see how members opposite are 

conducting themselves in this passage. It’s interesting to see the 

kind of powers that are being secured for them in this piece of 

legislation, and if there’s a rationale . . . I guess one of the 

things that, you know, if these powers are called for, then make 

the case for it. Don’t try to do some kind of sneak attack where 

the people you let in on it are like Thomarat and Gormley; 

they’re the ones with the inside track on what’s happening with 

this government’s agenda. If you’re going to be moving for this 

kind of power, you know, own up to it. You know, let it be 

known what you’re about. But of course, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 

got to square the circle in terms of what’s been their record and 

what’s, you know, they think is going to make sense. 

 

And it’s also interesting, Mr. Speaker, again in terms of recent 

experience on the part of the people of Saskatchewan, the way 

that this government utilizes existing powers in the legislation 

and what concepts like consultation mean to them and what 

concepts like, you know, due process mean to them. So we’ll 

see how this all shakes out, Mr. Speaker. But you know, it’s 

interesting the way this legislation has come forward. Not the 

immediate circumstance in which it’s come forward, but it’s 

mightily interesting to know something of the historical record, 

Mr. Speaker, and ways that members opposite got on the record 

in terms of the question of so-called regional co-operation, you 

know, regional co-operation where it depends on the minister 

having the hammer to force it, Mr. Speaker. 

 



3222 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2013 

Well it would be interesting to know, you know, if some of the 

members opposite were, you know, if the tables were turned, 

what they’d have to say about that. And I think they’d say some 

pretty outrageous things about that, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

they said some pretty outrageous things in the past about some 

pretty straightforward propositions, you know. Anyway we’ll 

see how this shakes out, Mr. Speaker. But if it’s anything like 

what’s gone on to date, you know, it’s not a lot of hope. 

 

And I know the minister can drive around with that Legislative 

Secretary in the sidecar all he likes. I know they can maybe 

fight over who’s going to sign the cheques on that big quarter of 

a million bucks that they’ve got in store in terms of trying to 

facilitate this co-operation. But of course the real price, the real 

power is in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. And how that gets 

sorted out, we’ll be watching with great interest from these 

benches. 

 

Anyway you know, maybe that sidecar’s going to hit a bump. 

Maybe, you know, he’ll have to turn around, go back, pick up 

the Legislative Secretary, say, oh, oh, we’ve got some more 

regional co-operation to direct. We’ve got some more regional 

co-operation to force because now we’ve got the legislative 

power. You know, local decision making, well that was a nice 

thing we had a lot to say about back in the ’90s, but not so 

much anymore, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway with that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be watching mightily 

close in terms of what happens with this piece of legislation in 

terms of Bill 90, The Planning and Development Amendment 

Act. It’s too bad that they didn’t call it the regional co-operation 

Act, you know, sort of play out the irony in the piece to the full 

extent, Mr. Speaker. But I guess the irony is speaking loud 

enough for itself. With that, I would move to adjourn debate on 

Bill 90. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 90, The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 91 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 91 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or Mr. 

Speaker. It’s Mr. Speaker in the Chair now. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m pleased to enter into the debate on Bill No. 91, An 

Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act (No. 2). 

 

What does this bill do, Mr. Speaker? This particular bill, or 

these amendments, will enable the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

board of trustees and it enables the board to establish a pooled 

registered pension plan, or PRPP, through the creation of a 

non-profit corporation to act as a PRPP. A separate legal entity 

is required to be the registered administrator in order to meet 

the requirements for a corporate administrator under The 

Income Tax Act and to create a legal separation between the 

existing Saskatchewan Pension Plan and the PRPP. 

 

So to ensure the plan has a low-cost structure, the administrator 

corporation will be a non-profit corporation under the direct 

control of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan board of trustees 

because any property acquired by the administrator will have 

been funded by the plan members. Remaining property on 

dissolution would revert to members, and in order to maximize 

economies of scale for both the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and 

the pooled pension plan, the administrator will be obliged to 

invest the PRPP money in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan fund. 

 

So this bill is enabling the creation of . . . There is a bill that 

follows this that actually will establish the pooled registered 

pension plan, Mr. Speaker. So what is some of the history of 

this? We need to look to see what the federal government has 

done. This is the federal government’s way to support 

Canadians in retirement. I know one of the goals, many 

Canadians had been pushing for the increase to the Canada 

Pension Plan to ensure that all Canadians have an opportunity 

to contribute. So this is not an ideal way. 

 

I’ll just go through some of this here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

the one of the . . . Canada actually has a fairly comprehensive 

retirement income system. As the minister points out, it has 

several different pillars, three elements or three pillars. The first 

pillar consists of publicly-funded supports programs like old 

age security and the Guaranteed Income Supplement. And these 

programs are to provide a minimum level of financial support to 

Canadian seniors. Actually in recent times, actually the federal 

government, we’ve heard, is going to be upping the age at 

which you can access this plan to 67 from 65, which is hugely 

problematic, I think, should be from the province’s perspective 

because that means the federal government has fobbed off 

responsibility onto citizens of the province and taxpayers of the 

province while the Government of Saskatchewan and every 

other provincial jurisdiction will have to take over supporting 

those individuals. So this is a huge difficulty for many people 

who will now not be able to access some of these programs 

until they’re 67. 

 

The second pillar consists of the Canada Pension Plan, which as 

we know is funded through earnings-based contributions from 

employees and employers. Participation in the CPP [Canada 

Pension Plan] is mandatory for all employed and self-employed 

Canadians. There are many people who’ve put forward very 

good arguments for enhancing this particular structure rather 

than pooled pension retirement funds, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

this is not the way, the direction the federal government has 

chosen to go in, which to our minds is problematic. 

 

The third pillar consists of private retirement savings, including 

workplace pension plans and registered retirement savings plans 

or RRSPs. And participation in some occupational pension 

plans is a requirement of employment, and then obviously we 

know that participation in other private savings plans is entirely 

voluntary. And I know for many people that I speak to who are 

unable to plan properly for their retirement, it’s not because 



April 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3223 

they don’t want to, it’s not because they’re not thinking about it, 

but the amount of money that they have at the end of each 

month is not . . . With increasing rents, with increasing housing 

costs, with increasing cost to food, and the things that we need 

to live, as much as we’d even like to put $100 away, that is a 

huge challenge for so many people. 

 

So relying on the private pension plans is hugely problematic 

for so many people. And it’s not because people don’t want to 

plan for their future, it’s because they don’t even have enough 

income today to ensure that they have a decent quality of life 

right now. So I know that the minister and the federal 

government, to address the gap in retirement savings for 

workers, there were several Canadian ministers across the 

provinces who proposed a new pension savings arrangement, 

the pooled registered pension plan, which is voluntary, less 

complex, and less costly for employers, and which allows the 

assets of employees for multiple employers to be pulled into a 

large cost-effective pension plan, which unto itself isn’t a 

problem, Mr. Speaker. It’s not that this itself is a problem. It’s 

that you’re missing a few pieces of the puzzle in terms of 

ensuring people have the income that they need in retirement. 

 

As I said, I know, I speak to constituents on a regular basis who 

have far . . . who don’t have money at the end of the month. 

And the goal, I know, when we talk about private pension 

plans, people say, oh just — or RRSPs [registered retirement 

savings plan] — well just take $50, take $100 off of each 

cheque. But when people are barely making it, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Speaker, $50 off the top of a cheque to put into your 

retirement savings can be incredibly burdensome. 

 

So it’s not that pooled registered pension plans in and of 

themselves are a problem. And many people I’m sure will take 

advantage of them, and many employers. But I know that we do 

have some concerns just with the federal government’s overall 

strategy on helping people into their future retirement years, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, so I know that many of us will have 

many comments on Bill No. 91, The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Amendment Act (No. 2) going forward. And with that, I 

would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 91, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands adjourned to 

1:30 p.m. Tuesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3193 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3193 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3193 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3193 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3193 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3194 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3194 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3194 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3194 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3194 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3194 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3194 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3194 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3195 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3195 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society Fundraisers 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3195 

 Saskatoon Entrepreneurs Launch Mobile App 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3196 

 Grand Opening of Fitness Centre at Elmwood Residences 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3196 

 Juno Week in Saskatchewan 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3196 

 Café Success Story 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3197 

 Hockey Goes On 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3197 

 Robust Economy in The Battlefords 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3197 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Care for Children With Cancer 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3197 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3197 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3199 

 Land Acquisition for Highways 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3199 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3199 

 IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3200 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3200 

 Education and Employment for First Nations and Métis People 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3201 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3201 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 94 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3202 

 Bill No. 95 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3202 

 Bill No. 96 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3203 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 70 — The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3203 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3205 

 



 

 Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3205 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3207 

 Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3207 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3208 

 Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3208 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3210 

 Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3211 

  Wyant (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 3213 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3213 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3216 

 Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3217 

 Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3219 

 Bill No. 91 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3222 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


