




















































Hansard: April 08, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 42B  MONDAY, APRIL 8, 2013, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3075 

 April 8, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It is now 7 o’clock. The Assembly 

will resume the sitting, resume debate on Bill No. 53, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2). I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 53 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter where my colleague left off on the debate on 

Bill No. 53, An Act to repeal miscellaneous obsolete Statutes 

and to amend The Saskatchewan Development Fund Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this Bill sets out to do, it will set out 

to repeal 11 pieces of existing legislation. The purpose of the 

. . . [inaudible] . . . the minister says to repeal bills that are no 

longer necessary or have become obsolete. 

 

I know my colleague from Saskatoon Centre had at one point 

referred to Bill No. 53. When we talk about repealing old, 

out-of-date Acts or obsolete Acts, he actually talked about, this 

is like cleaning your basement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You’ve 

got all these boxes in your basement, and sometimes we think if 

we haven’t opened a box for a very long time that we should 

just haul it out. But I know my colleague from Saskatoon 

Centre pointed out the importance of, sometimes you have to 

peek in that box and see what actually is in that box, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. You may not have used it in a few years, but 

it’s important to still have a good idea what you might be 

passing on or getting rid of, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I know 

committee will be an opportunity to lift that lid on the box and 

take a look at some of these Acts in a little bit closer detail and 

ask some questions about the government’s intent. 

 

Some of these seem fairly straightforward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Some of these Acts that will be repealed are The Crown 

Foundations Act. This Act was introduced in 1994 to allow 

universities to take advantage of a difference in the income tax 

treatment of donations made to charitable organizations and to 

the Crown. The minister pointed out in his second reading that, 

at the time, the income tax deduction for donations made to 

charitable organizations could not exceed 20 per cent of a 

taxpayer’s income whereas donations to the Crown could be as 

high as 100 per cent of the taxpayer’s income. 

 

The Act permitted Crown foundations to be established for 

Saskatchewan’s two universities to act as a conduit for 

donations to those universities. So this Act, when it was passed 

in 1994, allowed donors to take advantage of a larger tax 

benefit. But the minister’s pointed out that in 1996 the tax credit 

distinction between donations to charitable organizations and 

donations to the Crown was eliminated and the new limit of 75 

per cent of a taxpayer’s income is now the same for either type 

of donation. So there’s no longer any tax advantage gained from 

establishing a foundation, so the minister would argue that 

there’s no need for this. And he says that the Crown 

foundations at both universities have had no activity in the past 

several years, and both universities support elimination of the 

foundations. 

 

So another bill that will be repealed is The Vegetable, Fruit and 

Honey Sales Act. And I know actually in the minister’s second 

reading speech, Hansard always records what the speaker is 

saying, but there was also . . . sometimes catches inaudible 

interjections from the members in the House, Mr. Speaker. And 

at that point, I don’t know if there was some great enthusiasm 

for The Vegetable, Fruit and Honey Sales Act or some 

displeasure. I’m not quite sure, Mr. Speaker. But when the 

second reading speech was taking place, there were some extra 

conversations going on around it. 

 

And this particular Act has been in place since 1947, and it 

permits inspectors appointed pursuant to the Act to certify that 

vegetables, fruits, and honey for sale in Saskatchewan meet the 

standards specified in the regulations. But apparently, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, since that Act was first introduced, changes 

have occurred in the industry to the federal regulations that have 

rendered the Act irrelevant and, as the minister says, 

cumbersome. And federal legislation actually now regulates 

producers selling to retailers or wholesalers both inside or 

outside of the province, and the retailers actually use federal 

legislation even if the produce is being sold in the province. 

 

I’m interested in that piece of that Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

The Vegetable, Fruit and Honey Sales Act. It’s already been 

about 24 years but I took an apiculture class back in university. 

I have no idea what inspired me to do that, Mr. Speaker, but it 

was actually quite a fascinating class learning about the 

apiculture, the beekeeping industry here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Again, I’m not quite sure what inspired me to do it, but it was 

quite fascinating. You’d be interested to know that 

Saskatchewan not only produces some of the highest quality 

honey in the world — our northern location and our long, warm 

summer days, although it’s questionable whether or not we’ll 

actually see long, warm summery days ever again here in 

Saskatchewan — but our climate of long, warm summer days 

and our skilled beekeepers help produce more honey per hive 

than any other province in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I know that some beekeepers . . . actually, interestingly 

enough, I know back in, I think it was 1992 when I took this 

class, possibly even 1991, there were some concerns. Often 

bees will be imported. We didn’t do a lot of it back then and 

I’m not sure where we’re at now, Mr. Speaker, but we were 

pretty well positioned here in our climate here in Saskatchewan. 

But I remember the day when a more aggressive African bee 

was a potential risk for beekeepers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

remember learning a little bit about that in my class but it’s 

been, like I said, more than 20 years ago, so that’s a while. But 



3076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

the bottom line is apiculture, beekeeping is a very important 

industry here to our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And actually beekeepers have another concern here, just 

looking at . . . Right now the beekeepers’ board is concerned 

about the negative impact of bees on comb approved for import 

into Saskatchewan, so that hasn’t changed. I think some of the 

issues around what the problems are have changed, but there is 

still some concerns about importing bees on comb into 

Saskatchewan. And actually, interestingly enough, our 

Agriculture critic would be interested in hearing this, that 

they’re encouraging beekeepers to direct their concerns 

regarding the importation of bees on comb to the Minister of 

Agriculture — so might be some interesting questions for 

estimates tomorrow night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my 

colleague from Saskatoon Nutana has an opportunity to talk 

about that. 

 

But back to Bill No. 53, which again is a bill the minister has 

said whose goal is to repeal obsolete legislation or legislation 

that’s no longer needed. I think we have to be mindful of that 

term, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe it was this time last year 

that the bill that made SCN, the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, an entity was repealed. And it was a choice that the 

government made to first fade SCN to black but then to 

privatize it. And then the company to whom they sold it has 

flipped it and made quite a profit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But that 

was one of those bills this time last year that was rendered or 

deemed obsolete by the government. 

 

And I know that there are many people in Saskatchewan who 

think that the Saskatchewan Communications Network was not 

obsolete and provided a great service, not just to the film 

industry for its broadcast licence, but in sharing Saskatchewan 

stories and Saskatchewan content with people across 

Saskatchewan. So I think we have to be very mindful when we 

refer to something as obsolete or no longer needed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So it will be interesting in committee when we take these boxes 

from the basement and have the opportunity to flip the lid in 

committee and discuss what exactly some of these . . . a little bit 

more about some of these bills. 

 

Another bill that’s going to be repealed is The Saskatchewan 

Development Fund Act. This Act was passed in 1974 and 

created the Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation to 

perform the duties of trustee, custodian, and manager of the 

Saskatchewan Development Fund, which was an open-ended 

investment trust. In 2009 the board of directors of the 

corporation resolved to close the fund, and since then the 

minister said all accounts have been redeemed and operations 

have been closed. In 2010 the board of directors resolved to 

begin the process of winding up the affairs of the corporation, 

and the minister says the corporation no longer has any assets or 

liabilities. So this bill not only repeals it, but it includes 

provisions to wind up and dissolve the corporation and repeal 

The Saskatchewan Development Fund Act as it no longer has 

any purpose. 

 

But again I always think it’s important to check the context of 

no longer having any purpose, as I would point out that The 

Saskatchewan Communications Network Act was one of those 

Acts deemed obsolete in the miscellaneous statutes Act last 

year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The minister has said that the NewGrade . . . Or the minister 

who brought this Act forward has said that the Minister of 

Government Relations put forward six pieces of legislation for 

repeal. The Cut Knife Reference Act is one of them, which was 

passed in 1978. The Act replaces Cut Knife, which was 

previously one word, as two words but apparently there’s no 

current legislation that refers to Cut Knife as one word and so 

the purpose of the Act has been fulfilled and repealed. 

 

The NewGrade Energy Inc. Act will also be repealed. So this 

Act was to facilitate the financing, construction, and 

development of the heavy oil upgrader in Regina. In 2007 CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] sold its 

interest in the NewGrade Energy Inc., and as such the Act is no 

longer required. 2007 was before my time in this legislature, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I’m wondering where the proceeds for 

NewGrade Energy have . . . what have we seen? 

 

I know one concern that we have here on this side of the House 

is the long-term sustainability of what we get from our 

resources, Mr. Speaker, an idea of a sovereign wealth fund, the 

idea that we’re putting away resources for future generations — 

my kids and grandkids, your kids and grandkids — making sure 

that we have those non-renewable resources that we utilize now, 

that there is some future benefits for generations down the path. 

 

And so I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when we think 

about proceeds from sales of government, that they just don’t 

get wrapped into general revenue funds or used for one-time 

things. I think it’s a good idea to think about our natural 

resources or anything that we might sell, as this government 

might sell, that we should think about, well, are we putting that 

money into savings or are we just plunking it down and it’s 

getting lost in the mix, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There are several other bills that are being repealed: The 

Municipal Industrial Development Corporations Act. And this 

Act was passed in 1960 to assist cities and towns with the 

attraction and promotion of industrial development by 

providing accommodation or financial assistance to industries. 

This Act provides the authority for incorporations, powers, 

distribution of profits or assets, directors, and other matters for 

industrial development corporations that are established under 

the Act. 

 

But the minister says there are no active corporations that meet 

the criteria in the Act, and the last active corporation was 

formally dissolved back in September of 2011. So this Act will 

be repealed as the municipal governments are able to establish 

the corporations pursuant to The Municipalities Act, The Cities 

Act, or The Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

And another Act of these 11 that will be repealed is The 

Subdivisions Act: 

 

The Act was passed in 1914 [Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very 

long time ago] and provides the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board with the authority to revise the property 

assessments of a subdivided area in a rural municipality 

and to permit the owner of a subdivided area to occupy 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3077 

adjoining vacant land for the purpose of common 

cultivation. 

 

The Act also permits the registrar [the minister says] of 

land titles to exercise a variety of powers in a subdivided 

area without obtaining planning approval from the 

director of planning. The Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

has no record of using this Act in the last 25 years, [Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, so that’s been quite some time] nor do 

land title officials recall having received an application 

pursuant to this Act. All sections of the Act have been 

either superseded by other provisions or have become 

redundant or inconsistent with current legislation . . . 

 

And this Act, the minister says, is ready to be repealed. 

 

But I know again, just going back to the whole basement 

analogy, there will be an opportunity in committee to pop open 

the lid on all these boxes and talk about this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 53, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. To which committee will 

this Bill be referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Oh, sorry. Okay, you can read it. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 58 — The 

Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 58, An 

Act respecting Compensation for Injured Workers and making 

consequential amendments to certain Acts. And it is an 

important piece of legislation that we’re debating tonight and 

one that I think that we need to make sure we consider this fully 

and take a look at what are all the implications of this. 

 

Now it’s interesting because we know that, and as I mentioned 

in earlier remarks on Bill 85, that actually the first form of this 

bill was something in 1908, 1909 — prior to our Workers’ 

Compensation Board, but a way to recognize workers and 

injuries in a way that would be fair to both employers and to 

employees to make sure when injuries do happen that there is 

some sort of insurance scheme that makes it work for all parties 

involved. And of course it’s taken a long time to get it to this 

state. And we have to make sure that it represents all interests, 

that it’s both fair and reasonable but affordable and doable. 

 

And so what we do now is, in the legislation, that every five 

years there’s a committee of review that is struck with equal 

numbers of employees, workers, and with employers or 

employer representatives. And that way they can take a look at 

what are the issues that have emerged over the past few years 

and address them in both legislation or regulation or policy, 

updating it. And it’s an important function of good legislation 

that there’s some form of built-in consultation. 

 

Unfortunately we’re seeing with other bills, that doesn’t seem 

to happen. But with occupational health and safety and with 

workers’ comp, we have those committees of review that are 

just a matter of process. And everyone can expect it, and 

everyone knows that every five years we will be having these 

consultations. And then they go out and they travel about, and 

they hear what people have to say about concerns. 

 

And this year, or it actually was a couple of years ago the final 

report came out, and there’s some 50-some recommendations, a 

little bit different than in previous years. I remember reading 

previous reviews that are much more in depth. But you know, at 

the end of the day we want to see an improvement and I think 

this is what is so critical about this. So there’s some 50-some 

recommendations in this, and this piece of legislation addresses 

some of it, and some of it doesn’t. And I think that I want to 

talk about a couple that are in the piece of legislation, the 

maximum wage rate . . . And the governance is not addressed. 

 

But a couple of pieces I just want to highlight. And I will speak 

more in a few minutes around privacy, the issues of privacy 

when it comes to workers and their claims and their files. The 

Privacy Commissioner has some thoughts about that that I think 

needs to be put on record. 

 

The other one that the folks who did the review came up with 

suggestions around funding of the workers’ advocate office, the 

OWA, office of the workers’ advocate and occupational health 

and safety. Both of those functions or parts or areas are funded 

by the Workers’ Compensation Board, but are run out of the 

Ministry of Workplace Safety. 

 

And so the funding is there, but because of this government’s 



3078 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

initiative, the lean initiative, there is an impact. The committee 

of review felt that was unfair, that particularly in today’s 

situation in Saskatchewan which has been for several years that 

we have such a high injury rate, that they needed to make sure 

that there was appropriate funding for those two offices. Of 

course the occupational health and safety that in fact that we 

would have fewer accidents, and we can all support that and we 

can all get behind that. And that means better implementation of 

the regulations and legislation that we have in place. And that 

should not be a party or victim of cost reductions. We think 

that’s just too, too important. And I would agree with the 

committee of review that because Workers’ Comp is paying for 

it and it’s part of what they do, that that’s really important. 

 

And the other part is around the office of the workers’ advocate. 

And we all know, and I would imagine that we all have had 

people who’ve had WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] 

claims come and visit us about concerns they have about how 

they’ve been treated at WCB. And it’s so important, the role of 

the office of the workers’ advocate in ensuring that they have an 

advocate when they go to make their claims or their appeals, 

that that office is fully funded. And it is a shame, and it’s not a 

good thing that they may be victim of reduced expenditures 

because of the lean initiative. And so that was one thing that the 

committee of review wanted to highlight. And they did so, and 

we’ll be raising that. 

 

But that’s an important issue because again the whole issue 

around workplace safety both in terms of prevention . . . That’s 

the number one thing, that if we can prevent injuries, that’s 

what we want to do. But if they do happen, that we want to 

make sure everyone is treated fairly and that nothing happens 

untoward because there just wasn’t enough resources when in 

fact there probably was enough resources. But if there was a 

government policy in place that blocked that, that was going to 

be a problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk a little bit about the issue 

around the maximum wage rates and the maximum benefit 

level. And this has been one that often raises a lot of concerns 

because when an injury happens, and if it’s a problem that the 

wages are just not keeping up — or their benefits I should say, 

their benefits are not keeping up — that is truly unfortunate 

because they may have families to raise. They may have 

circumstances where it’s important that they are receiving 

appropriate benefits. 

 

And the unfortunate thing too as well is some of these folks, 

particularly if they’re working in construction or in one of the 

mines or one place where they actually do receive fairly high 

wages, that because of the situation as it is now, that it’s just not 

the same level of benefits that they probably should receive just 

because of the mortgage that they may have or the different 

commitments they have. And it’s just not fair that these folks 

who were doing very well in high paying jobs and then have an 

accident, then find out that actually their benefits are not that 

high. 

 

So as the committee of review noted, it’s one issue that they’ve 

repeatedly heard during their sessions — what’s the maximum 

annual benefit? — and that there was, as you might imagine, 

two sides of the coin. One side, the employers thought that 

55,000 at the maximum level was quite appropriate, and that 

should be left at that. And in fact that level, that was the cap 

that was specified in the Act currently, has been in place since 

2005. But I understand that it had been raised actually as cost of 

living and then met that cap in 2005. And so what they want to 

do now is set the maximum benefit level higher. I understand it 

might be immediately to 59,000. That’s a recommendation out 

of the committee of review. I’ll check my notes when I refer to 

the minister, what he said, but over the next four years increases 

annually to a percentage of the annual average wage in 

Saskatchewan until it reaches 165 per cent of that average 

annual wage. And then it will remain and it will be indexed at 

165 per cent. 

 

So that sounds like a reasonable solution. I’d have to find out 

more about that when we actually get into committee about that 

and ask what the implications are for income that is lost, who 

would be the kind of claimant who might get that benefit. I 

would imagine that people who are working at lower wage 

circumstances would not be eligible to get the maximum 

because that’s just not . . . but those who are much higher than 

that, and we know there’s several sectors or several types of 

employees who would actually be making significantly higher 

than that, and at the time, and we know particularly now with 

the cost of housing that clearly they would be carrying 

mortgages and that type of thing, and it would be a difficult 

situation. 

 

And so I want to take a minute to review what the minister has 

said here when he talks about the committee of review. But he 

talks about the positive step forward for the indexation of the 

benefits for injured workers and that this is an important thing. 

He talks about the maximum wage rate, and of course that it 

would be increased to 59,000 for workers injured after this bill 

comes into force. And so there will be a group that may be less 

vulnerable. 

 

And I am worried about those who saw an increase in 2005 but 

have not seen an increase . . . And that would make it, to 2013, 

some eight years without even a cost of living increase. And 

that’s significant. So I don’t know what the minister is going to 

do about that. I think that’s really not fair and we should have 

further discussion. And we will when we get into committee 

about that. 

 

So I think that’s very important. I think that some of the other 

issues . . . He talks about Workers’ Comp borrowing, that type 

of thing, talks about clarity to a number of WCB internal 

processes, including the fair practices office, which is very, very 

effective. And I think that’s an important thing. I think that’s a 

key part of some of the new initiatives that the Workers’ Comp 

Board has been able to work in the past several years. 

 

One of the other issues that the committee of review asked 

about was actually expanding the board of the Workers’ 

Compensation Board from three. There’s a Chair now and a 

representative from labour and a representative from labour. 

The folks at committee of review thought we should be taking a 

look at five, so that could expand the ability or the capacity of 

the board to do more work and be more effective in its work. 

It’s one that they have not accepted, and again we’ll have more 

discussions about that. 

 

But I do want to raise one other question, and that is around 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3079 

privacy. The committee of review raised the issue of privacy in 

a couple of different ways. And it’s one that we always want to 

make sure that we have the appropriate amount of information 

that needs to be shared. And the emphasis is on needs to be 

shared as opposed to we think we need to know everything just 

in case there’s something that’s missed. 

 

And of course the Information and Privacy Commissioner here 

in Saskatchewan has written a letter to the minister about this, 

who wrote it November 19th, 2012 regarding Bill 58, The 

Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012. And you know, he talks 

about . . . He’s not quite agreeing with the minister when the 

minister says the bill represents a positive step forward for 

workers’ compensation in Saskatchewan. And he said that there 

is still an issue that warrants focused attention of the Legislative 

Assembly and is not addressed in Bill 58. 

 

And he talks about the long-standing concerns that his office 

has raised for a number of years over the interpretation of the 

Workers’ Compensation Board of The Freedom of Information 

and Protection of Privacy Act and the current workers’ 

compensation Act. And he lists several, several concerns and 

talks about the annual reports, his recent annual reports and 

some of the concerns that have been raised around the way 

Workers’ Comp does its business. 

 

“Overall . . .” I quote: 

 

Overall, the complaints and concerns we hear regarding 

WCB include the following: 

 

WCB demands personal health information that is not 

relevant to the compensable injury; 

 

WCB shares more information about an injury with an 

employer than is necessary or relevant; and 

 

WCB does not let claimants see their own case 

management files unless and until an appealable issue 

has been identified, and even then may not allow the 

claimant to view their entire file. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So you have, you have some odd things happening. WCB 

sharing more information with employers and then not sharing 

it with the person who the file is about. So this is something that 

we need to talk about. And actually I’m going to raise this as 

well within Bill 85 as well because I know there are severe 

concerns about privacy and the imbalance between what the 

employer gets to know and why, and what the employee’s 

rights are. So we’re really concerned about this. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

We are also concerned about WCB’s position that OIPC 

does not have jurisdiction in many cases that involve 

WCB. 

 

And it goes on, and so we have a lot of work, a lot of work. And 

this will be one of key areas for our questions when we go to 

committee, is around the office of the privacy and information 

commissioner and their thoughts with WCB because we do hear 

that. And not only . . . I mean when people are hurt it’s, you 

know, you feel just the violation of your limits of what you’ll be 

able to do but also the fact that you’re not being treated fairly. 

And somehow WCB needs to be brought up to date in terms of 

the privacy expectations that we have now in a modern Canada 

and a modern Saskatchewan. 

 

So it does have some specifics. He talks about amending the 

Act to specify the board is subject to The Freedom of 

Information and Privacy Act. That would be only logical, it 

seems to me, but I think we’ll have to have a conversation in 

committee about that. And the other recommendation is repeal 

the exemption The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979 has in 

parts II, IV, and V of The Health Information Protection Act. 

So I think we need to talk further about this. 

 

So I know that many, we’ve got a lot of different speeches to 

hear tonight and we want to make sure we get as much work as 

we can get done. So again, to the government side, we will have 

a lot of questions particularly around the privacy aspect of the 

Bill, especially those issues the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner has raised. We’ll be wanting to know more 

information about the maximum benefit levels, and particularly 

those folks who haven’t seen a raise in a while. And some of 

the other issues that the committee of review has raised, and 

particularly around funding for the office of the worker’s 

advocate and occupational health and safety initiatives that 

happen, we just think this is a priority. And we all share that; 

we know this is a priority for the government because they 

often say that and will spend a lot of energy and resources to get 

that word out. But we really need to put our money where our 

mouths are and really get that job done. It’s about time that we 

do. 

 

We see, as percentages, the numbers squeaking down but 

actually in the data we see from this committee of review, the 

actual real numbers are actually climbing up. And that’s just not 

the way it should go. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

that this bill then go to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Advanced Education that Bill No. 

58, The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

designate that Bill No. 58 be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 



3080 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 70 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Marchuk that Bill No. 70 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi nº 2 de 2012 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

evening to join in on the discussion that has been occurring over 

the past weeks on Bill No. 70, Mr. Speaker, and this is The 

Education Amendment Act. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, a very 

important piece of legislation because it is dealing with 

education, something that we all care about in the province and 

in the Assembly because it is about the building blocks for our 

society and it’s about how we ensure that our young people 

have the best opportunity to reach their full potential and how 

we are able to extend opportunity to more and more people here 

in the province. 

 

Over the past days, Mr. Speaker, in the Assembly, we have 

been talking a lot about education through the budget debates 

that occurred over the past week, Mr. Speaker, as all members 

had a chance to talk about the issue of education, and also 

through question period, Mr. Speaker, where we’ve also been 

discussing a number of issues on the educational front. 

 

One issue today that was discussed by our critic, Mr. Speaker, 

was the issue of the Sask Party’s fondness for standardized tests 

and how there’s a greater focus to spending millions of dollars, 

Mr. Speaker, on testing as opposed to teaching.  

 

And I raise that, Mr. Speaker, because it’s a reminder that as we 

make changes to The Education Act — which is a sizeable 

document, as it ought to be for something so important, Mr. 

Speaker — as we make changes to The Education Act we have 

to ensure that we are actually taking steps that improve the 

delivery of education here in the province. Steps that allow 

school boards to do their job well. Steps that allow educators, 

whether they be principals or educational assistants or teachers, 

allow them to do their job well. And, Mr. Speaker, that we are 

working and striving towards a culture and an approach where 

it is about excellence for our students, and regardless of the 

background of a student — whether they’re born into a poor 

family or a rich family, whether they live in the North or the 

South, urban or rural, Mr. Speaker, whatever their ethnic 

background may be — that they have the best opportunity to 

reach their full potential. And that needs to be the lens through 

which we examine any sort of change to The Education Act. 

 

This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, touches on a number of 

areas. It’s a collection of changes that need to occur to the Act 

in order to modernize in some cases and clarify in others. And 

as I go through some of the examples, Mr. Speaker, there are 

some changes here where an issue has come up in a particular 

school division or with a particular group of people and some 

lessons have been learned and some changes are being 

suggested through this legislation. 

 

And so let’s go through some of these changes, Mr. Speaker. 

The first change in this education Act here is to change the 

compulsory school age to six years from seven, Mr. Speaker, 

recognizing the age that it’s necessary for children to be going 

to school and be receiving education and starting that process, 

Mr. Speaker. And this is I think something that most people in 

the province would see as a positive thing in terms of allowing 

young people to receive education at the earliest opportunities. 

And so it’s one change, Mr. Speaker, that’s identified by the 

minister in his second reading speech right off the top. 

 

The second change, Mr. Speaker, is about changing the 

definition of a school to reflect the addition of pre-K 

[pre-kindergarten] programs. And pre-K, Mr. Speaker, has been 

something that we’ve discussed in this legislature quite a bit. 

It’s something that isn’t a consistent application across school 

divisions, or school divisions that operate this at different levels 

and in different places, Mr. Speaker, but it is an important 

component because it is about early intervention. And it is 

about allowing children, especially those who need it, Mr. 

Speaker, an early opportunity to start development or continue 

development, I should say, and to receive the education that 

they need and preparing them for kindergarten, but more 

importantly just preparing them for life, Mr. Speaker, for those 

families that choose pre-K as a good option. So the change in 

definition here allows . . . It’s changing the definition of a 

school to include this pre-K aspect, which I think is an 

appropriate step, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another change that we see coming forward through this 

legislation is the changing of the definition of the school day. 

And this has to do with other changes that we’ve seen, Mr. 

Speaker, because of the school year changes. And as the 

minister identified in his speech, it changes the definition of 

what is the school day to reflect some of the amendments that 

were enacted on January 1, 2013 regarding the new school year. 

And as the minister stated, the new definition recognizes that a 

school day could be comprised of instructional time and 

non-instructional time. And he said, “The proposed revision to 

the definition of school day has been identified as necessary 

during our work to finalize new regulations for the school 

year.” 

 

So it sounds as though, Mr. Speaker, as the Sask Party 

government made the decision to change some of the dates 

around the school year, this has had a ripple effect in some 

other areas. And we see here a different definition of the school 

day in order to accommodate some of the changes that are being 

brought forward in another area. 

 

Just as I said, Mr. Speaker, that it’s appropriate to change the 

definition of a school to reflect the addition of pre-K, it’s also 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker, I see — and this is what’s brought 

forward in this legislation here — to allow for the development 

of policies around pre-K. And it’s only appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker, that if this is part of the changes to the definition of a 

school, that it would be, the decisions made around pre-K 

would be based on sound evidence or on sound policies, and 

that they would be done in a clear and transparent manner. So it 

fits in nicely with the other change that was brought forward by 

the minister. 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3081 

So we can see, Mr. Speaker, as we’re going through some of 

these changes, some of them are of a housekeeping nature. 

Some of them are based on good changes that have been 

occurring when we look at the issue of pre-K. And some of 

them, Mr. Speaker, have to do with other changes that have 

been brought forward, such as the changes to the school year. 

 

It’s obviously the desire of the provincial government, speaking 

in the broad sense of government and opposition, to have full 

compliance with The Education Act by educators, by families, 

by anyone interacting with the education system. And what we 

see here is another change brought forward that changes some 

of the fines and penalties around non-compliance. And as the 

minister stated, the fines would increase significantly. He said 

fines are presently from $500 or less for an offence, and with 

this change we see the minimum amount increase to $5,000 for 

a first offence and that subsequent offences would be $10,000. 

So a sizeable jump. 

 

The important part that I’ll highlight on this change is that the 

minister stated that this was done in consultation with the STF, 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and the SSBA, the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association. So I hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that the right consultation and the right input was 

received from those organizations and that they are in support 

of the changes, as the minister has indicated that they do 

support this change in order to provide a better deterrent for 

those that might be thinking about being in non-compliance. 

 

Another component which is important, Mr. Speaker, has to do 

with the definition of a provincial resident. And the minister 

identified the existence of refugees for example who are 

attending schools, and they most certainly should be attending 

schools. We’ve had broader discussions here in the legislature 

and in the province about some of the benefits provided to 

refugees, and I think it’s important to provide children of 

refugees with an opportunity for education because it would be 

adding injury to insult in some situations, Mr. Speaker, to not 

allow refugee children to receive an education when they are 

here in Canada. 

 

But another component which I found interesting, it had to do 

with, Mr. Speaker, the provision of education to the children of 

temporary foreign workers. And we know that there is an 

increased fondness that the federal government and I think the 

provincial government has for temporary foreign workers, and 

this provides the ability for the children of temporary foreign 

workers here in the province to receive education. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would support that, but I do want to 

highlight the irony in this policy, Mr. Speaker, because it’s tied 

into broader discussions that we’ve had in the Assembly about 

the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, specifically 

around the changes that occurred motivated by the Sask Party 

government, directed by the Sask Party government, around the 

changes to the family class and how we’ve seen a shift and a 

departure in policy around immigration, especially as it relates 

to the SINP [Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program] where 

we’re not having enough of a focus, in my opinion, on 

developing the strong social ties that are required and necessary 

for good immigration policy and to allow families to have the 

type of success and establish the types of roots here in the 

province that we truly want. 

And we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, on the federal front, changes that 

would allow temporary foreign workers to be paid less than 

Canadian workers in some instances, providing an incentive 

perhaps for employers to have a greater reliance on these 

individuals. And I mean when we think of, for those of us who 

aren’t of First Nations ancestry, Mr. Speaker, who came to the 

province through immigration, which is my own situation and 

many people I know and many people in the Assembly, we’ve 

come, our ancestors came to Saskatchewan and were able to 

establish yes economic activity, but also strong social ties that 

allowed them to thrive and do well over the generations. So I do 

want to point this out. It’s yes I think appropriate to provide 

education for the children of temporary foreign workers, but 

what I think is it’s a result or a consequence of other decisions 

that the federal government and the provincial government have 

made with respect to immigration policy. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And another component that we see, Mr. Speaker, has to do 

with the boundaries of school divisions and the desire at times 

when someone is living on one side of a boundary of a school 

division, but they wish to attend school in the adjacent school 

division perhaps because of economic trading areas and social 

patterns of activity, there is a mechanism in place, as the 

minister identifies, where students can apply to go into the other 

school division. What this is proposing and this changes that 

there be a 5-kilometre buffer zone along the boundaries which 

provide greater flexibility for students that are living close to 

the borders to choose the school division that makes the best 

sense for their family and bus routes and all of those things. 

 

So now the flexibility is good and appropriate, Mr. Speaker, but 

we do have to be cognizant of the fact that there can be 

unintended consequences at times about making this process 

easier. So I would hope that would have been a part of the 

discussion that occurred with school divisions about what some 

of the impacts may be for some school divisions that face 

perhaps a greater activity along this type of border issue than 

some of the others. So I do think that is an important 

consideration. 

 

In these proposed changes, we also see a discussion about 

capital grants and some updating, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

school divisions. As we speak about capital and school systems, 

we have heard about the Sask Party’s intention to go down a 

privatized model for the development and construction of 

schools here in the province. So I do flag this as a concern. I 

think it is tied in to that issue, and it’s tied in to discussion about 

what is the most responsible and what is the most cost-effective 

way to build school facilities here in the province. 

 

We also see, Mr. Speaker, a repeal concerning the submissions 

of returns. And as it was identified in the minister’s speech, this 

repeal is occurring because it’s covered through legislation 

through Government Relations and is redundant in The 

Education Act change. 

 

One other component, Mr. Speaker, has to do with property 

classes redefinition as it relates to education property taxes, 

some adjustments there. And the one other component, Mr. 

Speaker, that we see, has to do with increased representation for 

the community of La Ronge as it relates to the Northern Lights 



3082 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

School Division. It was identified in the minister’s speech that 

through consultation with the mayor and other northerners, Mr. 

Speaker, that given the importance and the size of La Ronge 

within the North, but also within the Northern Lights School 

Division, that it made sense to increase the possibility of 

representation for the community of La Ronge. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I would defer to the wisdom of northerners and locals 

on that issue and trust that that is a wise decision, not having a 

lot of personal information specifically about the topic. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we can see, this has been a bit of a grab bag 

of changes to The Education Act on a number of fronts, some of 

them more significant than others and some of them opening up 

broader policy discussions with respect to immigration and with 

respect to the construction of capital projects. But some of 

them, Mr. Speaker, of a smaller nature and are the result of 

other changes that have occurred with respect to the school year 

and changing of language around pre-K, Mr. Speaker, which is, 

as I see it, an appropriate step and a decent thing to be doing 

and an important thing to be doing, based on my knowledge of 

it. 

 

So I’ve appreciated the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to provide 

some remarks on Bill 70 in question period and in budget 

speech as we have the chance to talk about the education system 

as it relates to specific topics, whether it be standardized testing 

or capital projects, Mr. Speaker. So it is nice to have the 

opportunity to talk about some of the other issues in a bit more 

detail that may not always be on the front page of the paper or 

in the A section but still have a lot of importance and relevance 

to Saskatchewan children, Saskatchewan families, and 

Saskatchewan educators. 

 

So with those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 70 at this time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 70, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 71 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 

2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 

boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter into the debate on An Act to amend The Alcohol 

and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. This is Bill No. 71, and what 

Bill No. 71 does is lay the foundation for about 70 different 

changes to alcohol licensing and regulation here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Looking at . . . This government underwent a red tape review 

and has many liquor regulations that haven’t undergone a 

comprehensive review for decades. And so the minister is 

proposing making some of these changes, modernizing — the 

word often comes up — modernizing liquor regulations, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Many of them are basic. Well some of them are just catching up 

to what other jurisdictions are doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

including corkage or being able to bring your own bottle of 

wine to a restaurant, for example, and taking that wine home for 

a corkage fee. There are many jurisdictions who already do that. 

One very positive thing about that obviously, about being able 

to afford a bottle of wine but also that it also, it also allows . . . I 

think often what happens is someone will buy a bottle of wine 

in a restaurant and feel the need to drink it all. You’ve spent this 

much money and you want to get your money’s worth. And so 

allowing the opportunity to bring your wine and cork it and take 

it home I think is a positive thing when it comes to putting a 

check on impaired driving. 

 

There’s several other things that this bill is doing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, again around just very basic things. I’m just trying to 

find my article here that . . . Age restricted theatres will be 

allowed to serve alcohol. Concert halls and convention centres 

will be able to sell alcohol at televised or pre-recorded events. 

Spas and salons will be able to sell and serve liquor to 

customers. Hotels will be able to provide guests with alcohol 

through room service. Another change, for example, Sunday 

brunch will be able to be offered in karaoke lounges with 

minors present. So some of these are very common sense 

changes that we don’t have any big difficulty with. 

 

I think on this side of the House we . . . When you make 

changes on one side of the ledger, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you 

need to do it on the other side as well. So if you’re making 

alcohol more accessible on one side you need to recognize that 

perhaps there are some challenges on the other. We’ve heard 

about record deaths here on our highways here in 

Saskatchewan, a large number of them because of impaired 

driving, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have some serious alcohol 

issues in Prince Albert. There’s a drinking problem in Prince 

Albert, is the headline of a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] story. “Although Prince Albert has only about 

35,000 people, according to the 2011 census, it racks up more 

intoxication arrests than either Regina or Saskatoon.” 

 

And there are stats showing that the problem is getting worse, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. There was a recent study actually just at 

the end of 2012, and I don’t have it in front of me, but we have 

some of the highest numbers of risky drinking behaviours or 

binge drinking, which is drinking five or more beverages at 

once, which is often something that young people do in 

university. 

 

And so when you make changes on one side, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you have to make sure you’re doing a balanced 

approach on the other side and putting in place an addictions 

and mental health strategy perhaps, looking at some of the risky 

drinking behaviours, updating your impaired driving legislation. 

 

Before the legislature another bill that we have is The Traffic 

Safety Amendment Act, which is making some changes because 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3083 

of a very tragic death in a construction zone last summer. Those 

changes are absolutely imperative, Mr. Speaker, but I would 

argue that this would have been a perfect time for us to make 

some changes on our impaired driving legislation as well. And 

I’m pleased that, after some pressure, the government has struck 

an all-party Traffic Safety Committee to look into all kinds of 

issues that have led to fatalities on our highways, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I think that that’s a very good thing, but I do have some 

concerns that you come up with a report and recommendations 

and I’m eager to see once this . . . I’m pleased to be the 

Vice-Chair of this committee, but I hope when we have heard 

all the evidence and we make good recommendations . . . Well 

first of all, I hope that the recommendations reflect what we 

hear and that the government is committed to acting on some of 

them. Undoubtedly there will be recommendations on impaired 

driving legislation. I know I’ve had, the last several months I’ve 

had an opportunity to look closely at what other provinces or 

what other jurisdictions are doing, and I think it would have 

been an opportunity . . . As I said, we’ve made changes on this 

one side, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This spring session could have 

been an opportunity to make some changes on some of our 

impaired driving legislation to ensure that we go into the 

summer a little bit safer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some of the changes could have involved . . . And I’m hoping 

that some of these recommendations will come out of this 

Traffic Safety Committee. But BC [British Columbia], actually, 

one of the things that BC does, at .05 on your first offence, not 

only is your licence suspended, but there is a vehicle 

impoundment for three days, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is 

very . . . This change happened about two years ago and I spoke 

to someone actually who has worked in traffic safety for 30 

years, and he said he has never seen a public policy change that 

has had such a huge impact on death rates. And death rates in 

BC have dropped dramatically because of this. 

 

They’re attributing it largely to the vehicle impoundment piece, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because when you take someone’s car 

away for three days, you can’t get through a weekend. You 

can’t be that teenager, the 19-year-old who took the car on 

Friday night, and you got your licence suspended overnight. So 

you’ve just left the car where you left it, and you go home and 

tell mom and dad, oh I left my car at the bar. I left the car at the 

bar. If your licence and your vehicle is impounded, if your 

licence is suspended and your vehicle is impounded for three 

days, it has a very real impact. It will impact your ability . . . It 

takes you beyond a weekend basically, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And that has proved to be a huge deterrent for people. And 

again this one individual who has worked in traffic safety for 30 

years and is cited in many of the academic articles in the 

literature has said to me that that was one measure he’s never 

seen anything so effective in his 30 years working in the 

industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There are some other things again. So you make changes here; 

you should seriously think about making concurrent changes on 

the other side of the legislature. 

 

Or something that Ontario is doing, which is interesting, is they 

have a zero blood alcohol content for all drivers 21 years and 

under. So the interesting thing about that . . . And one could 

argue well maybe it should just be legal age, 19. But the whole 

idea behind this — and it’s still in early days to see what kind 

of impact this particular change has, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but 

one of the arguments here is you’re, from a very young age, 

you’re separating drinking from driving. So if we talk about 

having an impaired driving culture, people still accept impaired 

driving as the norm. This is one way to get our young people 

learning from day one that you don’t drink and you don’t get in 

your car. There’s zero, zero tolerance for having alcohol in your 

system for those first five years you’re a driver, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And so the evidence is still coming in on that. That’s a fairly 

new change, but I think when you think about a culture shift, 

that is one policy that they see having the capacity to change 

some culture. 

 

Ontario has very low drinking and driving rates. Just for the 

record, Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Why 

would we talk about drinking and driving? We have here this 

piece of legislation that is going to make alcohol more 

accessible, and we have some of the highest drinking rates in all 

of Canada. The highest of all the provinces, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And again I had mentioned binge drinking is a huge 

problem. So I think that it would have been wise to put some of 

these polices in place on the impaired driving side of things at 

the same time that you brought forward legislation to make 

alcohol more accessible, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Another piece actually that BC has also done — which initially 

they had some difficulties with it and there were some court 

challenges, and they’ve ironed out the legislation and resolved 

that issue now — but it was on interlock. So when you get a 

licence suspension you will have to . . . It was mandatory to get 

an interlock program. But one of the changes they’ve made is to 

make it allow people to get their vehicles back and drive, but 

drive responsibly, so you have to breathe into the interlock and 

then you’re allowed to drive. But instead of bumping it way 

down, so you have a licence suspension for X amount of 

months and then you can drive your car, the whole idea is to get 

people back in their vehicles, but again separating drinking 

from driving. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And what some of the studies have shown is that people 

actually have a suspended licence and will learn how to drive 

while they’re suspended and get around the rules. So this 

interlock program is very proactive in ensuring that if you’re 

driving, you’re not drinking, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I think it 

would have been very wise on the part of the government to 

look a little bit more closely. If you’re making these changes, 

you have to look at the big broad picture and how they might 

impact other parts of your policy. And the reality is we don’t 

have a great track record on alcohol here in Saskatchewan. 

Whether it’s on impaired driving, risky drinking, addictions are 

a huge issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I know one of the things actually that I found quite interesting 

that I have to commend the minister on is: 

 

Two of the changes in this bill will enhance SLGA’s 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] ability to 



3084 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

continue to contribute to public safety in 

alcohol-permitted establishments. Intoxicated individuals 

would be able to remain in a permanent establishment 

until safe transportation can be arranged for them, and the 

Act will be clarified that permittees have an obligation to 

contact the proper authorities if they know of or become 

aware of any unlawful, detrimental, or prohibited activity 

taking place on the premise. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was a waitress, a server for a very long 

time. That’s how I paid for my university. I’ve worked in 

restaurants and I’ve worked in bars, and I’ve had many 

opportunities to see impaired people in the public. And 

allowing people, if people are intoxicated when they come in 

. . . Or you might not always know that as a server, and you 

serve them one more and they’re . . . So you generally would 

ask them to leave. But asking a person who’s incredibly 

intoxicated to leave opens you up for all kinds of problems. So 

allowing that individual to be able to stay there until you’ve 

ensured that they are going somewhere safe and in a safe way, I 

think is very important. 

 

I know that another issue that always came up as a server . . . I 

worked at many different restaurants and many different pubs. 

So one of the pubs I worked at was Louis’ on campus and I 

have to say that was an incredibly great organization to work 

for. And I remember spending one Sunday afternoon getting 

server training on learning how to ensure that we were serving 

responsibly, and it was great training to have. But even though I 

had that training, I also worked in another establishment where 

the manager wasn’t quite so supportive of my desire to cut 

people off, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I think a place that we could have maybe gone or considered 

going in this legislation is mandatory server training, but again 

it requires . . . It’s great to have the training but it requires an 

employer who is willing to support you or back you when 

someone who has had too much alcohol and it’s time for them 

to call it a night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it’s not much fun 

trying to ask someone to leave or telling them that you’re not 

asking them to leave, you’re telling them that you can’t serve 

them any more alcohol. And generally when people have had 

too much alcohol, they’re not very interested in being told that 

they can’t have more, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I think that Bill No. 71, An Act to amend The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act in fact does some positive things. It 

brings us up to where many other jurisdictions already are but I 

would say this government is remiss in doing the other side, the 

other part of the work in ensuring that if you’re making alcohol 

more accessible, that you sure as heck better be making sure 

that your citizens are safe. And with the track record that we 

have on alcohol-related deaths here in Saskatchewan, there’s a 

lot of work to do in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with that I know that others . . . I look forward to the 

opportunity in committee to talk a little bit more. I know we’ll 

have some questions in committee for this. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

that Bill No. 71, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 72 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 72 — The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

am very pleased to rise in the debate tonight on Bill No. 72, The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012. And we certainly have 

heard a lot about this Act, given some of the recent events in 

Saskatchewan on our highways and events relating to tragedies 

where people are driving too fast. Certainly the motor vehicle is 

a large part of our lives and we use them . . . I know just coming 

here last night from Saskatoon and driving on the highway, a lot 

of ice packed from the recent snowfall, and I could see off in 

the distance emergency vehicles. I knew something had 

happened. You start slowing down, and there’s a fellow there 

with his warning suit and directing me to go actually across the 

highway on to the other side of the highway, which is a bit 

disconcerting when you’re used to driving on a four-lane 

highway and you see oncoming traffic. So I just thought about 

that fellow, and I actually did think about this bill and what is 

necessary to protect those highway workers which, for him, was 

a very dangerous circumstance to be in. 

 

And I could see the emergency vehicles, but was not really sure 

what was going on when he was standing there directing traffic 

with a flashlight. So it’s a dangerous place for them to be, and 

it’s one that I think we have to commend those workers for, for 

being out there and available in emergencies like that, or in the 

case of the young woman who was tragically killed last 

summer. She was just doing her job in terms of the highway 

maintenance. And those kinds of things are always difficult for 

us as a society to appreciate and understand, and certainly it’s 

the role of government to ensure that that doesn’t happen, as 

much as is possible within a legislative sphere. 

 

So I think this bill makes a number of changes in addition to the 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3085 

one to ensure that there’s more stiff penalties, there are stiffer 

penalties for people who disregard the law in those safety 

zones. And so these are very appropriate measures I think for 

governments to do, and we certainly support those changes. 

 

There’s other changes that are being proposed as well, I 

understand, in this bill. And one is the stickers on our licence 

plates are no longer being required, which actually is good news 

to me too, because I always hated when you had to go out and 

clean off the licence plate and it was muddy and cold and then 

you had to put your new sticker on and sometimes it went 

crooked and all those things. So I think what’s going on now 

with the new systems that SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] have implemented and the way we have computer 

systems right there in the law enforcement vehicles, they can 

actually look up your current information right away just by 

punching in the licence number. So the sticker has become 

irrelevant. And the minister in her comments indicated that 

that’s one of the changes in this bill. It’s just a housekeeping 

change and it’s going to reflect current practices and standards. 

So because law enforcement don’t rely on those stickers to 

validate vehicle registration anymore, it’s going to eliminate 

redundancies and save costs and streamline the renewal process. 

So these kinds of changes are very welcome, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and ones I think that make a lot of sense. 

 

I think what we would make comment as far as the extent of 

this bill though is that perhaps it could go further. And I know 

that some work will be undertaken very shortly by the special 

committee that’s been established by this legislature to look 

more into traffic safety and all the reasons that people are 

getting killed on our highways. And we certainly know, for 

example, groups like SADD [Students Against Drinking and 

Driving] Saskatchewan, students against drunk driving or 

driving and drinking and MADD [Mothers Against Drunk 

Driving], the mothers that are also organized in this fashion, 

would like to see stiffer penalties in relation to people that are 

careless and drink and drive. 

 

And we know that there’s a number of deaths that occur on our 

highways as a result of alcohol consumption and improper 

driving and we are looking forward to additional changes to this 

bill to ensure that . . . You know, in this case when, you know, 

the punitive aspect doesn’t always succeed in changing 

everyone’s behaviour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I believe that 

with the ability to impound vehicles and issue stiffer penalties 

for removal of licence privileges, those types of things do have 

an impact and are certainly something people have in mind 

before they choose to get behind the wheel after having 

consumed alcohol. 

 

And so in that circumstance we are looking for a complete 

review of this and we’re pleased to be participating in the 

committee work that will be taking place looking at those 

issues. And two of our members, from Cumberland and from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, will be participating in that and look 

forward to hearing from the people and finding out what sort of 

changes would make a difference for us in The Traffic Safety 

Act. So we look forward to those additional changes. 

 

Just a couple more comments on the minister’s introductory 

comments. There’s some changes also being used for photo 

radar. And one of the changes is that in the section 192, it used 

to say that you couldn’t obstruct your licence plate to prevent it 

being photographed by a red light camera system. There’s a 

change being added to that and that’s a speed monitoring 

device. So photo radar apparently now can also photograph the 

licence plate of the vehicle. As it’s being tested, the radar itself, 

the speed of the vehicle is being monitored. So that’s a new 

change, and again it highlights the impact of technology on our 

ability for law enforcement and also just how computers and 

Internet and the database systems allow a complex system like 

SGI, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, to issue licences 

and licence plates. And when you think about what a great deal 

it was to be able to pay monthly . . . We used to have to pay for 

the whole year and now we can pay monthly. So all these 

things, we’re taking advantage of the technologies available to 

us and making sure that we are keeping up with the times, so to 

speak. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think at this point those are 

probably the extent of the comments that we are going to have 

in relation to this bill and I think that’s the extent of my 

comments as well. So thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister for Crown Investments Corporation 

that Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 73 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise tonight and enter into the second reading 

debates on Bill No. 73, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2012, and it is quite a substantial piece before us and it has lots 

of substantial work in here. And of course, you know, this kind 



3086 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

of thing often lends itself to times when you have question and 

answer and we will get to that at some point. 

 

But I do want to take a minute and I know there will be others 

who want to have some time to talk about the bill itself because 

it is a fairly substantial piece.  

 

And we do think about, you know, when we’re dealing with the 

different levels of government and we often think that many of 

our citizens, and probably rightfully so, when they look at 

services and they look at how we do business, to them we’re 

government. And whether we’re provincial, federal or 

municipal, we’re all the same. And so in many ways, because of 

the way our system is set up through the constitution and how 

rights and responsibilities are devolved out of the constitution 

and it’s a way that we’ve come to appreciate how Canada is 

run, right from our villages and hamlets right up to our cities, 

our provinces, our regions, this all plays out. 

 

[20:15] 

 

When I speak about our regions too, Mr. Speaker, it’s not by a 

slip of the tongue. I mean actually some of the things that the 

minister has referred to in his remarks talks about the New West 

Trade Agreement and that type of thing. And of course that 

brings to mind to me CETA [Canada-European Comprehensive 

Economic and Trade Agreement], the European trade 

agreement and how . . . And now none of this is related to that, 

but I know that there are a lot of concerns about some of our 

trade agreements and the impact it has on our ability to be in 

charge of our own affairs. 

 

And you know, we often have a lot of concerns about trying to 

make sure that our communities are vibrant, our economies are 

strong, and that if we can create work and jobs in our own cities 

and towns and provinces that’s a good thing. Sometimes though 

when we sign these trade agreements, we create situations that 

we had not fully foreseen, and that becomes a bit of a problem. 

And so it is important that we take some time to read these bills, 

think about them a bit, discuss them, talk to our stakeholders. 

And if there was, it would be, you know, a great day if there 

was some way that we could get our constituent input into some 

of these issues. But it is difficult because they do seem remote 

when we talk about some of these specific things. And they 

become very interested when it’s something that’s directly 

related to them. 

 

And I’m thinking of particularly the first time the minister talks 

about boundary exemptions and how do you transfer from one 

type of . . . to an RM [rural municipality] to a city annexation. 

Those can be very difficult. When you talk about it in theory, 

it’s a little bit more abstract and a little easier, but not very 

interesting. And then when it happens to be your farm, it 

probably is a very big deal, and so it’s just that much more real. 

 

So these are the challenges we have as politicians, and it’s our 

responsibility to make sure it’s fair and it’s doable as it possibly 

can be and it’s practical. And so we rely on those stakeholders 

like SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

to give us their best advice, but appreciating too that they have 

strong, strong stakes in these decisions as well. And so we have 

to take the time to make sure we get it right. 

And so as I review the minister’s comments, I’ll just take a 

moment to talk about them because I think it gives us a good 

insight into the bill itself. But as I said, you know, with so many 

of those things — and we seem to see a few of these bills and 

probably that’s not a bad thing — but we see a quite a few that 

have a lot of detail and will need a lot of scrutiny when it comes 

to committee. But we’re not there yet and we’re still at the big 

picture place. 

 

So, first he talks about . . . He has several main ideas that he 

wanted to pursue but the first is that they will, this amendment 

“will improve processes related to the boundary alterations or 

annexations for the municipalities involved for the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board and to support government’s 

growth strategy.” So that’s an interesting thing. And how do we 

do that in a way that’s fair, that’s responsible, and not push 

around some of the smaller players? 

 

Some of these RMs may feel that they want to . . . it’s their 

leverage that’s being taken away here. I’m not sure; it will be 

interesting to see what their thoughts are on that. And then 

apparently the SARM and SUMA had some specific requests. 

And then we talked about the New West Partnership Agreement 

and the agreement on internal trade when it comes to business 

licences and municipal procurement. And that’s very important. 

And then there is some administrative matters making sure 

language is clear. 

 

But first let’s talk about the boundary limitations. And he talks 

about how there is “a new time limit on how long a 

municipality must wait for response to a proposed annexation 

application from the other affected municipality before the 

process is considered disputed and can then proceed to the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board . . .” And of course then they 

would require mediation. So this is important that there is a 

timely process and that there is some way that there is a process 

that people know that as this province is growing and as our 

cities and our communities grow, that there is a proper way and 

a fair way that’s outlined. And so this is very clear that there 

will be a process for approval of a portion or parts of the board 

that can be agreed to. 

 

So we’re interested in that, talking more about that. If there are 

some specific areas in the province that are hot spots, of course 

we would probably assume that that would be around the larger 

cities, well in fact all cities. I think all the cities. You know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think when we talk about the number of 

cities we have — I believe it’s 12 or is it getting to be 14 now? 

— but of course those smaller ones are growing at quite a pace 

too. So that’s very important. 

 

The other one that is talking about some of the requests, and 

one of them was to be able to do . . . when they’re creating 

taxation policies for within their own RM, it sounds like there’s 

challenges when parts of their RMs are very heavily populated 

with acreages, that type of thing, and needs a different tax tool 

than some of the others than required because they’re expecting 

services that are more urban-type. And so this is a challenge. 

 

And so the RMs have expressed an interest that they can talk 

about additional service areas, and I think that sounds fair 

enough. I do want to make a note that of course there’s 

important safeguards within the legislation. For example, 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3087 

additional service areas cannot be established to specifically 

target an individual, residential, commercial, industrial, 

agricultural property or be specific to a business or a business 

activity. So I think that speaks to the fairness. And it’s a good 

thing that that might have been one of what we call unintended 

consequences, when we hadn’t fully thought that out or if an 

RM decided to just go a little bit too far and decided that one 

type of business was worthy of a special tax for a service area. 

 

But that’s interesting, you know, because I know some RMs 

can be home to one specific type of industry or business. I 

mean, I’m thinking of a potash mine or, you know, different 

types of oil, that kind of thing. And so I’m not sure how that 

plays out into it. 

 

They talk about municipal debt limits. And that’s important that 

that can be dealt with and how we can utilize the municipal 

board in making sure that issues around debt and borrowing are 

done and borrowing approval are handled in an appropriate 

fashion. 

 

So another area of amendments includes enabling 

municipalities to establish and enter into voluntary municipal 

business licensing arrangements and common issues of 

overweight vehicle permits with other municipalities. And this 

seems to make a lot of sense. I mean, I think this deals with a 

lot of our concerns. And I know, particularly if you have and 

were about to go into spring season, overweight trucks on the 

RM roads is a big, big issue. And so if we can establish some 

consistency across the borders, that would be a very, very good 

thing. 

 

Now of course they do mention the amendment supports the 

province’s commitments under interprovincial, national, and 

international agreements, such as the US partnership and the 

Agreement on Internal Trade. And of course that’s one of the 

things that I was asking about; I wonder if that could be the 

implications around CETA. That’s very, very important. 

 

And then they do talk about “The last main area of amendments 

addresses other requests of stakeholders to clarify certain 

administrative matters such as signing of council meeting 

minutes, consistent terminology regarding service or filing of 

assessment appeal notices . . .” Now I wonder if they have 

problems with the number of times they define employee or 

worker, like in a certain other bill that I know. We may be back 

defining, getting that straight, but that’s for another time. 

 

But these are . . . You know, and it does actually remind me a 

lot of The Cities Act because when that was introduced, that 

was a huge, huge piece of legislation. And we’ve seen The 

Cities Act come back before this House almost on an annual 

basis, almost annually because there is concerns. And so that’s 

why we have concerns about other omnibus bills, just because 

they seem to be here every year and they don’t really fix the 

problem that they thought they would and . . . if you don’t get it 

right. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, I think that this does make a lot of sense, and I 

think that those folks who serve as RM councillors and reeves 

and our city mayors and our city councillors all are deserving of 

a lot of respect. And even if people are in a rush, we do need to 

take the time, we need to take the time to acknowledge the good 

work that people do for us. They really are well-deserving of 

that special recognition, and I think this is, this is important that 

we do. And so when they bring forward suggestions for how we 

can improve our municipalities Act, our cities Act, anything to 

do with levels of government, let’s take the time and hear them 

out. 

 

Now it is, though, our responsibility that we make sure that it’s 

in the basis of fairness and that there is nothing that can create 

an unfair or a disadvantage or singling out or targeting groups. I 

know that sometimes we often hear of those concerns. And 

there are people who come to our offices are concerned that 

how the game has changed and they’re changing the rules as we 

go forward, and in the RMs where there can be issues around 

just the number of people involved. Everybody does know 

everybody. We want to make sure that our laws are fair and 

transparent and as accountable as possible. 

 

So I think that the three things that the minister really wants to 

establish here about boundary descriptions, I’ll be interested to 

hear how that . . . The questions that we ask in committee, 

particularly around any specifics, that will be of interest. The 

service areas that SUMA and SARM brought up, that’s very 

important. And just talking about these different levels of 

agreements, and whether it’s New West and whether it’s the 

internal agreement on trade, or I’d be very curious to know if 

there’s implications for CETA. I think that’s very important. 

And of course when we talk about debt limits and that type of 

thing, clearly in this time that we are seeing incredible growth 

in infrastructure, that it’s important that we have these 

conversations about debt. And we think that this is really 

worthwhile. 

 

So a lot of this stuff is coming forward. And we know there’s 

going to be a lot of conversations about this, and we’re hearing 

concerns. But we’re also hearing that people want to move 

forward with it. But I know that there will be many folks on our 

side who will continue to raise these issues. You know, we’ve 

had a good break over the Easter week and been home and been 

able to see and talk to people about the concerns that they are 

raising. And I think it’s important that we do support our 

municipalities in as many ways as we can. As I said, they’re 

trying to do the very best job that they possibly can with the 

resources that they have, but sometimes all the tools aren’t 

there. And when they make these kind of suggestions, we 

should listen to them. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s many other speeches 

and many other items we need to cover tonight, so I move 

adjournment on Bill No. 73, The Municipalities Amendment 

Act, 2012. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 73, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[20:30] 

 



3088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

Bill No. 74 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 74 — The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to wade into the debate on Bill No. 74, The Cities Amendment 

Act, 2012. 

 

The original cities amendment Act, it’s the legislative 

framework through which Saskatchewan’s, our 16 cities, 

exercise their powers and provide services. This Act had been 

in place since January 1st, 2003, and so now there is a bill 

before us proposing amendments to this cities Act. 

 

Some of the amendments in this, I’d just like to go through the 

minister’s second reading speech and talk about the four 

different areas of amendments that the minister is proposing. 

The first is related to the process for boundary alterations in the 

cities Act, and it’ll include “. . . a new time limit on how long a 

municipality must wait for a response to proposed annexation 

application from the other affected municipality . . .” I think 

that the goal is to cut down when an annexation application 

comes in, having it stalled over time, which would eventually 

quash it. I think this amendment will address that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

It also requires “. . . mediation before the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board hears and decides an application for 

annexation on which the affected municipal councils cannot 

reach agreement . . .” I know that I’ve said this here, not just 

related to cities and municipalities, personally mediation I think 

is always a good thing. When you can bring parties together 

with a third party neutral individual who can help you sort 

through your differences, and differences happen at all different 

levels, including between municipalities and in this case cities, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so mediation I think is a good thing. 

 

This particular set of amendments also clarifies “. . . that an 

application may be amended or withdrawn at any time up until 

the board completes its review, after which the board’s decision 

shall apply.” The minister has pointed out that these 

amendments are all consistent with amendments that are 

proposed with The Municipal Board Act and all through 

municipal Acts. So these actually sound vaguely familiar I’m 

sure to people who might be watching at home because I know 

that we’ve debated and discussed these across the other 

municipal Acts as well. 

 

The second main area of amendments, the minister said, comes 

from: 

 

. . . requests from the cities and SUMA for authorities 

consistent with the other two municipal Acts, The 

Municipalities Act and The Northern Municipalities Act, 

regarding matters such as unpaid municipal utility charges 

and trailer home permitting. [These] . . . amendments will 

allow cities to add unpaid city utility charges incurred by 

a tenant to property taxes provided the prior notice is 

given to the tenant and property owner and any utility 

deposits are applied to the charges. This authority was 

requested by resolution of SUMA [the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association]. 

 

And it’s already provided for in the other two municipal Acts. 

So all these three Acts are being made consistent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Cities, the minister has said, also has “. . . requested the ability 

to license and permit trailer homes as an alternative to assessing 

and taxing these as improvements, similar to the existing 

authority in the other two Acts.” So that amendment is bringing 

The Cities Act up to speed with the northern municipalities and 

the municipalities Acts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Another category of amendments that this Act proposes is: 

 

. . . enabling cities to establish and enter into 

intermunicipal agreements and arrangements that 

reconcile business licensing requirements so that a 

business or certain types of business could operate across 

participating municipalities under a single licence. 

 

And the minister has noted that “. . . these are voluntary 

provisions and ensure cities have the legislative authority to 

agree on such arrangements,” which that seems to be a 

reasonable proposal, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

 

And the minister has pointed out actually that these 

amendments support the province’s commitments under the 

New West Partnership Agreement and the Agreement on 

Internal Trade — not eternal trade, Mr. Deputy Speaker; that 

would be very different than internal trade.  

 

And the goal of this particular amendment is encouraging “. . . 

municipalities to reconcile their business licensing regimes 

similar to what Saskatchewan has done in partnership with the 

other provinces of Alberta and British Columbia regarding the 

extraprovincial business registration option that became 

effective . . . [last] July.”  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a final amendment, the final set of 

amendments: 

 

. . . address other requests from stakeholders to clarify 

certain administrative matters [the minister said] such as 

the signing of council meeting minutes, consistent 

terminology regarding service or filing of assessment 

appeal notices, and adding contact information for 

appellant agents to assessment appeal notices. These have 

been requested by the cities through their city solicitors, 

city assessors, and city clerks. 

 

The minister also points out that his ministry identified 

amendments to clarify certain provisions like those regarding 

education property tax reporting, so now these reports will go to 

Government Relations instead of the Ministry of Education. 

 

“As well other amendments clarify that fees for issuing a 

permit, inspection, or approval not exceed the cost of 

administration and enforcement similar to the present situation 

regarding licence fees.” That makes good sense, Mr. Deputy 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3089 

Speaker, that fees for issuing a permit, inspection, or approval 

shouldn’t exceed the cost of administration and enforcement. 

 

The one thing that the minister points out, that: 

 

. . . [his] ministry consulted extensively on these 

amendments with the city sector, including individual 

cities and city officials as well with SUMA and the 

Saskatchewan Association of City Clerks. Other 

stakeholder groups [the minister has gone on to say] were 

also consulted on specific aspects of the proposed 

amendments. These consultations began in mid-February 

2012 and concluded this past summer. 

 

So I’d just like to point out, and I know we’ve talked about this 

in this House before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but this 

government’s track record on consultation has not been 

incredibly strong . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the 

Minister of Highways is saying, oh come on, Danielle. But I 

need to point out that there’s been many examples of this 

government’s lack of consultation. We heard about Bill 85 

today — 90 days. This government took 90 days to consult on 

100 years of labour legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 100 

years of labour legislation in 90 days — and those 90 days 

actually also happened to fall over the course of the summer, in 

times where people in Saskatchewan try to take advantage of 

the weather, often have summer holidays. So it was not an 

opportune time to consult, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But that’s only 

one occasion where this government has not had a stellar track 

record. 

 

So I need to point out that these consultations began in 

mid-February 2012 and concluded this past summer. So 

February, March, April, May, June, July maybe . . . Did they 

conclude in July or August? So seven months, seven months, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it sounds, it sounds like, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this government has done a reasonable job of 

consultation on this bill, but seven months, seven months to 

consult on this where they took 90 days to consult on 100 years 

of labour legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government has 

not had a stellar track record when it comes to making sure it’s 

connecting with people who are impacted by legislation. 

 

And we all know that you can’t just talk to like-minded people 

when you want to create public policy or change legislation. It’s 

important to reach out to all kinds of individuals who maybe 

don’t always see things your way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or 

people who are impacted by legislation. And it sounds like with 

The Cities Act that that has been the case. They’ve talked to 

stakeholders, a whole gamut of individuals, which is important 

but it is important when you consult that you are . . . I just need 

to point out that this isn’t always the case with this government, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. But there are some, it sounds like, changes 

that are coming from individuals or from stakeholders in 

organizations that are worthwhile and will make the running of 

our cities a little bit smoother, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But I know that I have colleagues who will be wading into the 

debate on Bill No. 74, The Cities Amendment Act, in the coming 

days, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with that I would like to move 

to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 74, The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 75 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 75 — The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A pleasure this 

evening to join in on discussion on The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012, Bill No. 75, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, has to do with northern 

municipalities obviously, as the title would suggest, and 

specifically, Mr. Speaker, work in a number of areas where 

there are some changes ongoing in order to ensure that some 

proper changes occur so that the legislation best reflects what is 

needed for northern municipalities. 

 

The changes, Mr. Speaker, are brought in through three areas. 

The one has to do, Mr. Speaker, with, as the minister would 

describe it, as competiveness in a growth strategy, Mr. Speaker, 

with respect to business licensing, overweight vehicle 

permitting, boundary alteration, municipal procurement. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this aspect, we’ve had the opportunity to discuss it 

as it relates to municipalities in other context, not specifically 

related to northern municipalities, but we’ve talked about this as 

it relates to other . . . in other speeches on other pieces of 

legislation. 

 

It has to do, Mr. Speaker, with the idea of business licensing 

and provisions enabling one municipality to enter into 

agreements with other municipalities with respect to licences, 

and to allow for less . . . to prevent duplication of requirements 

with respect to licensing so that a business operating in one area 

could operate in another area if the agreement was in place and 

they could have a single licence thereby streamlining the 

process for the business and not putting in place additional 

barriers to the smooth operation. And, Mr. Speaker, this, as 

we’ve discussed in previous items of legislation, has to do with 

the New West Partnership and some of the changes in place 

there in order to ensure that things can be streamlined when 

appropriate. 

 

It is important though to note, Mr. Speaker, when entering into 

these types of agreements, that that there not be unnecessary 

trade-offs with respect to autonomy of local levels of 

government as it relates to the requirements that they need to 

have in place in order to meet the needs of their constituents. So 

I think that’s important, important item to note and something 

to keep in mind when we’re talking about requirements in one 

area having application to another area. 

 



3090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

Also, Mr. Speaker, there is the voluntary aspect here with one 

area entering into an agreement with another as it relates to 

overweight permits for vehicles, Mr. Speaker, so that in 

situations where municipalities want to enter into a voluntary 

arrangement where one area would recognize the permit issued 

by another, that this legislation would provide and allow for 

that, Mr. Speaker. So that is the one component that this 

legislation provides. And the government sums it up with 

respect to competitiveness and growth strategy, Mr. Speaker, as 

it relates to business licensing and boundary alteration and 

different components. 

 

And as I said, it is important to listen to small businesses. It’s 

important to listen to municipalities. And it’s also important to 

respect autonomy. And it’s important to respect processes that 

have been in place allowing for local governments to make 

decisions in the best interests of the citizens in that area. That’s 

the first component of this piece of legislation. 

 

The second component, Mr. Speaker, has to do with changes 

that are needed with respect to inactive municipal development 

corporations. So this would be in situations, Mr. Speaker, where 

a development corporation was started up at one point in time 

but is currently inactive. And the legislation here that’s been 

suggested would help deal with that situation with respect to 

some of the reporting that is required and some of the meetings 

that are required under the Act, taking into account the reality 

that a development corporation may be inactive in an area. 

 

It also has special provisions that are included for northern 

hamlet incorporation and northern settlement dissolution. So 

these are some aspects of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, that are 

unique to the North, recognizing some of the settlement patterns 

and the nature of communities in northern Saskatchewan. And 

this provides some changes to allow for the recognition of 

hamlets but also for the dissolution of settlements when no 

longer appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that it’s necessary for legislation to 

be responsive to locations where this may be the reality with 

respect to smaller communities, with respect to some of the 

changes that need to take place in order that the legislation is 

reflective and responsive to the local needs within northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[20:45] 

 

The third component that is identified in the minister’s remarks 

based on the legislation that was brought forward and the 

amendments, Mr. Speaker, has to do with administrative 

matters with respect to council meeting minutes, signing off, 

and some of the necessary process that is required at the 

municipal level with respect to notice of assessments that are 

being given for appeal notices and the details, as I said, around 

meeting minutes and the need for there to be consistent 

terminology across different pieces of legislation. And often 

when we look at legislation, Mr. Speaker, especially in the 

municipal context, there may be pieces of legislation that affect 

cities or affect rural municipalities and in this situation, Mr. 

Speaker, affect northern municipalities. 

 

So it is in my view appropriate to have consistency in language 

across those pieces of the legislation in order to ensure that 

there is consistency. And that’s an important thing so that when 

people look at the legislation in one area, they know what the 

context is, they know what the issue is, and they can see how 

this particular topic or issue is dealt with in a sister or brother 

piece of legislation, so to speak, within the realm of municipal 

government but whether it affects the North or the South or a 

large centre or in a more rural location. 

 

So those are the three main areas of this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. There is also a component here that was included 

through The Northern Municipalities Act that wasn’t provided 

or wasn’t included in earlier changes in 2010, as the minister 

said, due to some technical reasons. So we see the inclusion of 

that. It’s important that the changes here, Mr. Speaker, are 

developed in consultation with people in the North, especially 

local leaders and those that are serving in elected office. I think 

that is very important that there has been the input of SUMA, 

the New North, and the Northern Municipal Trust Account 

Management Board and with the last, Mr. Speaker, addressing 

the issue of the development corporations in the North in 

different communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the three areas to recap, Mr. Speaker, that the amendment 

here is covering to The Northern Municipalities Amendment 

Act, the first has to do with some steps that the government 

wishes to take in order to, as it describes it, to improve 

competitiveness and growth as it relates to licences. As I said, 

Mr. Speaker, when there are instances where it makes sense, it’s 

based on common sense, and when it is the will of small 

businesses to do that, I think that does make sense provided, 

Mr. Speaker, that it does not unnecessarily erode any sort of 

autonomy or control or oversight that the municipal level of 

government provides. 

 

With respect to the vehicle provisions for overweight permits, it 

is a voluntary arrangement, Mr. Speaker. So where there is the 

will and the desire to have voluntary arrangements and 

recognize permits issued by another area, Mr. Speaker, so long 

as it’s not forced and it serves a good purpose and is easier to 

do, that I think on a face value, Mr. Speaker, has some merit. 

 

Also with the municipal development corporations where some 

have been inactive and some adjustments need to take place 

with respect to recognizing a corporation of northern hamlets 

but also the dissolution of northern settlements, Mr. Speaker, 

this legislation addresses and touches on that issue. 

 

And lastly the third area with respect to some of the 

administrative amendments with respect to meeting minutes and 

requirements that northern municipalities would have to follow 

in order to be in step with the legislation, there are some 

adjustments here with respect to modernizing, as well as with 

some of the language that this piece of legislation has with other 

pieces of legislation with respect to municipalities. 

 

And it is the minister’s statement that consultation has occurred 

with SUMA and the New North and the Northern Municipal 

Trust Account Management Board. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

hoping that that consultation was genuine and that the remarks 

received from those organizations and individuals working in 

those organizations are in fact reflected in the changes here and 

are in the will of those organizations. 

 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3091 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 75, I would conclude my 

remarks and look forward to the chance to speak on municipal 

issues more at future dates. And I know other individuals within 

caucus may have a desire to speak to this piece of legislation, so 

I move to adjourn debate on this piece of legislation. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 75, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 76 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 76 — The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m pleased tonight to enter into the debate on Bill No. 76, An 

Act to amend The Municipal Board Act and to make related 

amendments to other Acts. 

 

And of course there seems to be many bills coming forward that 

are dealing specifically with the issue around boundary and 

boundary changes and annexations between RMs and 

municipalities. And this is one . . . In fact I was speaking earlier 

on a previous bill talking about the role of the Municipal Board 

and how it will be used as a vehicle to help resolve some of the 

issues. And in many ways this bill itself is that way of enabling 

it to be pretty constructive. 

 

But we have some questions about that, and I’ll take a minute 

here to review the minister’s comments about the bill and what 

the implications are for it. Of course clearly this is done, and as 

they say it’s done in a way to promote the provincial growth 

agenda. And of course we are very supportive of growth. We’re 

not sure that the agenda that they put forward is as solid as one 

might expect, but we have what we have. 

 

And we know there are challenges, and some of them very 

public in the newspapers between our large cities and the 

surrounding RMs, and it’s been causing some real concerns. 

And we need to deal with that in a way that is constructive and 

fair and that people are heard, and actually that people are not 

taken advantage of, or different levels of government aren’t sort 

of ganging up on smaller levels. That’s not fair at all. But we 

think this may be a reasonable alternative. But we have some 

questions about this and we will have those questions when we 

get to committee. But I know there will be others who want to 

speak to that when the time comes. 

 

But what they do is, the minister has talked about the 

amendments in this bill relate to the part of the annexation 

process after the application reaches the Municipal Board for a 

decision. So they talk about four processes that will help it. First 

it clarifies the board secretary’s ability to determine the 

completeness of the application and notify the applicants of 

deficiencies before it may be considered by the board. This will 

speed up the process and save the board’s time for higher 

priority questions. 

 

Now I just have to say, Mr. Speaker, that when I was reading 

through the bill I found this very interesting actually, if we can 

take a moment. Of course the board’s secretary is someone that 

is of significance. And it’s important that the work is complete 

and full and all the details are there and all the t’s are crossed 

and i’s are dotted. But I’m not sure. It seems to me to leave a lot 

of power in the hand of the secretary to say, this isn’t good 

enough and that’s done, you know. So it goes: 

 

(1.1) Before an application mentioned in subsection (1) is 

reviewed by the board, the secretary of the board shall 

review the application to determine if, in the opinion of the 

secretary, it provides sufficient information and: 

 

(a) if the secretary determines that the application 

provides sufficient information, refer the application to 

the board for review; or 

 

(b) if the secretary determines that the application does 

not provide sufficient information, notify the applicant 

in writing of the deficiencies in the application and 

specify a period within which the deficiencies must be 

remedied. 

 

(1.2) If, in the secretary’s opinion, the deficiencies 

mentioned in clause (1.1)(b) have been remedied within 

the specified period, the secretary shall refer the 

application to the board for review. 

 

(1.3) If the applicant does not remedy the deficiencies 

mentioned in clause (1.1)(b) to the satisfaction of the 

secretary within the specified period, the application is 

deemed to have been withdrawn by the applicant. 

 

So that’s a lot of power the secretary has there. It’s a lot more 

than just saying, this is filled in and we’re ready to go with it. 

Essentially that person is a real gatekeeper. And I’m not sure if 

that’s been totally thought through. I would have some serious 

questions about that if . . . We sure hope every secretary is 

level-headed and fair and has all the good graces and will get all 

these forms filled out appropriately. But to me, it sure seems to 

create a situation where one person is the gatekeeper and the 

board may never hear of some. So that leaves me a little uneasy, 

the amount of power that person has, and so that we will 

definitely have some questions about. 

 

So the second part that the minister has talked about is it 

ensures that the council . . . The bill will also ensure that 

councils undertake mediation to settle dispute if none has been 

attempted prior to the board’s review and decision. That makes 

a lot of sense. The premise is of voluntary settlement, even with 

the assistance, but it is preferable to having the board impose a 

decision. 

 

All right. And then it also talks about changes allow for the 

board to provide or approve portion or portions of the 



3092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

application, and this change is from the all-or-nothing approach 

that was a problem before. Now you’re allowed to have much 

more of a compromise solution where more parties are feeling 

. . . And so we’ll stop for a minute here and . . . Anyways I 

won’t take the phone call, Mr. Speaker. I’ll continue with my 

. . . [inaudible interjections] . . . Mr. Speaker, we digress. And I 

will continue on to say that this is a good way to solve if you 

can have a compromise and not have a winner-take-all solution. 

That’s very, very important. So that’s good. 

 

The other one, and I know my colleague from Regina Lakeview 

raised concerns about this, amendments are proposed to provide 

more flexibility in the appointment of alternate part-time 

members representing SARM or SUMA to sit on the panel that 

reviews and holds hearings regarding municipal boundary 

changes. Now it isn’t so much that it’s SARM or SUMA. I 

think that’s fair enough. But what the question is, that if you’re 

a full-time board member, you have to be appointed by the 

Executive Council and it would be advertised, whereas if you’re 

a part-time board member, that is circumvented and you don’t 

need to go through that kind of rigorous process. But it is the 

minister who has that power. So we have questions about that 

and whether that’s appropriate or not. But that’s one. 

 

So other issues talk about the consultation process, as I said, the 

Executive Council. It talks a bit about the pension plan, that 

type of issue. But the real issues that are before us, and I think 

this is a real issue and I think that while this government may be 

trying to address this in this bill, the real issue becomes how do 

we deal with annexation in a logical, well-planned, -thought-out 

process here in Saskatchewan and how does that reflect our 

provincial interests. 

 

And I’ve talked at length at other times when we’ve talked 

about municipal issues because we do have a stake in having 

strong, healthy, vibrant communities and strong, vibrant rural 

municipalities. I think that it’s important that we can work 

together to get these issues ironed out and that when we know 

. . . And we do know that there will be annexation, and we do 

know our communities are growing. And if you have land and 

if RMs are close to cities and communities, then it’s clear that at 

some point the resolution will have to be made that annexation 

will happen. 

 

[21:00] 

 

But there should be a process to make sure that’s fair. And I 

think in many ways we try to do that prior to involving the 

Municipal Board, and if it does come to that, that there will be 

processes that are respectful and leave all parties feeling like 

they’ve had their day, that they’ve been able to make their case, 

and that the board has been able to hear them — that’s only 

reasonable and fair — and that nobody’s taking advantage of 

the situation either by unfair leverage of delay, delay, delay or 

just steamrolling ahead with it and not really taking into 

account the needs of all the parties involved. 

 

And so I know that there’s going to be lots of speeches on many 

of the bills tonight because we want to make sure we’re getting 

to that point where we need to get to work on a lot of these 

things. And a few more of my colleagues will want to speak on 

Bill No. 76. 

 

Those are my main concerns. We will be listening and paying 

close attention to this in committee because we think 

community planning is essential. It’s not just as simple as 

annexing land and allowing cities to grow or communities to 

grow without any foresight or any kind of plan. We need to 

make sure that we have good community plans. And that all fits 

together, fits together to make a great province, and a great 

province that will attract people to come and stay and move 

here. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of 

Bill No. 76, An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act and to 

make related amendments to other Acts. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 76, The Municipal 

Board Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 77 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 

Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise tonight to speak to Bill No. 77, An Act to amend 

The Horse Racing Regulation Act and to make consequential 

amendments to The Revenue and Financial Services Act and 

The Revenue Collection Administration Regulations. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill 77 is quite a short bill. It’s maybe just longer 

than one page. But as with a number of pieces of legislation that 

we have this session, there are bigger consequences to the bill 

than have been totally explained. 

 

The minister indicated in her comments that she had announced 

that the provincial government would be eliminating the 

parimutuel tax it collects on horse racing wagers effective 

March 31st, 2013. That announcement was made last October. 

This was something that the horse racing industry had been 

lobbying for because effectively the money collected by the 10 

per cent tax — parimutuel tax — was turned back to the 

industry to assist it. And the thinking was that if they didn’t 

have to go through that mechanism of collecting the tax, 

remitting it to the government and then getting it back in the 

form of a grant, it might be simpler for everyone. 

 

However it was not explained or indicated that that 

announcement meant that the government was going to choose 

a winner and two losers as it relates to horse racing. They didn’t 

let these horses race against each other and let the best horse 

win. The minister, the government, the Premier chose to use the 

tax deduction and only give it to the thoroughbred racing crew 

and not to the harness racing or standardbred racing 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3093 

community. 

 

And so the net effect of this seemingly innocuous one-page bill 

is that it has effectively wiped out over 100 years of harness 

racing in Saskatchewan. This is something that has been an 

important part of many communities right . . . Last summer the 

harness racing took place in Regina, just west of Regina, in a 

new track that they’d built to replace the one that was formerly 

at Evraz Place. And it also will eliminate the harness racing in 

Yorkton. And so the net effect is that the racetrack in Saskatoon 

at the exhibition grounds will get all of the money from this 

particular decision and leaving out Yorkton and leaving out 

Regina. Now I’m not certain if the member of the legislature for 

Yorkton spoke up about this within the caucus period or if the 

members on the government side from Regina and area spoke 

up about this, but there doesn’t seem to be any explanation of 

why one group was chosen over the other. 

 

And how this works, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this tax that’s 

collected on the racing at the three venues in Saskatchewan last 

summer, the 10 per cent parimutuel tax, goes back then to those 

particular racetracks. But there’s also the ability to have a 

market of allowing for online betting — betting basically 

watching televised races from Longacres or other racetracks 

around North America or probably around the world — and 

then allowing for bets to take place that then can collect this 10 

per cent tax. 

 

And so effectively what the minister and Premier did was to 

say, okay Saskatoon, in your operation you’re going to get all of 

this, and Yorkton and Regina, you get nothing. The other side 

of that is that the people involved with the Saskatchewan 

Standardbred Horsemen’s Association, the harness racing 

people, met with the minister, and they said, this is the effect of 

this. And they were hopeful that some solution may be there. 

 

One of the solutions proposed was that there’d be a line drawn 

across the province at Davidson, and the betting north of that 

line would go to the Saskatoon thoroughbred group and that the 

money from people betting south of that line would go to the 

standardbred or the harness racing people. And that way they 

would be able to provide the subsidy to both Yorkton and to 

Regina from the south part, and then Saskatoon would get the 

subsidy or the licence to charge this fee for the northern part of 

the province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, even as late as the later part of February 

when they thought maybe this would be resolved, it was 

announced I think on February the 20th that the Minister of 

Liquor and Gaming had made the decision, presumably in 

consultation with the Premier, that we’re going to wipe out 100 

years of history of harness racing in Saskatchewan. They’re not 

going to get any of this subsidy that the thoroughbred industry 

at Prairieland Park in Saskatoon’s going to get and so that there 

would not be any funding from this system for the harness 

racing in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again it’s a quite a . . . It’s not a big 

community of people, but there are clearly many people 

involved. Now sometimes I don’t think the public totally 

understands how many different aspects are involved in either 

standardbred racing or thoroughbred racing as it relates to the 

industries or the types of businesses that are involved. I mean 

clearly we have the horse breeders, the horse people that are 

involved. But you also then have the financial agencies that 

allow for the purchase of horses. You end up having clearly the 

jockeys and the others who are involved. You have all of the 

stablehands and people who are involved in care of the horses. 

You have people throughout the province that maybe provide 

feed or pasture for the horses. 

 

And you will then end up having a steady stable or a group — I 

guess a stable is the right word — of horses that are turned over 

through the industry. And if one hasn’t been involved in this 

industry, they wouldn’t understand about claiming races and the 

ability for very good horses to get claimed at certain prices in 

races that they participate in, and then eventually some of those 

horses will be taken outside of Saskatchewan, to probably 

Alberta or British Columbia or into the States or maybe Toronto 

to compete on a broader basis. And a number of Saskatchewan 

horses have been developed over the years through the work of 

these industries to become very fine racehorses on a broader 

basis. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this decision which is summarized in this short 

one-page bill has broader implications for Saskatchewan, and it 

eliminates another area of jobs for young people who have great 

interest in working with horses. It eliminates also jobs relating 

to the actual races themselves, whether it’s the concessions or 

other kinds of things. It probably involves jobs related to 

specific types of clothing that are used in some of these things. 

So it has a much broader aspect. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it appears this decision has been made with 

little or no consultation with the harness racing people 

specifically. It’s not clear whether there was some special 

arrangement with the people involved in the thoroughbred 

racing in Saskatoon or if there was some special favour or 

whatever that was there, but clearly they are the ones in 

Saskatoon that benefit from this decision. And, Mr. Speaker, 

when these kinds of decisions are made, there needs to be a 

better explanation of why it’s been done. 

 

Now I’ve looked at the announcement by the minister. I’ve 

looked at the comments by the minister, but I’ve also looked at 

the letters and the correspondence and the reports of the 

meetings that have taken place over the last number of months 

as it relates to this decision. And I can’t find anywhere what the 

rationale is for this particular proposal. 

 

And I think that it’s still lots of snow on the ground. They’re 

not going to be getting out racing any time soon. There’s time 

for the minister, for the Premier to actually sit down and maybe 

change some of these decisions in a way that allows for the 

100-year history of harness racing in Saskatchewan to continue. 

And when I describe that, I’m also describing all of the people 

involved with that on a whole number of levels who are looking 

forward to a summer where their traditional jobs do not exist. 

And I think that it’s a sad commentary that the government 

makes this decision without a clear rationale. 

 

So the request by both the standardbred group and the 

thoroughbred group to change this 10 per cent parimutuel tax 

into effectively a non-tax and allow for it to be shared by the 

two industries has been met with a response to remove it, but 

then a specific decision to give it all to one group to the 



3094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

detriment of the harness-racing people. And that’s not a fair 

way to treat people in this province. It’s not a smart way to do 

it. And there is no explanation to all of the young people who 

probably have been part of family traditions around harness 

racing in Saskatchewan. 

 

[21:15] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that there are a whole number 

of questions around this very short bill that have not been 

answered. I know that some of my colleagues will want to 

comment on this as well because it does not appear to be fair, 

does not appear to be a decision that’s been well thought 

through, does not appear to be a decision where there’s been 

consultation. And for all of those reasons, I think it should be 

revisited by the minister and by the Premier with a much better 

explanation of why this bill is going forward. But at this time I 

will adjourn the debate on Bill No. 77. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 77, The Horse Racing 

Regulation Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 78 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 78 — The Social 

Workers Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we go through 

adjourned debates this evening and looking at different pieces 

of legislation, it’s a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak to 

The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is important because it 

obviously deals with a very important area with respect to the 

health and well-being of Saskatchewan people. This piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, has to do with what will be new 

powers given to registered social workers here within 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We know within the province that there are many individuals 

who have had special training in social work through a 

Bachelor of Social Work in many instances, Mr. Speaker, 

which is a good degree and good training. But social workers 

also are a regulated profession where to call oneself a social 

worker requires that there be the necessary procedures in place 

and that necessary steps need to be followed in order for 

someone to call themselves a social worker. And there needs to 

be the appropriate amount of training which is important. There 

needs to be the right oversight and professional code of 

conduct, appropriate hours through the training process in order 

to call themselves a social worker. 

 

And these are important steps because social workers deal with 

some of the most vulnerable people that we have in our 

province, individuals who find themselves in a situation that 

many of us can’t relate to, or maybe we can relate to because 

we’ve benefited from the help and assistance of a social worker. 

We think of some of the most vulnerable. We think of 

individuals going — children in many instances or minors — 

going through social circumstances or issues related to their 

family where they’re not doing well or they’re struggling or 

there’s been family breakdown. 

 

We think, Mr. Speaker, of young people who may be struggling 

with a variety of issues, whether it be depression or addictions 

or any variety of concerns that they may have as individuals 

operating within society, operating within their schools. And we 

know that social workers provide important care and important 

assistance to struggling individuals — not just struggling 

individuals, also those that are doing well but could benefit 

from the expertise of a social worker, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that they operate in schools or through health regions, through 

the ministry itself, Mr. Speaker, individuals who care about the 

vulnerable in our province and want the best for them. 

 

So this particular piece of legislation is extending some of the 

ability and power, the scope of practice, I suppose, of social 

workers here in the province, allowing them to . . . not all of 

them, but certain ones who are registered and have met the 

proper requirements in order to diagnose some mental health 

disorders. It’s important, Mr. Speaker, to recognize that this is a 

significant step and an area of practice that social workers have 

been working in and involved in, but which has traditionally 

been the domain of psychologists and other health 

professionals. 

 

So it is a step, Mr. Speaker, that shouldn’t be taken lightly and 

should be done with the proper examination of what the rules 

will be in order for this to occur safely and responsibly, how 

social workers who have this new authority or ability to provide 

a diagnosis of a mental health disorder, how they will interact 

and connect with health care professionals, whether that be a 

psychiatric nurse or whether that is a psychiatrist or a family 

physician, whether that’s other . . . in the context of school 

divisions, perhaps other counsellors and teachers within the 

educational system. So it’s important to clearly identify what 

are the roles, what are the expectations. 

 

As the minister identifies in her remarks, it sounds as though a 

big push for this, Mr. Speaker, has been the increased need and 

demand for individuals, health professionals who can provide 

this type of service. It’s identified that there are currently 78 

psychologists and 36 psychiatrists working in Saskatchewan 

mental health and outpatient services. So we know that, Mr. 

Speaker, is not a great number. I mean those that are working 

are working very hard and diligently. But I know as an MLA, I 

can think of interactions with constituents who have required 

services to do with mental health, and I’m sure colleagues in the 

Assembly can think of their own experiences as an MLA in 

dealing with constituents who need assistance. Or maybe it’s 

not in an MLA capacity, but maybe it’s in their own capacity 

from their family or perhaps within friends or loved ones. 

There’s nothing more frustrating and in some ways 

discouraging to have a need identified and not have the proper 

resources available for the individual to access in order to 

receive the help that he or she needs. 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3095 

So according to the assessment by the minister, this would 

increase the number of individuals who could be providing this 

type of health care services by 50 individuals. So it’s obviously 

not all social workers in the province. It will require high levels 

of training and certification to enter this level of service to 

Saskatchewan people. And the minister identifies that this is 

occurring in other jurisdictions, with Alberta and British 

Columbia and Ontario mentioned as some examples. 

 

So it’s important, Mr. Speaker, yes, to provide the individuals 

and to allow for individuals to provide a diagnosis when it is 

needed. It’s important to have those services in place. But when 

we’re talking about this type of service as it relates to mental 

health, it needs to go beyond the diagnosis. Also we need to 

ensure that the proper resources are there for the people needing 

the services, whether that means accessing a prescription or 

other counselling and assessment and training that is needed in 

order for the person to be well and to do as well as they need to 

do and to deal with the family situations as well. 

 

And we know this is a priority, Mr. Speaker, not just in our 

urban centres but it’s especially a priority in rural locations and 

in northern locations. And I know, Mr. Speaker, from my time 

in the legislature hearing of situations and stories, especially in 

the North, Mr. Speaker, where youth suicide is a real concern 

and something that affects northern communities at a very high 

level. And we hear of situations, Mr. Speaker, where young 

people are discouraged. Young people don’t have hope. Young 

people are turning to suicide as what they see is a way out. 

 

So I make these remarks because, yes, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important to have the individuals there who can provide the 

diagnosis, but it’s also, and as importantly — and perhaps more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker — to have the right services in place 

so it can go beyond that so that health regions have the 

programs in place, school divisions are able to access the 

programs and run the programs that they need in order to make 

a difference in the lives of young people. So it can’t simply be 

about increasing the pool of people who can deal with 

individuals at the early stages, but it’s about continuing that 

care, taking it beyond that initial stage so that people can 

become well; people can be safe so that people can reach their 

full potential. So the issue of services can’t be lost in this 

context. 

 

It is important also, Mr. Speaker, with this new power being 

given to social workers as it is currently suggested by the 

minister, it’s important to see how other professions and 

organizations and those with different credentials are 

responding to it as well. Because yes, while social workers have 

for many years been dealing with individuals who may be 

suffering with mental illness, this power is a new authority 

being given to them and a new responsibility given to them. So 

of course there’s interaction with other health care 

professionals, whether it’s psychologists as mentioned earlier 

on, or whether it is . . . a psychiatrist is another example, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s also psychiatric nurses who provide important 

care to patients and have a good understanding of how our 

health care system can help and maybe how our health care 

system can do a better job of meeting some of the needs of 

individuals who have mental illness. 

 

In some feedback that was received from the Registered 

Psychiatric Nurses Association of Saskatchewan, they highlight 

a number of issues with respect to this proposed change as it 

relates to social workers. A few points that they make . . . 

Because I think it does speak to some of the earlier remarks I 

made about how changes need to go beyond increasing the 

number of people who can provide a diagnosis, but that we also 

are doing more than that. We’re helping individuals as they 

journey along in their process of recovery and their process of 

healing and of dealing with their situations. 

 

So for example, one example here is social workers. One issue 

that they recognize is social workers diagnosing clients will not 

change the problems with access and lack of services. That’s 

one point that psychiatric nurses make. Also, Mr. Speaker, that 

changes should be made as part of a comprehensive mental 

health strategy for the province involving all those providing 

the services. 

 

So it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not just increasing the 

number, but we’re looking at the overall picture. We’re looking 

at the whole picture and doing our best to ensure that the 

necessary services are there down the road and that that is, in 

fact, we’re taking the right steps to make sure that we are 

organizing and structuring the entire health care system and 

ways that we care for people through different . . . Whether it be 

through schools or other organizations, that we are in fact 

looking at the big picture and the complete individual. 

 

So those are some remarks made on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

Social workers do tremendous work in our province and have 

for many years. And the designation that a social worker has is 

an important one, because with that designation comes trust 

from the general public because we know that a high level of 

standards are there. There’s professional accountability with 

colleagues within the profession and that there are the 

appropriate disciplinary mechanisms in place when individuals 

are not in tune with what needs to occur. 

 

And so when we are changing the role, when we are expanding 

or adjusting the role, it’s necessary to do it in a thoughtful way 

and in a way that looks at the total picture. And so while 

extending this additional scope of practice or this additional 

responsibility or privilege to these individuals, these certain 

social workers — about 50, as the minister’s notes would 

identify — it is a significant step and one that needs to occur 

through proper consultation with all people working in the area 

of mental health and wellness. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my remarks on the 

amendment related to The Social Workers Act and I would 

move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78, The Social Workers 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[21:30] 

 



3096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

Bill No. 80 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 80 — The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having just had 

the opportunity to speak to legislation related to social workers, 

we’re switching gears now a bit and speaking about legislation 

as it relates to our Crown corporations and specifically The 

Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012, Bill No. 80. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the topics are different, I suppose the issue 

with respect to how we organize ourselves as a province and the 

role of government, Mr. Speaker, in improving the lives of 

people, I suppose there is some overlap there. And while one 

issue, social workers, looks specifically at the issue of mental 

health and looking at how our health care system and those that 

work within it can best meet the needs of Saskatchewan people, 

here we’re looking at how, Mr. Speaker, our Crown corporation 

is able to organize itself and how SaskPower can function in a 

way that best meets the needs of Saskatchewan people once 

again. 

 

So while the content and the topic is in many ways different, 

there is — as with everything we do in the legislature as it 

relates to Saskatchewan people — the same mindset is required. 

And it’s a mindset of asking ourselves how do the changes 

brought forward in the legislation improve the situation for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we think of SaskPower and we think of 

The Power Corporation Amendment Act, we have to ask 

ourselves many of the same questions. Does this legislation, do 

the proposals brought forward in this amendment by the 

minister, Mr. Speaker, work in a way that strengthens the 

position of SaskPower in order to provide, one, services for 

Saskatchewan people in a way that it’s able to do it in an 

environmentally sound way, in a responsible way, and a way 

that is also keeping in mind our financial reality, and how the 

well-being of Crown corporations in our province do in fact 

have a real bearing on the well-being of the provincial 

government, but most importantly the well-being of 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

And whether it’s a small customer, a customer purchasing 

power in a small amount, or whether it’s for industry on a large 

amount, Mr. Speaker, it’s necessary to ask ourselves the same 

question because fundamentally it comes down to the type of 

service and the role of Crown corporations and SaskPower 

operating within the province in order make life better for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I made it very clear, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks that I think it’s 

important to have a strong private sector as well as a strong 

Crown sector. And the two are needed, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think it’s important to view those two hand in hand, looking at 

yes, the historical relationship and role that Crown corporations 

have played in the province, but as importantly or more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the current role that 

Crowns play within the province in terms of providing services 

to Saskatchewan people and ensuring, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 

making steps that are in the best interest for all Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

It’s important, Mr. Speaker, to ask ourselves that question 

because sadly on too many instances, in my opinion, in my 

view, we have seen an erosion and a weakening of the Crown 

sector which hasn’t been in the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. And based on some of those examples that we’ve seen 

and the steps that we have taken and some of the policies that 

have been put in place, it causes me and it causes the opposition 

and many people in Saskatchewan to look at changes in the 

legislation that are being brought forward here with a very keen 

eye and looking at what are the intended and unintended 

consequences that may be coming forward because of the 

division, the amendments that are being proposed. 

 

On that topic or in that vein of thought, Mr. Speaker, we can 

look at some of the actions that the Sask Party government has 

made with respect to the Crowns, specifically around the issue 

of dividend rates and some of the constraints that have been put 

in place from preventing our Crowns from operating 

independently, as well as some of the increased contracting out 

of services and privatization approaches that we’ve seen, Mr. 

Speaker, that I don’t think are based on common sense, but are 

more in tune with a predisposition that members opposite have 

with eroding Crowns and making the case that they are not in 

the best interest of Saskatchewan people. And I think that 

approach is one that we certainly have seen as it relates to 

SaskPower and the actions that the Sask Party government has 

taken in relation to SaskPower. 

 

A key example that we saw, Mr. Speaker, in the last year for 

example was the special dividend that SaskPower took of $120 

million. So when we look at legislation that talks about the 

long-term well-being of SaskPower, the sustainability of 

SaskPower, the ability of SaskPower to invest in infrastructure 

and provide services to Saskatchewan people, we can’t lose 

sight of that special dividend and how the $120 million, Mr. 

Speaker, could be providing for the Crown corporation, but 

most importantly providing the services and allowing for the 

corporation to act in a long-term manner that is about looking 

towards the future and not the short term. 

 

What we see in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, which I think is 

most crucial, is the aspect here where the borrowing power of 

SaskPower is being increased in order to cover substantial 

capital expenditures. So I just touched on and covered the point 

that we saw a large dividend being taken from SaskPower in 

order to assist with the provincial coffers, but then very shortly 

after we see the government coming forward wanting an 

increase to the borrowing limit of SaskPower. And to me, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think to most individuals who are looking at this, 

we see a connection here that isn’t necessarily based on 

common sense or an approach that isn’t based on the best 

interests of the Crown corporation and its ability to provide 

services to Saskatchewan people. 

 

If we have legislation, Mr. Speaker, now asking for the 

borrowing limit to be increased, we must ask ourselves why, if 

this is needed, Mr. Speaker, why the Sask Party government 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3097 

took the special dividend from SaskPower, thereby putting it in 

the position where it is more reliant on borrowing as opposed to 

investing its profits to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people, 

Saskatchewan consumers, whether they be individuals 

operating independently or part of the business community, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And sadly we’ve seen this approach when it comes to the issue 

of debt, where the Sask Party government has been more than 

willing to make decisions that present their own financial 

picture in a rosier fashion than what reality would actually 

suggest. And I think of a parallel situation, Mr. Speaker, 

parallel in the sense where it’s taking a decision and forcing it 

on another organization in order to make the provincial 

situation look better. And that, Mr. Speaker, that was very clear 

with respect to the Sask Party government’s treatment of the 

University of Saskatchewan with relation to the Health Sciences 

Building, in forcing the University of Saskatchewan to take that 

debt and put it on its books, as opposed to providing the funding 

as it promised in the election. 

 

And so if we take that sort of approach — though the details are 

different as it relates to SaskPower, but it’s the same intent, Mr. 

Speaker — in this case taking additional resources from 

SaskPower and putting it in a position where it needs to borrow 

more so that those dollars, that debt is showing up in the Crown 

and not within the provincial context of the direct finances, and 

so I think that is, I know that is a concern.  

 

And it’s something, Mr. Speaker, that when we see that track 

record repeated in a variety of instances, whether it’s within the 

context of the universities or whether it’s punting and putting 

difficult decisions on our K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 

system, Mr. Speaker, or pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 

12], as one of my earlier remarks tonight in adjourned debates 

commented on, it’s a track record that doesn’t build a lot of 

confidence that members opposite are operating in a way that is 

as transparent and as open as it ought to be, and transparent in 

its motives for why it’s making decisions and why it is bringing 

forward amendments through this type of legislation. 

 

Other components that are being addressed in this legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, have to do with the issue of nuisance claims. And 

as the minister identifies and as identified in the legislation, or 

stated in the legislation I should say, we see additional 

protection here from SaskPower so that it is not needlessly 

occupied and spending dollars and time and resources on 

situations which may not have a sound basis. So addressing 

nuisance claims. 

 

And while, Mr. Speaker, I would recognize that there ought to 

be a way for a Crown corporation to address and deal with such 

nuisance claims, we have to also be cautious on this topic in 

order to ensure that . . . I’m not saying this is necessarily the 

case in this situation, but one person’s nuisance is another 

person’s well-founded case and complaint that they may have. 

And so it’s important that government and the Crown 

corporation in this instance is not being heavy-handed. But that 

being said, I do recognize the need and that it is appropriate 

from time to time to have the ability to deal with such nuisance 

claims. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another component of the legislation has to do 

with SaskPower’s “ability to access newer technology such as 

fibre optic lines to ensure that SaskPower continues to be able 

to operate efficiently in a changing technological context.” And 

that one sentence was lifted from the minister’s second reading 

speech. And most certainly technology is important. That’s 

been how we have been effective as a Crown corporation over 

the decades, is because our Crowns have been able to act in a 

way that we’re accessing the newest technology, bringing it to 

customers, or allowing better delivery of services to customers. 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is most certainly an important step and 

one that we need to ensure that SaskPower is able to take the 

steps that it needs to do in embracing new technology. 

 

And part of those steps, Mr. Speaker, means treating SaskPower 

in a way that is based in respect and based in the role, the very 

important role that it has and the ability that it needs to have in 

order to be able to invest the appropriate amount of profits that 

it obtains, in order to invest it into new services and better 

services and better infrastructure for its customers throughout 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So technology is most certainly good, Mr. Speaker. And where 

there are areas where there can be increased conservation, I 

think those steps must also be taken. We know that SaskPower 

had a goal of investing at least 300 megawatts of electricity 

efficiency by 2017, and that goal was under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government, Mr. Speaker. We know the 

Sask Party cut that goal back to 100, and that was a change. 

 

And so when we think of those types of changes and we think 

of the broader context of how the Sask Party government treats 

the Crown corporation with respect to taking special dividends 

and weakening its financial picture, to me it’s concerning that 

they now come around, Mr. Speaker, asking for increased 

borrowing capacity for the Crown corporation when in fact 

they’ve taken actions that would not support the notion that 

they have the best financial interests of the Crown corporation 

at heart. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, having made these remarks and had the 

chance to speak about the value of Crown corporations, 

specifically SaskPower, to the people of Saskatchewan most 

importantly, we can’t lose sight of that whenever we’re having 

a discussion about services — whether it’s the role of social 

workers or whether it is northern municipality changes, Mr. 

Speaker, or whether it is the borrowing capacity and some of 

the issues around dividend stripping that we’ve seen from the 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to Sask Power 

— we have to ask ourselves whether or not the steps and the 

decisions being taken are in fact in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So I’ve appreciated the opportunity to speak on this piece of 

legislation. With that, I would conclude my remarks and move 

to adjourn this bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 80, The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



3098 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 81 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 81 — The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Tonight I 

rise to enter into the debate about Bill No. 81, An Act respecting 

the Global Transportation Hub Authority and the 

Transportation Logistics Hub and to make consequential 

amendments to The Municipal Board Act. 

 

It’s been one that’s created a lot of interest particularly here, 

down in the southern part of Saskatchewan. Clearly it’s an 

initiative that has a lot of merit in many different ways. I mean 

clearly it’s creating a lot of economic activity and, as the 

minister made the comment in his introductory remarks about 

how much of our economy really depends on export, and that’s 

certainly the case. 

 

[21:45] 

 

But we really have some questions about how this particular 

piece of legislation and the work itself has been carried out. It 

seems to have created a lot of buzz, some of it, much of it not 

necessarily all that positive, whether you think about the Kal 

Tire situation that arose and how the minister responded to that 

or the Pinkie highway situation or the Pinkie land and the 

concern around that. And so clearly there’s been questions 

about how this is all unfolding. And likewise we have questions 

about the bill itself, and of course we’ll have a lot of questions 

when we go to committee with it. 

 

It’s one that has seen a lot of changes and a lot of growth. And 

we’re not sure whether in many ways this is sort of the kind of 

planning that really . . . You know, when we were talking 

earlier about annexation and the relationships between different 

levels of government, how it’s important that there really isn’t 

bullying taking place, that there’s a sense of fair play and 

people are involved and everybody knows what’s happening as 

you move forward. And clearly this is one where we have a lot 

of questions. There is a lack of transparency around this and we 

have questions. And that causes a lot of concern because when 

you have some of the statements have been made about 

different ways that . . . why it needed to be an authority when 

local zoning bylaws could have probably dealt with the issues, 

we have questions about that. 

 

We have questions about how the transfer or taxes in lieu or 

grants in lieu will be handled. Much of this probably could have 

been handled prior to this so all parties would have been excited 

to see this move forward, but that wasn’t the case, and so we 

have questions. And of course different parts of local authority 

Acts will be used and others will not. And obviously maybe that 

makes some sense because when you’re dealing with 

innovation and you want to make sure it’s the most relevant that 

it can be, that makes some sense. But then it also gives rise to, 

has this been thought out as carefully as it might be? 

And so we have concerns. We have concerns about the integrity 

of the project and the leadership around the project because 

when this kind of stuff happens, there gets to be some 

questions. 

 

And I know why folks in Regina are watching this very 

carefully, the impact that it has, the impact it has on the RM of 

Sherwood, some of the local landowners out there, the impact it 

has on the city, the expectations of the new partners out at the 

Global Transportation Hub and what they expect from the city. 

So all of this causes us to have concern. And so this will be an 

interesting discussion in committee around the issues that we do 

have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s one that I know that’s very, very important 

that we get it right. It could be a model. And I know people 

across Canada are looking at it and saying, is this kind of thing, 

the planning, the appropriate way of doing it? We’re not sure. 

We have a lot of questions and a lot of concerns, and we’re not 

sure about how the different parties, the RM, the city, how 

they’ve been involved in planning that. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that many others will want to 

join into this debate on this bill. Myself, I’d like to move 

adjournment of this bill. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 81, The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 83 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 83 — The Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I’m pleased to rise and enter into the debate on 

Bill No. 83, An Act respecting Foreign Worker Recruitment and 

Immigration Services. And this is one that I am very interested 

in from a lot of different angles, and I do have some comments 

that I think that we need to get on the record here. 

 

And it’s one that as well that came out towards the end of the 

session just before Christmas. Again there was some 

consultations, but I know of groups who didn’t hear about the 

consultations until the very end. In fact they had heard about the 

consultation on the bill and missed out on the actual 

development of the bill, and that was too bad. 

 

And so it’s a significant piece of legislation. And I think it’s an 

important piece of legislation because when we have foreign 

workers who come to this province, we should be making sure 

that we are everything that we think we are in the international 

community — that we’re fair, we don’t exploit people, and that 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3099 

when people come here to work, they’ll be treated as we would 

treat our own; as I said earlier, there’s a concept of decency — 

and we would have people work and be paid just as if they were 

nationals in our own country. And so that’s a very important 

principle that we have. 

 

But we have some questions about this bill. We know that in 

many ways it’s driven by a new reality in Saskatchewan that we 

have many more new foreign temporary workers, and that’s a 

reality, and particularly as well the rapid increase recently of 

new immigrants, new Canadians to our province as well. And 

so that makes for an interesting new economic force in our 

province. So there’s a demand for services that we have to 

meet, and it’s like a cycle that grows. And if it’s managed well, 

it’s a good cycle. But if it’s not managed well, it can be a 

dangerous one. And so this is important that we get it right. 

 

We have heard and we know of circumstances right across the 

country, and in fact just yesterday morning when we heard 

about the Royal Bank, RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] who were 

using temporary foreign workers and the unfortunate 

circumstance, as reported by the media, that the people who are 

actually going to be losing their jobs were training the new 

people. And one of the reporters talked about how the jobs in 

fact actually were going to be leaving and were going to be 

going offshore in the long run anyways. And so this is a new 

reality that we have to take the time to make sure, to make sure 

that we get it right. 

 

And we saw stories. We heard stories here in Saskatchewan of 

temporary foreign workers from Mexico who were employed 

by a local coffee shop here, very tough circumstances, felt they 

were being exploited because of the rent that they were having 

to pay in terms of housing, challenges like that. So this is 

important that we get this right, that people have confidence 

that it is doing . . . that we are going to protect those who are 

vulnerable in our communities. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when I see this Act, first of all I just want 

to say that I found it odd that much of this would not be in the 

new employment Act. Why is it that temporary foreign workers 

are not covered by The Saskatchewan Employment Act? 

 

Now some of this of course deals with recruiters and 

immigration consultants. And ironically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 

I take you back to about 4 o’clock this afternoon when I was 

reading the history and talking about Walter Scott and some of 

the things he was talking about, same issue 100 years ago with 

people being exploited, coming here and essentially having 

immigration consultants and their fees that they were charging. 

Isn’t it interesting how some of these things never change over 

100, 110 years? 

 

So we have the issue of foreign worker recruiters and 

immigration consultants and all of their requirements and how 

that’s important that it’s carried out in a fair and appropriate 

manner; registration of employers of foreign nationals so we do 

know who is actually hiring foreign nationals here in 

Saskatchewan and to make sure we can keep track of that. And 

if things don’t go well, that there can be refusal of registration 

and as well that the certificate of registration is not transferable. 

 

Prohibited practices and standards of services talks about the 

recruitment fee, the referral fee and that type of thing. So this is 

important, important to have right. Then the registry of records 

and sharing of information, and that’s straightforward. Then it 

talks a bit about getting into inspections, investigations, and 

enforcement — part VII. And really that sounds like, to me, the 

part that would really make more sense if it was in the 

employment standards Act. And why is it not in that area? I’m 

not sure. 

 

So if I look at section 33, that . . . And in fact, you know, 

ironically it talks about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the director of 

labour standards, and in fact in just a few short months we will 

not have a director of labour standards. I believe he’s going to 

be called the director, or she’s going to be called the director of 

employment standards — that no longer will we have labour 

standards in this province; we’ll have employment standards. 

And so I don’t know whether right away that we’re going to see 

an amendment in this legislation because it’s not current with 

other pieces of legislation that’s coming forward in this House. 

 

So you have director of labour standards pursuant to labour 

standards Act which, you know, as the plan is, this government 

is, that it will cease to be on mid-May. But of course the 

question then is, and as I raised then, is this whole issue of 

implementation. We don’t know what the implementation plan 

is of these Acts. And so they refer a lot to labour standards Act 

and the director of labour standards, but as I’ve said, that may 

cause some confusion because as of the end of two months, that 

will be no more. 

 

Now the other interesting part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 

discussion around freedom of information and protection of 

privacy Act that is under that director of labour standards Act. 

Now I’m wondering and I’m curious to know and it’s probably 

something that I probably should talk to the Commissioner of 

Privacy and Information, as he . . . what’s his thoughts around 

this. It seems relatively straightforward. They are referring to 

the Act, the FOIP [freedom of information and protection of 

privacy] Act, but interestingly, I don’t know if the employment 

standards Act refers to the FOIP Act. It is a deficiency. I know 

that the commissioner identified that there were a lot of issues 

around privacy, but I have to refer back to that and say . . . and 

find out if they are consistent between the two pieces of 

legislation. 

 

So that is interesting to see. And it talks about the inspections 

and investigations and that type of thing. So again why this 

wasn’t a part of the labour standards, I’m not sure. It seems to 

me part of this should have been and it’s . . . or The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act, Mr. Speaker. I think that 

there’s a real problem here in terms of trying to line up these 

two pieces of Acts. 

 

And so I know that we have seen a real explosion on this. And 

one of the unions that’s very interested in this of course is the 

United Food & Commercial Workers. This has become a real 

issue for them nationally, and they’ve issued a Report on the 

Status of Migrant Workers in Canada 2011, and it refers to a lot 

of issues that we have here in Canada when it comes to migrant 

or temporary foreigner workers. And of course every province 

has a different way of dealing with it. But I think that, you 

know, I really think that it’s important that they talk about the 

big picture, the shift from nation building to indentured 



3100 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

servitude. You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are all 

immigrants except for the First Nations people, and it was just a 

matter of time or just the year that we came. 

 

[22:00] 

 

But there was a point in our history, and it was a very proud 

point, where we looked at immigration as a way to build a 

nation. And now we look at particularly temporary foreign 

workers in a different light. In many ways it often seems it’s 

indentured servitude. They’ve come here, and they don’t get 

very good housing, and their hours of work really are focused 

. . . Their lives are focused around their work. And they come 

here for a short period of time, and then they’re gone again. 

And it’s not really about building our country here. 

 

And I think this is really, really unfortunate, that in fact we 

should be proud of all newcomers, all new Canadians and 

immigrants. And if there was a way that we could make sure 

particularly temporary foreign workers are more connected to 

our communities, that would be a good thing. That would be a 

very good thing. But often they are so tied to their sponsoring 

employer that it’s impossible to see how they will get a chance 

to be part of our province. 

 

And so they’ve talked about some real issues, some real 

concerns about the temporary foreign workers and how it’s 

really grown. You know, when they were talking about the 

years, total entry of temporary foreign workers by province or 

territory from 2004 to 2008, in Saskatchewan we had about 

4,400 — 4,378. And of course that is almost five years out of 

date. Ontario, 91,000, over 91,000 temporary foreign workers in 

that province. Alberta was 57,843. And BC, 58,456. 

 

So you see that it’s a real, real issue in how it’s grown over the 

course of time. And it’s one that we really have to think about 

how do we make sure that we get things right and that we’re not 

exploiting our foreigner workers but that in fact they’re coming 

here and we’re treating them as we would treat Canadians, and 

not exploit them but in fact treating them based on the decency 

principle — one that ensures that they are paid fairly and it’s a 

living wage; their housing is adequate and safe and they feel 

safe in our communities — as we would treat our own. So this 

is very, very important. 

 

I also want to just take a minute, you know, to highlight . . . 

And it was interesting that, and it caused quite a bit of news, 

this report from the University of Calgary, the School of Public 

Policy, and this was J.C. Herbert Emery, the department of 

economics, University of Calgary. He was reflecting on labour 

shortages in Saskatchewan, and this was in January. And he 

was talking about some of the things that we should do and 

some of the things we shouldn’t do when it comes to labour 

shortages. And of course he had five main ideas, specific policy 

advice for the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The first is “Pick up the pace.” And it talks about the slow pace 

of detailed planning for changes to the post-secondary system 

or for encouraging greater labour force participation for 

underrepresented groups. And so this is really important. And 

he says, “Finally, increasing labour-force participation rates of 

Aboriginal Canadians, the elderly, females and . . . [those with 

disabilities] have been major challenges for decades, and 

finding cost-effective policy options remains an outstanding 

task.” 

 

So he really talks about picking up the pace, making sure that 

we encourage greater participation from underrepresented 

groups. And this is something that’s really important. And I 

think that he reflects and he talks about how the government’s 

largely produced targets, general directions, but not detailed 

plans on how to meet those targets. And I think this is really 

important. 

 

He talks about developing cyclical infrastructure planning, and I 

think there’s been a lot of discussion about that, whether that’s 

a good idea or not. Do you have to build all the big projects all 

at the same time, or can you do it over a planned, cyclical 

process so that you can create a more sustainable infrastructure 

process? And I think that’s interesting. And I think that’s, you 

know, it reflects that the current process “creates headaches for 

employers in the peak periods and discourages workers from 

choosing Saskatchewan as a place to live and work.” 

 

And I think that, you know, the “To the extent that public sector 

capital spending . . . has been adding fuel to this fire . . .” So 

maybe what we need to do is think about how can we plan this 

out better so the work is more consistently available? 

 

Make a greater effort . . . Another one is “Make a greater effort 

to leverage the human capital investments made to date.” So 

that’s really, really important. And also interestingly he talks 

about “Don’t forget about the boys,” the fact that we have a 

large group of underemployed males age 15 to 24. Many of 

them completed high school but we need to do more work to 

get them into post-secondary trades. 

 

But the one that really is related to tonight, and this is one that 

may be controversial, he says: 

 

Stay away from temporary foreign workers — [And he 

says] If the policy objective is to develop labour supply to 

meet longer-term growth targets, rather than distributing 

short-term rents to employers, then temporary foreign 

workers should not be part of the province’s 

labour-market strategy. Temporary foreign workers 

undermine long-run labour-market adjustment and skills 

capacity by dampening the wage signals that would lead 

to higher numbers of permanent in-migrants and more 

Saskatchewan residents choosing to invest in skills that 

are in demand. 

 

So that’s a kind of a controversial statement to say, “Stay away 

from temporary foreign workers . . .” But I think what really, 

what is useful to say, let’s have a good discussion about it. You 

know, make sure when we bring temporary foreign workers that 

there’s a real need, that it’s not solving a short-term problem 

that really should be thought of in a more long-term sustainable 

manner. And so I think that’s worth some consideration. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that in many ways I do see 

that the bill has some merit, and it’s one that we’re going to 

have some interesting conversations in committee with. I think 

that it’s important that we handle this well. As I said, that we 

worry too much when we see . . . And I think the minister even 

alluded to the fact that over a four-year period ending in 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3101 

August, some 335 cases were filed with the province’s program 

integrity unit which was tasked with investigating complaints 

and concerns about the mistreatment of foreign workers. Thirty 

per cent of those were not covered by federal or provincial 

legislation. 

 

So hopefully this will solve that and stop the abuse and protect 

. . . and give them some protection. So we need to see the 

commitment for that. I’d be interested to know again what the 

problem with another bill, Bill 85, was the fact that there was 

not any support for implementation. This is a significant bill. 

Will there be support for the implementation of this bill? 

 

You know, it’s really important that we can really count on the 

fact that we can say one thing, but will we actually make sure 

that it’s enforced? High compliance is something that we have 

to strive for in this area. And we can’t just say we have a strong 

bill, a strong legislation, but we have to say we have strong 

compliance. And that’s critical. It’s very, very important that 

we have that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of work on this area, and I 

do think that, as I said, we’ll have lots of questions about this. 

But it’s an important area, and at this time I’d like to move 

adjournment of this Bill No. 83, An Act respecting Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 83. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 86 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 86 — The 

Regulatory Modernization and Accountability Act be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 86, An Act respecting 

Regulatory Modernization and Accountability. 

 

Once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a very short piece of 

legislation. But I want to start off by saying that I think it 

breaches a fundamental point about legislative drafting, and 

that’s the point that if you just read the bill, you have no clue 

what it’s about. The only hint is the word of the title, regulatory 

modernization and accountability Act. 

 

But then you go and look at the Act, and let’s go to section 2. 

Sort of standard clauses. One, there’s a minister who will be a 

member of Executive Council is supposed to administer it. 

Then the word prescribed, in other words there’s things can be 

prescribed in regulations under the Act. Then you go to 

regulation and a regulation is “a regulation within the meaning 

of The Regulations Act . . .” That’s kind of logical. And then . . . 

or it’s “any prescribed information or procedure that is 

administered . . .” Then it defines the term report as a report 

pursuant to section three point one of the legislation. And I’ll 

get there in one second. Then it talks about the reporting period 

being the annual year of the government, which is from April 

1st in one year to ending on March 31st in the following year. 

 

So then you get to what is the heart of the bill, paragraph or 

section 3, and it says, “In accordance with The Tabling of 

Documents Act, 1991, the minister shall prepare a report . . .” 

And then we go up and see well what report is that? Well that’s 

the one under the definition as a report prepared to pursuant to 

this section. And so then it goes on, “. . . a report that contains 

the prescribed information . . . [prescribing] the activities 

undertaken by the Government of Saskatchewan to modernize 

regulations during the reporting period.” 

 

So then it goes on to say like normal, the tabling of this, it 

should be delivered to the legislature. Then it goes on to say 

that the report should be, “. . . published in a manner that, in the 

minister’s opinion, can reasonably be expected to bring the 

report to the attention of the public.” 

 

Then you go on to the final section or section 4, and it says: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 

regulations: 

 

(a) defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of any 

word or expression used in this Act . . . 

 

And then it goes on to basically say everything is prescribed. 

And so practically, on the face of this, the only word that might 

give you a bit of a hint about what the whole Act is about is the 

word modernize. But everything else is going to be prescribed 

in the regulations, and we don’t know exactly what that’s going 

to be. 

 

Now there’s a bit of a hint in the comment from the minister 

where he talks about the word red tape. But practically what we 

have here, Mr. Speaker, is something that obviously was written 

fairly quickly to get it here into the legislature, but it doesn’t 

actually have any of the terms of what it’s trying to do set out in 

the Act. Everything is to be prescribed or it’s to be some part of 

a regulation. And so, Mr. Speaker, this is not very helpful 

legislation for anybody. 

 

I think what the minister was trying to do was to say, what we 

have done for generations of legislative counsel, legislative 

lawyers, legislative clerks who work in this legislation is to, on 

a regular basis, file a report about all the old laws that you’ve 

looked at to see whether or not they’re still relevant. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a long-standing tradition in this legislature. 

It’s done and has been done over many, many decades. And we 

know you can just look at the legislation that’s sitting in the, 

you know, shelves here in the legislature, that there are 

revisions and revised statutes of Saskatchewan where people go 

together and take a look and basically then get rid of pieces of 

legislation, or if it’s the regulations, get rid of regulations that 

are no longer used. 



3102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

What the only thing this legislation appears to add to the whole 

process is that, in the minister’s discretion, he gets to put it up 

into a fancy book of some kind. And so it’s going “. . . to be 

published in a manner that, in the minister’s opinion, can 

reasonably be expected to bring the report to the attention of the 

public.” 

 

Now maybe it’s going to have a red cover or a yellow cover or 

who knows what kind of cover, or maybe it’s going to be 

television ads, so it’s a report that way. But otherwise this is an 

attempt to bring some sort of political spin or public relations 

around a long-standing activity of the Department of Justice, of 

the people who work in that department who are continually 

working with civil servants from all of the other parts of 

government and with members of the public who say, this piece 

of legislation doesn’t seem to have any effect anymore; why 

don’t you get rid of it? 

 

Now I think that this could have been prepared and drafted in a 

way that would give a much clearer perspective on what is 

intended and do it in a way that is complementary to the work 

that’s been done. I think it was a little bit disingenuous of the 

minister to say, oh this is something new that was part of the 

October 2010 Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, I think if you go 

back and look at throne speeches for decades, this concept of 

eliminating red tape in government bureaucracy has been a 

fundamental part of the civil service of Saskatchewan and 

primarily of the people who work within the Department of 

Justice in the legislative drafting, legislative review. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this one could have 

been brought forward in a much clearer or much more defined 

way where you would actually understand what the legislation’s 

about when you look at the legislation. The only way that I’m 

able to understand this legislation is based on the fact of many 

years of working in this particular area. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s unfortunate when there was an 

opportunity to have a much clearer piece of legislation that was 

not presented. It may be that this legislation, especially since 

it’s been introduced quite late in the session, should go back 

and be reviewed and brought back next year. I don’t think 

there’s too much preventing the minister from filing the kind of 

report that she talks about here or from the Premier doing that. 

And it would be better for all of us if this legislation was in 

much better shape than it is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I move that we adjourn debate on 

this piece of legislation which I think should be sent back and 

redrafted. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 86, The Regulatory 

Modernization and Accountability Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:19.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3075 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3077 

 Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3077 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3079 

 Bill No. 70 — The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi nº 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3080 

 Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3082 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3084 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3084 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3085 

 Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3085 

 Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3088 

 Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3089 

 Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3091 

 Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3092 

 Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3094 

 Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3096 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3098 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3098 

 Bill No. 86 — The Regulatory Modernization and Accountability Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3101 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


