




















































Hansard: March 27, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 40A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 27, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2985 

 March 27, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour for me to be able to introduce to you, and then through 

you to all members of the Assembly and to our guests, some 

very special people that are seated in your gallery. We’re going 

to hear more about them in a moment in a member’s statement, 

I think. But we’re pleased to welcome today Michael Regan and 

his mom, Tania. He should give us a wave, and there’s his 

mom, right? And Joel Galenzoski-Deis who is also here with 

his dad, Ryan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve joined us today to celebrate important 

recognitions that have been bestowed upon Michael for his very 

courageous efforts and his cool demeanour when he was forced 

to make a crucial EMS [emergency medical services] call to 

help his friend. Again we’re going to hear more about that in a 

moment, Mr. Speaker, but I want to welcome them and ask all 

members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming Michael and Joel along with parents. 

Sounds like an interesting member’s statement we’re about to 

have. I’m interested to hear more. And it’s inspiring, Mr. 

Speaker, to always see young people who are doing important 

things here in the province and leading by example. So I’d like 

to join with the Premier on behalf of the official opposition and 

welcome these guests to the legislature. Thank you for being 

here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in your 

gallery are 14 public services employees who are here 

participating in a parliamentary program for the public service. 

Participants come from a variety of ministries: Advanced Ed, 

Agriculture, Central Services, Economy, Environment, 

Government Relations, Health, Highways, Justice, Public 

Service Commission, and Social Services. I think that covers 

probably all of us. 

 

They are taking part in various things today, including a tour of 

the building and watching the proceedings today. And I’m 

going to have the opportunity directly after question period, I 

believe, to meet with them and explain what it’s like to spend a 

day in the life of a politician in this building — and some days 

are better than others, but today is a pretty good day — and 

answer some of their questions. So I ask all members to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 

with the Minister for the Public Service Commission to 

welcome the professional public servants here today. 

Saskatchewan has a long track record of a professional public 

service that helps build and shape good public policies dating 

back to the 1940s that we’ve exported to other parts of the 

country, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to say welcome today to your 

Legislative Assembly, and I believe that I’ll have an 

opportunity to chat with you after the minister. So I look 

forward to that as well, and answering any questions and telling 

you a little bit about what it’s like to be an opposition politician. 

 

As well, in the west gallery, I would like to welcome some 

folks from Big Brothers Big Sisters of Canada. Today I believe 

the minister will probably be doing the same as well. But today 

we have here Bruce MacDonald, Wayne Wiens, Irma Van De 

Bon, Kim Megyesi. The youth involved: Brandi Thomas, Avery 

Cornelius, Ryan Hamilton, Nicolaus Goertzen, and Meghan 

Remy. 

 

We appreciated the opportunity earlier today to hear a little bit 

more about Big Brothers and Big Sisters in our caucus meeting, 

and we look forward to hearing more tonight at the reception. 

And thank the organization for all the good work that they do in 

ensuring that youth have the supports that they need to grow 

into the full citizens that they have, should have the opportunity 

to be. So thank you so much for all the work that you do in 

Saskatchewan and in Canada as well. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member from Saskatoon Riversdale in welcoming the 

representatives from Big Brothers Big Sisters to the legislature 

today, to their Assembly. 

 

With them as the member did introduce some of them: Bruce 

MacDonald, CEO [chief executive officer] of Big Brothers Big 

Sisters Canada; Irma Van De Bon-Nicol, Yorkton ED 

[executive director]; Wayne Wiens, Saskatoon ED; Kim 

Megyesi, Saskatoon; Brenda Robinson, Lloydminster; Sharla 

Sept, Weyburn; Anne Lindemann, Regina; Ash Noureldin, 

Regina; Kendra Strong-Garcia, Regina; Catherine Gibbs, 

Regina; Jodie Palaniuk, Regina; Erin Skoretz, Regina; Stacey 

Poss, Humboldt, ED. 

 

And from the Little Brothers and Sisters, Mr. Speaker, Brandi 

Thomas of Yorkton; Avery Cornelius, Churchbridge; Ryan 

Hamilton, Yorkton; Nicolaus Goertzen, Saskatoon; Meghan 

Remy, Saskatoon; Conry Hessdorfer for Humboldt; Brent 

Dawood, Humboldt; Jennifer Koffing, Humboldt. 

 

One other person I’d like to point out in the Assembly with 

them is Jennifer Faryon of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. And the 

reason for that is, Jennifer is actually related to me, is the niece 

of my brother. I consider all the Faryon girls my nieces as well. 

And I’d just like to welcome her specifically to the Assembly 

and ask all members to join me in welcoming all the 

representatives of Big Brothers Big Sisters to their Assembly. 

 



2986 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

two individuals seated in the west gallery, Sheryl Rosom and 

Ashley Rosom. Sheryl is my aunt and Ashley is my cousin, and 

it’s great to have them here in the Assembly today. They’re 

residents of Regina. Sheryl works for the city of Regina and 

Ashley is a kinesiology grad from the U of R [University of 

Regina]. 

 

And when I was first elected in ’07, I crashed at their house for 

a few months. So they’ve always been very hospitable and 

welcoming of me. So I’d welcome them here to the legislature. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, sitting in the east gallery and down on the floor of 

the Assembly here today, I’m proud to welcome some students 

from A.E. Peacock Collegiate in Moose Jaw, along with their 

teachers here today. I’ll welcome their teachers, Mr. Stephen 

Lys along with his wife Catherine Lys that have joined us here 

today. Catherine’s a public health nurse here in Regina. Mr. 

Redstone is here. Ms. Prokopetz is here. 

 

And I had a brief chance to visit these students before 

proceedings here today. And I look forward to sharing a very 

interesting venture that they’re involved with, as a class, very 

shortly that might be quite literally out of this world, Mr. 

Speaker. But I’ll ask all members at this time to welcome these 

students, these teachers to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the member opposite as well. I’d like to join in welcoming the 

students from A.E. Peacock School. I had the great pleasure of 

visiting A.E. Peacock last . . . Well, I guess, this winter I was 

presented with a pair of beautiful orange socks as we celebrated 

their charity fundraising event. And so I’d have my colleagues 

welcome A.E. Peacock to the Chamber. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s not too many groups that get three introductions, but I 

too would like to welcome Mr. Lys and the grade 11 class from 

A.E. Peacock in Moose Jaw. A.E. Peacock is actually in my 

constituency, Moose Jaw North. And they’re one of the largest, 

well they are the largest school, the high school in Moose Jaw 

with a wide range of programs and courses including 

pre-university and some college academics. 

 

I had the privilege of talking to the grade 12 class just last fall 

and found them to be an enthusiastic group, wanting to learn 

and eager to . . . and very interested. Peacock is a very 

interesting high school in Moose Jaw and they have got a lot of 

extracurricular as far as sports and drama and music. You’ll 

recall, Mr. Speaker, that they won provincial awards with their 

Junior Achievement and also national awards through the 

Junior Achievement program. So I want to welcome them here, 

and ask all my colleagues to also welcome the class of A.E. 

Peacock to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 

gallery is an old friend of mine, Terry Sinnett, wearing a lovely 

Dog River Howler rugby jersey, it looks like. And Terry and I 

had worked together at Dale’s House for many, many years, 

and certainly appreciate the work that he’s always done, plus 

his co-workers. And just wanted to welcome him to his 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

proud today to rise to present a petition in reference to 

cellphone service, Mr. Speaker. The people that have signed 

this petition are asking for better cellphone coverage for the 

North, and the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nation, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nations along with the community of 

Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring communities 

in each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition have 

signed this petition from all throughout Saskatchewan, a great 

show of support. But the petition I’m presenting today are 

people that have signed the petition are primarily from Dillon, 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

renters from unreasonable rent increases. And we know on 

February 28th, tenants at 2221 Robinson Street in Regina, an 

apartment building purchased by Castle Mountain Properties on 

February 1st, 2013, received notices of rent increases as large as 

77 per cent. And this is a petition that the tenants put together 

and had done in the media and that type of thing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know that with a growing shortage of 

quality, affordable rental accommodations available in cities 

across Saskatchewan, property management companies are 

buying up property, increasing rents by amounts that are 

unreasonable, unfair, and to many are basically an eviction 

notice. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that these increases are 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2987 

unfair. It should not be allowed by law. 

 

Furthermore, we pray that the government immediately 

enact legislation to regulate the amounts that rents can be 

increased, and protect these renters and all renters across 

Saskatchewan from receiving rent increases so large and 

unfair that they amount to eviction notices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Youth Receives Emergency Medical Services Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to recognize Michael Regan, who is seated in your 

gallery today. Michael is 12 years old, attends Lumsden 

Elementary School in Thunder Creek constituency, and is here 

with his mom Tania, his good friend Joel Galenzoski-Deis, and 

Joel’s dad, Ryan. 

 

Michael recently received two prestigious emergency medical 

services awards for helping his friend Joel who was in dire need 

of help. The incident happened during a sleepover at Michael’s 

Lumsden home in December. Joel woke up and wasn’t feeling 

well. His condition worsened and he had a seizure. Michael was 

the only other person at home. He took action. He phoned his 

mom at work and then 911. 

 

Michael overcame his fears and was able to help Joel and 

provide a really good description of what Joel was dealing with 

until the paramedics arrived. Michael had rolled Joel onto his 

side to prevent him from choking, and closely updated 911 

communications specialists on Joel’s condition.  

 

In recognition of Michael’s efforts, the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region Emergency Medical Services presented him, on 

January 25th, with the Director’s Commendation, the highest 

civilian honour. Michael also received an induction coin. He is 

the first civilian to ever receive this award from the health 

region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this honourable Assembly to 

join me in recognizing Michael on his achievements and the 

receipt of the prestigious EMS awards. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

AIDS Programs Life Skills Graduation 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 

honour of attending and bringing words of congratulations to a 

very special and inspiring event. Last night saw the graduation 

ceremony for the life skills class at AIDS [acquired immune 

deficiency syndrome] Programs South Saskatchewan. The 

ceremony saw the graduation of eight very courageous and 

determined women from the empowering families and 

individuals life skills program. 

To get through, the program demands a tremendous 

commitment on the part of participants and requires a lot of 

support from friends and family. And last night that 

determination and support paid off with reaching the goal of 

graduation. And as one of the grads said, Mr. Speaker, “Once 

you achieve one goal, you want to achieve another.” And 

certainly it was great to hear the proud statement of future goals 

by the grads in terms of education, employment, and healthy 

living. 

 

Thanks to everyone on the board and staff at AIDS Program 

South Saskatchewan for their great work. A special shout-out 

goes to relatively new APSS [AIDS Programs South 

Saskatchewan] Executive Director Sope Ogunrinde, an old 

friend of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and a huge thank you 

very much to program leader, Doreen Lloyd. She makes a very 

real and positive difference in so many lives. 

 

Finally congratulations to the graduates and their families. 

Congratulations to the wonderful MC [master of ceremonies] 

Nicole Leont, to Anna Marie Henry, Sarah Lee Tobacco, and 

Charlie Wahpooseyan. And congratulations to four more 

graduates representing a remarkable three generations of one 

family: Tanya, Deanne, and Chenique Desjarlais, and Wanda 

Manitopyes. 

 

Graduates, keep on living in that good way and keep on making 

us all very proud of you. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Business Supports Close Cuts for Cancer 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

to bring to the attention of the Assembly yet another new 

business in Yorkton. Mr. Mikes Steakhouse Casual, Yorkton, is 

one of the latest to open in my hometown, among many retail, 

manufacturing, processing, service industry, and hospitality 

businesses. 

 

What is special about this locally owned and soon to be 

expanding province-wide business is its owners in their 

community involvement. Dave Nussbaumer, Mark Butchko, 

Dr. Andy Van Heerden, Arlan Maddaford, Glen Gelowitz, 

Blaine Buckle, and manager Barry Hilderman wanted to do 

something special during their opening and support a local 

charity. During the initial three-day invitation-only dry run of 

the restaurant, donations were collected and staff offered up 

their tips. 

 

On their grand opening day of March 16th, they donated an 

amount equal to 10 per cent of their day’s sales. The official 

amount collected, $8,750, went to a cause very close to my 

heart, named in memory of someone very special to me. Funds 

were directed through the Brayden Ottenbreit Close Cuts for 

Cancer local initiatives fund, through the Health Foundation, to 

expand and enhance the services offered by the community 

oncology program at the Yorkton Regional Health Centre. This 

will offer cancer patients more space and local treatment 

options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my family is so thankful to the owners of Mr. 

Mikes and all the people involved in this, and so many other 



2988 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

initiatives over the past 16 years that has helped Brayden 

Ottenbreit Close Cuts for Cancer raise almost $700,000 for 

cancer research and local initiatives that strive to find a cure and 

make the lives of those battling this disease a little better. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Let’s Launch the Saskatchanaut 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Stephen Lys has ideas and 

drive that could potentially take him places literally out of this 

world. You see, Stephen is also known as the Saskatchanaut. By 

day he is a teacher at A.E. collegiate in Moose Jaw. 

 

In January he entered a space race competition by AXE to send 

21 civilians into low Earth orbit in a private, two-passenger 

spacecraft. Yes, his first goal is to enter space, but secondly he 

plans to educate his students on the experience for the next 20 

years. To qualify, he needs to collect as many votes online as 

possible before August 31st. If successful, he will attend a 

five-day astronaut training camp in Orlando, Florida. To win 

this competition, Stephen needs the support of an entire 

province. Currently, Stephen is among the top two competitors 

here in Canada. 

 

Stephen sees this competition as more than just a chance to go 

into space. He wants his students to become excited about 

science. The potential exists for the first teacher-astronaut to be 

a science teacher from Saskatchewan. It’s a special opportunity 

for our province and for our students.  

 

I invite everyone to visit Stephen’s Facebook page at 

Saskatchanaut, and of course to vote and promote this 

endeavour. And I would ask this Assembly to congratulate Mr. 

Stephen Lys on his work thus far to earn this opportunity and 

for already effectively engaging and exciting his students about 

science. Let’s launch the Saskatchanaut into orbit. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Saskatchewan Scouts Awards Ceremony 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this past weekend 

I had the honour of bringing greetings on behalf of the province 

at the annual awards ceremony for the Saskatchewan scouts and 

leaders. The ceremony recognizes the amazing efforts and 

dedication of Saskatchewan scout youth and adult leaders. 

 

I would like to identify some of these impressive awards that 

were presented: the Chief Scout’s Award for completing a 

number of requirements identified in the scout program; the 

Medal of the Maple for Distinguished Youth Service, an award 

created by the members of the national youth committee 

designed to honour those youth who have significantly 

contributed to the movement and the spirit of scouting. The 

Gallantry Award for especially meritorious conduct was 

presented to one of the youth members. The Outstanding 

Service to Scouts Award to recognize youth leaders and adult 

leaders, and the awards for Adult Long Service of 10 to 35 

years was also presented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was an inspiring event to see all the worthy 

scout members receive these prestigious awards. I ask all 

members of the Assembly join me in recognizing the award 

recipients, as well the 100,000 scout members across the 

country for their dedication and service to their organization, 

their communities, their province, and to their country. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Cupar Canucks Win Championships 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, many 

communities in rural Saskatchewan will be turning off their ice 

plants this weekend to mark the end of another hockey season, 

and that certainly is the case in my hometown community of 

Cupar. But Mr. Speaker, I must tell you that they will be 

marking an extremely successful hockey program this year, 

especially when it comes to our senior hockey team, the Cupar 

Canucks, who last Friday evening defeated the Wynyard 

Monarchs to claim the Highway Hockey League 

Championship, which is without a doubt the most competitive 

senior hockey league in all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there’s certainly more to this story, because last Sunday 

afternoon the Canucks travelled up to Wynyard to play that 

team again. And this time they defeated the Monarchs 4 to 1 in 

a close game to claim the Provincial Senior ‘A’ Championship, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s rather unique, Mr. Speaker. The Canucks were the 

southern representatives and the Monarchs were the northern 

representatives, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to congratulate the 

players, the coaches, the fans on a job well done, Mr. Speaker. 

But also I’d like to, for the record, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to set 

the record straight. We’ve all heard the member from Arm 

River-Watrous claim that his constituency is the centre of 

hockey excellence. Well we all know now that Last 

Mountain-Touchwood is the centre of hockey excellence. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Health Care Efficiencies 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, one of these things is not like 

the other. In recent days, the Leader of the Opposition has been 

attacking this government for asking health regions and 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to find $54 million in 

efficiencies within a record-setting health budget of $4.84 

billion. Maybe the Leader of the Opposition should better 

manage his flip-flops. 

 

The leader states on his website that he wants more efficiencies 

built into our public health care system. Then this past Monday, 

the Leader of the Opposition stated in this Chamber that “The 

health . . . system should obviously be efficient, and we should 

be more efficient.” 

 

Since the Leader of the Opposition is suddenly against 

efficiencies, he must also be against the good results that come 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2989 

from a well-managed and increasingly efficient health care 

system. He must be against the $70 million invested this year in 

the Saskatchewan surgical initiatives aimed to lower surgical 

wait-lists province-wide. He must also be against the $10 

million saved through improved management of the blood 

inventory. He must also be against the 600 more MRIs 

[magnetic resonance imaging] being delivered in the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region. 

 

We’ve seen him flip-flop on Keystone. We’ve seen him 

flip-flop on uranium. And now we’re seeing him flip-flop on 

health care efficiencies. Mr. Speaker, will the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] leader ever stop his flip-flops? Maybe today 

we’ll find out. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Children in Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week we raised 

the case of children as young as nine months old, Mr. Speaker, 

being placed in the care of the staff at Dales House. Mr. 

Speaker, the staff were asked to care for children in a former 

classroom even though their facility is not set up to do such 

work. It shouldn’t be this way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Ministry of Social Services and the minister has had a week 

to sort out what has happened with these children, children in 

the care of the minister. So my question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Premier — not to the minister; to the Premier — is: why did 

infants and toddlers as young as nine months end up in the care 

at an at-risk youth facility? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 

members know or at least they should know that our first goal is 

to ensure that children can stay with their families. If we can’t 

do that, Mr. Speaker, then we try to go to extended families. If 

we can’t do that, then we go to foster homes. And if we can’t do 

that, we’ll go to community-based emergency operations, and 

then they would go to Dales House. An emergency might be 

something like road closures or storms or keeping a sibling 

group together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we had to take someone to Dales House, Dales House 

is one of the facilities, one of the last facilities left in the 

province that is still government run. And I think the members 

opposite should know that they, under their government, were 

the ones that stopped these homes. In fact it was in 1999 was 

the last time there was a government-operated residential space 

for children opened in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask all the members to direct their 

comments through the Chair. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Whether the incident 

or the situation for a child is emergency or not, that doesn’t 

change the level of care that these children deserve, regardless 

of their situation. 

Mr. Speaker, Dales House is intended to house not young 

children, not toddlers, but troubled teens and pre-teens. The 

teens in Dales House are there for a variety of reasons, Mr. 

Speaker, including violence as well as, Mr. Speaker, problems 

arising in homes because of sexual abuse. These are high-risk 

teens, Mr. Speaker, with high-risk needs. Dales House is not 

intended or designed for toddlers and babies. And it’s not 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to have these very young children 

sharing accommodation very close to teens with these very 

serious concerns. 

 

To the Premier: does he think it’s appropriate for toddlers and 

babies to be housed in the same facility as teens and pre-teens 

who have very tragic and complicated lives? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my first concern and my 

government’s first concern is making sure that children are safe. 

I’m well aware that the staff at Dales House are very capable of 

looking after the children there. And we also know that the 

children that were there were in a separate room and they were 

double doors away from the trained staff that we have in Dales 

House. And we have trained social workers who were actually 

there looking after those individuals. The staffing levels there 

are three to one. It’s the same level that was there when the 

previous members were in government, and I assure you that 

the children were safe. That is our first concern always. And I 

think the members . . . There was a quote from an individual at 

Dales House that’s saying right now: 

 

I understand that younger children are being placed at 

Dales House on emergency basis in cases where there are 

no other placement. I don’t have a serious issue with this 

if it can keep Dales House open. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what we should be talking about is the 

safety of children at all times. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question is not 

about the staff’s desire to have the safest conditions possible. 

It’s not about the staff’s willingness and their competence and 

their determination to have the situation safe. The situation, Mr. 

Speaker, is about whether or not Dales House facility is 

appropriate for babies and toddlers. 

 

It’s not appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to have babies and toddlers 

sleeping in a modified classroom. I’m told the children sleep on 

cots, and there are no bathing facilities in the classroom. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m told that the children are bathed downstairs in 

the basement, and this is where the staff normally bathe the 

facility’s dog. 

 

This is not an appropriate living situation for these children, Mr. 

Speaker. Even when emergencies present themselves, we have 

to have the highest level of care for children under the control, 

under the responsibility of the provincial ministry. My question 

to the Premier: does he think it’s acceptable to have these 

conditions for babies and toddlers at Dales House? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 



2990 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m aware that we had one 

incident of where trained social workers were used at Dales 

House in an emergency situation. These are trained social 

workers, and these children were there 48 hours. And when I 

talk about an emergency situation, Mr. Speaker, I’m talking 

about storms. I’m talking about poor roads. I’m talking about 

not having the opportunity to put those children into other 

facilities where we would have them. 

 

I also trust that the workers at Dales House were looking after 

them to the best of their ability, and I know that’s very good. I 

also know that the children the next day attended daycares and 

medical appointments and they went on as they would if they 

were in another home. Mr. Speaker, our goal is to look after 

those children. And I think the members opposite should be 

using the word children more often than they’re talking about 

the actual staff at a facility when their real goal is to talk about 

politics instead of children. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this issue is about the 

appropriateness of young children, babies, and toddlers being 

housed, being cared for in the same facility as pre-teens and 

teenagers, Mr. Speaker, individuals who have had very 

complicated lives, individuals who have been exposed to sexual 

abuse, who have been exposed to violence, Mr. Speaker. And in 

my opinion, Mr. Speaker, it’s not appropriate to have very 

young children exposed potentially to that interaction with 

much older children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: will the Premier ensure that the 

proper resources are being put in place, Mr. Speaker, so that 

babies and toddlers who find themselves in Dales place not 

because . . . Dales House not because of their own fault, Mr. 

Speaker, but will he ensure that the proper resources are put in 

place so that this type of exposure, this type of placement, does 

not occur in the future? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the member 

opposite knows that some of the proper resources means things 

like funding, the fact that we’ve put $91 million more into child 

welfare than what the members opposite did. The member 

opposite should know also that the number of children coming 

into care is down 19 per cent. 

 

When the children are put into a facility like Dales House, it is 

an emergency situation. We try not to put them in hotels like the 

members opposite used to do. We have to make sure the 

children are cared for by trained individuals. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we know that the individuals that are looking after our children 

are caring about them. We know that we are looking after them 

to the very best of everybody’s ability. We know that there are 

now 900 child welfare spaces in the community. There’s 31 of 

them left in government-run organizations. And I know every 

one of the individuals that are working in these organizations 

are looking after our children. And they’re worried about 

everything, including the safety of our youngest children to the 

ones that are 12 and 15 years old. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Venture Capital Funds 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government 

announced in its budget that it’s eliminating the tax credit for 

labour-sponsored venture funds, funds that allow residents to 

invest in their own province. In Saskatchewan, funds such as 

Golden Opportunities and SaskWorks have been popular, a very 

popular fund choice for retirement savings with more than 

50,000 hard-working people making an investment or an RRSP 

[registered retirement savings plan] as part of their retirement 

plan, and putting their savings to work right here in our 

province. 

 

These investments have provided hundreds of millions of 

dollars to capitalize our province, boosting our local economy, 

creating jobs with local investment, and generating big returns 

to the province by way of direct revenues from income tax, 

corporate tax, PST [provincial sales tax] and GST [goods and 

services tax]. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: was he consulted on 

this cut before the federal budget? And what has he done to 

stand up for Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, specific to the question 

that the member asks, whether we, whether I as the Finance 

minister in Saskatchewan, whether the province of 

Saskatchewan was consulted on the plan of the federal 

government to eliminate the labour-sponsored venture capital 

tax credit, the answer is no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the second part was what 

case has he brought forward on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 

But it wasn’t just the federal cut that hit these funds. This 

government, with their budget, also hit these funds. In that 

budget the government lowered the investment cap from $110 

million to $80 million, something that will pull tens of millions 

of dollars out of our province by way of investment, something 

that is important to the people of our province. 

 

Many people are trying to make an RRSP investment in their 

own province, and that will be denied. Their investment will be 

pushed to New York or Toronto. Mr. Speaker, economically it 

doesn’t make sense to reduce the investment by Saskatchewan 

people in our province. So will he work with the industry, the 

funds here in Saskatchewan, to find a better solution than his 

hasty cut? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Ministry 

of Finance has undertaken a review with the Ministry of the 

Economy of the labour-sponsored venture capital. We made 

some changes last year to the kinds of actual investments that 

the funds could undertake. And those changes were made that 

took effect for the fiscal year 2013. As we move forward . . . 

2012, I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. As we move forward we’ve 

looked at the entire investment funds. Those were at about $90 

million last year. They weren’t at the full $110 million that was 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2991 

the maximum allowed under the program. And we took a look 

at whether or not those funds could still continue. And we 

wanted them to consolidate and look at innovation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that there are many opportunities in 

this province that can deal with innovation, and we are now 

concentrating on ensuring that the $80 million that now we 

hope will still be reached by those investors who want to 

contribute to that plan will now be able to have those dollars 

channelled more into the area of innovation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister actually introduced the 

most egregious new change introduced by the Sask Party 

government with these funds. And it’s that government’s 

decision to unilaterally change the mandate of these funds, 

forcing them to focus on much higher risk investments, directly 

impacting the return of more than 50,000 hard-working 

Saskatchewan people receive on their precious retirement 

savings. It’s not fair. 

 

The savings must be held in the fund for eight years, and of 

course people invested based on the mandate and the prospectus 

that was in place. Now those funds are being interfered and 

monkeyed around with by their Premier changing the 

prospectus on the fly and on his own, placing hard-working 

people’s retirement savings at risk and denying them the return 

they deserve. Mr. Speaker, how does this government think it’s 

fair to interfere with the hard-earned retirement savings of 

Saskatchewan families and deny them the best return possible? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the decision for 

investment by a particular fund, which has now been capped at 

$40 million for any fund that would be accumulating the 

investments, those decisions will be made by the fund 

managers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a venture capital fund, so we’ve indicated 

that there are specific areas that we don’t want them to invest 

in, Mr. Speaker. We do not want them to put venture capital 

dollars into current oil and gas companies that are currently 

operating. Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that there are 

opportunities for those investment dollars to pursue other 

venture capital initiatives. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, nothing has changed in that respect. The 

analysis will still be done by the investment fund managers. All 

we have done, Mr. Speaker, with the goal to ensure that we 

have a balanced budget, is we have reduced the amount of tax 

credit that now government will be responsible for. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s simply not true that the cut was the 

only impact. This government has also interfered and 

intervened by directing the mandate, changing the prospectus 

on the fly of where those funds will be placed. I hope the 

Finance minister knows that change. 

 

Many Saskatchewan families have been utilizing these funds as 

an important part of their retirement savings, and they placed 

those funds into those funds based on the prospectus and the 

investments that were in place. And their investment is locked 

in for eight years. 

 

Investors have rights. And with these savings funds, a change of 

this nature should be voted on by the investors, not foisted upon 

them recklessly by the Premier. It’s certainly not fair. It doesn’t 

make sense. And it may not even be legal. To the minister: is he 

sure the unfair, unilateral change he’s making to retirement 

savings of so many Saskatchewan families is even legal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the venture capital funds 

will continue. The dollar figure that we have now reduced as far 

as the total cap that we have put in place is now not a maximum 

of 110 million. The cap is a maximum of 80 million. 

 

We continue to see investment — last year, Mr. Speaker, the 

$90 million that we saw. The average investment by individuals 

was about $4,200. So, Mr. Speaker, those kinds of investments 

will continue. It will be up to now the relationship between the 

investor and the investment fund managers to ensure that the 

funds are being placed in an area of return. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to ensure that there is continued 

growth, that there is continued investment in this province of 

Saskatchewan. That’s why the changes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Decision Regarding Film Employment Tax Credit 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

minister did not answer the question as to why his government 

spent taxpayers’ money on a contract to spin their senseless 

decision to end the film tax credit. That contract was supposed 

to create an easily understood narrative for the minister to spin 

the decision that government had already made months before. 

Let’s be clear. The contract came long after the Sask Party had 

decided to kill the film tax credit. And it came while that 

minister sat as a member of the Treasury Board. He knew the 

budget plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the minister couldn’t answer either here in 

the House or to the media, I will ask again: why would the 

government spend taxpayers’ money to find a rationale to end 

the tax credit after they had already decided to cut it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. The hon. member did raise this issue in question 

period yesterday, and she alluded to a contract that was in her 

possession. I can inform you, Mr. Speaker, and the House, I had 

never seen that contract until minutes after question period 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker. I never saw the product of what that 

contract was to deliver with respect to the services. But that 

contract had been entered into, Mr. Speaker. Nor had any 

member of Executive Council at the time — last year, March of 



2992 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

2012 — seen that contract or the services that were delivered on 

behalf of the Ministry of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport at 

that time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I can inform the House is that the ministry at that time 

entered into a contract late in March to engage a third party 

consultant — an economist, Mr. Speaker — to help them with 

some language that was going to be delivered on budget day 

with respect to the changes in tax policy on the film 

employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker. There was an awful lot of 

information presented to cabinet during budget finalization last 

year, Mr. Speaker, things around econometric modelling, things 

around economic impact analysis, things around volume 

production, Mr. Speaker. This economist was assisting senior 

officials to advise the minister as to how to deliver that 

language in understandable fashion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — But they didn’t understand it when they made 

that decision, Mr. Speaker? You’d hope the government would 

have a rationale for a decision that they had already made. 

When the Sask Party government decided to kill the film tax 

credit, they had ministry communications people to help with 

the spin. Mr. Speaker, they also have well-paid Executive 

Council staff to help with the messaging. But instead they spent 

even more money to review the tax credit and come up with 

talking points after they’d already made the decision to end it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this does not make any sense. Why would the 

Sask Party spend even more taxpayers’ money on the film tax 

credit after they decided to cut it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in my 

previous answer — perhaps the hon. member didn’t hear it — 

was that senior ministry officials engaged the assistance of a 

third party consultant, an economist in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not unlike the NDP did in 2004 

with respect to engaging the services of an economist outside of 

government, Mr. Speaker, to help them with some of the 

estimation with respect to the econometric modelling, Mr. 

Speaker. What I can tell you is senior ministry officials, in 

preparing the minister of the day for budget communication 

with respect to a very complex tax issue, had engaged the 

services of this particular economist who had expertise in the 

film tax credit system, Mr. Speaker, to help them in messaging 

a very, very complex issue on budget day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I can tell you is what’s becoming interesting 

now, Mr. Speaker, is we’re starting to see a clear delineation, a 

clear delineation on policy and budget, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

starting to see this government made a very difficult decision 

last year to move away from refundable employment tax credit. 

We moved to Creative Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, a $5 million 

fund available for all of our creative industries in this province 

now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The record shows 

the Sask Party scrambled every day following the budget 

announcement. The Premier himself looked for spin lines to 

solve his PR [public relations] problem of his own making. The 

very next morning following budget, he looked for urgent help 

on how to spin, then an hour later he used those spin lines on 

Twitter. As the week ended, his office looked for further help 

on how to respond to the complaints they were getting. Even 

though the Sask Party government had spent taxpayers’ money 

just days before to gain supposedly better messaging, they still 

had to scramble for urgent lines on what to say. 

 

The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party did not have the 

rationale for cutting the film tax credit when they made that 

decision, Mr. Speaker. Even the Premier couldn’t articulate 

without help why the government made this senseless decision. 

Mr. Speaker, why can’t this Premier admit his mistake and 

reverse the government’s ill-informed decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here we are one 

week from the day that the Minister of Finance tabled this 

government’s sixth consecutive balanced budget, the balanced 

budget for the years 2013 and 2014, Mr. Speaker. And we 

continue to get questions from the Culture critic for the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, on last year’s budget. More than 

happy to talk about this, Mr. Speaker, more than happy to talk 

about this, and if that’s all the criticism they have for this year’s 

budget, we’re more than happy to talk about this. 

 

What we do know in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, is a new 

agency, Creative Saskatchewan. The legislation was introduced 

yesterday. It’s going to be creative, Mr. Speaker. A $5 million 

fund, brand new dollars available to all of the creative industries 

in this province. And we know that the Culture critic, Mr. 

Speaker, the Culture critic doesn’t care about the other creative 

industries in this province aside from film. Her quote, Mr. 

Speaker, “It will do nothing. It does nothing for the economy, 

and that’s the bottom line.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they would reinstate a refundable employment tax 

credit. They would take the money from farmers and they 

would take the money from rural and urban municipalities to 

fund it. That’s their position, Mr. Speaker. That’s not this 

government’s position. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Surgical Wait Times 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that minister can yell all he wants 

about this issue but everyone in the province knows it was a 

mistake to eliminate the film employment tax credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on another issue, on the issue of health, the 

Canadian Institute of Health Information is an independent, 

not-for-profit organization that provides high-quality data for 

our health system. Their latest report on surgical wait times 

shows that the percentage of Saskatchewan patients receiving 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2993 

hip and knee surgeries within the benchmark time frame has 

actually worsened over the last three years. My question to the 

Premier: why is that number going in the wrong direction? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, if the member is asking, 

Mr. Speaker, why surgeries, the wait times are getting longer in 

this province, I am not sure where that member’s getting that 

information, Mr. Speaker because everybody in this province 

knows that surgery wait times have been reduced over the last 

three years by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We set a firm target of three months by the end of 2014 and we 

know that there is still work to do. But, Mr. Speaker, it is safe to 

say that this government is doing more than any other 

government across Canada in setting targets, in funding those 

targets — 70 million additional dollars for the surgical wait 

times, Mr. Speaker. And we’re certainly going to be able to 

provide sooner surgeries for our residents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, government news releases may 

say that wait times are becoming shorter, but if you look at 

independent organizations — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just the 

opposition saying this — if you look at what CIHI [Canadian 

Institute of Health Information] says, Mr. Speaker, it says a 

different story. 

 

In 2011 half of those needing hip replacements had surgery 

within 102 days. In 2012 that wait grew to 120 days. In 2010 

half of those needing knee replacements had their surgery 

within 135 days. Last year the wait was a full 30 days longer. 

These are the numbers of CIHI, Mr. Speaker. These are real 

people in Saskatchewan waiting for surgeries. My question to 

the Premier — not to the minister; to the Premier: why have the 

wait times increased by up to a month? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

since taking over government from the NDP, this side of the 

House, the government, has made some strategic investments in 

health care. We’ve also made some strategic decisions. We 

implemented the surgical wait times initiative. We decided to 

deploy private clinics within the public system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know the results from our surgical wait times 

initiative. We know that the record is this: wait times of 6 

months, down 55 per cent; wait times of 12 months, down 83 

per cent; people waiting 18 months and longer, down 92 per 

cent. Surgeries completed, Mr. Speaker: 99.6 per cent now done 

within the 18 months; 97 per cent within 12 months; 90 per cent 

in six months; 78 per cent in three months. These are the facts 

of the surgical wait times initiative in this province. 

 

Another $10 million in this budget, and the only people that 

oppose it are those members. And do you know why, Mr. 

Speaker? Because we’re using private clinics in the public 

system. That’s what that member said, Mr. Speaker. We’ll put 

our record against his plan every day of the week. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier can become angry if 

he wants to, but that doesn’t change the fact of the matter that 

CIHI is telling a very different story than what the government 

news release is saying. 

 

My question to the Premier: the numbers released by CIHI, 

when we look at important procedures here in the province, 

show that wait times are getting longer. Does the Premier agree 

with CIHI? Does he agree with this independent, not-for-profit 

organization or does he rely only on the news releases that 

come from his own government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. We talk to 

patients in the province of Saskatchewan. We talk to those who 

are doing the surgery, the nurses and the doctors. We actually 

hire the right complement of nurses that we need, unlike 

members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from time to time we even take, we even take 

counsel from a former NDP minister. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

sometimes we get some advice from the former Finance 

minister for the New Democratic Party under Mr. Romanow 

when he was the premier. She pointed out in a recent paper on 

this particular subject when she was looking at the importance 

of health care delivery, here’s what Janice MacKinnon had to 

say: “Saskatchewan has an excellent example of the use of 

private clinics in the Saskatchewan surgical initiative . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the members don’t want to hear the 

answer to the question, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to hear it 

because it’s an NDP minister saying, “The initiative was 

established in 2010 by the Health department to reduce wait 

times,” Mr. Speaker. They may lose their voice heckling 

because they don’t like the facts. But they ought not to worry 

because health care for everything, including throat problems, is 

more quick now in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the members come to order — all of 

them. Will the member for Athabasca come to order. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I will table the 

Detail of Expenditures — The Election Act, 1996 — Provincial 

Constituencies 2011-2012. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave to make a motion regarding absence of members. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, and I like to be able to speak 

without interruptions, if I may. The Government House Leader 

has asked for leave to move a motion regarding absence from 

the legislature. Is leave granted? 

 



2994 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence for Members to Attend Conference 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That leaves of absence be granted to the members for 

Prince Albert Carlton and Saskatoon Riversdale for 

Monday, April 29th to Wednesday, May 1st, 2013 

inclusive to attend the International Conference on Urban 

Traffic Safety in Edmonton, Alberta, on behalf of the 

Special Committee on Traffic Safety. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for 

Prince Albert Carlton and Saskatoon Riversdale from 

Monday, April 29th to Wednesday, May the 1st, 2013 

inclusive to attend the International Conference on Urban 

Traffic Safety in Edmonton, Alberta, on behalf of the 

Special Committee on Traffic Safety. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

again to continue off where I left off last night. Just to recap 

briefly some of the things that I was discussing, we talked a 

little bit about child care and where we had some concerns on 

this side of the House, with 60,000 live births in the last four 

years, that 500 spaces a year is not enough. 

 

I pointed out the fact that the subsidy system is completely 

broke and the fact that we paid out . . . Last year in a written 

question I asked what the range of subsidies were, and we 

learned that it was 25 cents was the bottom end. So I was 

wondering if that was in fact something that we paid via direct 

deposit or perhaps a cheque, Mr. Speaker. 

Anyway we have some very critical issues with child care. You 

can’t go a week or two without a story in the media about the 

pressing demand for child care. We have a government who 

doesn’t have a sense of how many licensed child care spaces we 

actually need, Mr. Speaker. So child care was a big issue. 

 

Education, I touched a little bit about education and this 

government’s focus on testing rather than teaching. I talked a 

little bit about some of the strains that I see in Saskatoon 

Riversdale. A classroom, this is not an anomaly, but a 

classroom with 31 grade 1 students, Mr. Speaker. Ten minutes a 

week — that is not an exaggeration, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken 

to educators who’ve said that with English as an additional 

language students, this one particular classroom, their kids were 

getting 10 minutes a week support for English as an additional 

language. 

 

This government, education, they often ask us what would we 

do differently. Well I can tell you an NDP administration would 

put lots of emphasis on education, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely 

imperative that we support educators to do their jobs well, to 

ensure that capital as well is supported. But there’s much to do 

on the education front, Mr. Speaker, and building schools by P3 

[public-private partnership] models probably isn’t one of the 

best methods. I’ll get on to talk about that a little bit as well. 

 

I mentioned last night the increase of government debt that 

we’ve seen. All one needs to do is look at page 57 of the budget 

summary to see that every year this government’s debt, contrary 

to its billboards and its spin, that debt is on the rise here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The balanced budget notion, it’s interesting. I mentioned 

yesterday, and we’ve talked about this in this House before, 

around flooding and not allocating money for flooding when 

we’ve heard that the average of the last three years in payouts 

has been 105 million. In fact, this government has only 

allocated 2.65 million, which is considerably less than 105 

million, Mr. Speaker. They’ve said, oh just in case, we’ve got it 

in the growth and stability fund. But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, 

they haven’t budgeted for it. They’ve chosen not to budget for it 

so they could try to convince the general public that they have a 

balanced budget. 

 

I left off in my speech talking a little bit about arts and culture 

and sport, Mr. Speaker, that particular element in my critic 

portfolios. I’ve talked about the government, how they’ve held 

the line on the Western Development Museum funding, which 

is causing huge difficulties at that organization which does great 

work in terms of ensuring that school children, families, visitors 

to our province, and newcomers have an opportunity to get a 

real feel for what this province is about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I talked a little bit about the Arts Board. And yes, the Arts 

Board did get a five per cent increase this year. But I also 

pointed out, read into the record, this government’s track record 

from 2008-09 onward. They’d like to take credit for the ’07-08 

budget, which was 10.534 million for the Arts Board. But that 

was an NDP administration at that point in time, Mr. Speaker. 

We actually saw a clawback in ’08-09 to 6.094 million, a small 

increase ’09 and ’10, holding the line in ’10-11, and a small 

increase in ’11-12, holding the line in ’12-13, and then an 

increase this year. 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2995 

So the bottom line is, it is the 65th anniversary of the Arts 

Board this year. And this is the body that supports the creators 

in being able to create, Mr. Speaker. And if the Arts Board 

wouldn’t have gotten this 5 per cent increase, it would have had 

a huge impact and continue to have a huge impact on this 

organization. So I’m very glad that the government has seen fit 

to give the Arts Board 5 per cent. But it hasn’t, it has not been 

stellar in its support for the Arts Board in previous years in its 

whole administration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Had an opportunity to talk a little bit about the film tax credit. 

We’ve heard again from a minister today . . . We hear and we 

see a government who made a decision to cut a very critical 

program to a key component, one of our creative industries, Mr. 

Speaker, without any economic analysis. They made a decision 

to cut it, and then they call in an economist at the last minute, 

the final hours, Mr. Speaker. What kind of policy-making is 

that? It’s not fair. It’s not right. I don’t think the citizens of 

Saskatchewan think that that was a good idea, and I think we 

deserve better than that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The irony actually is, Mr. Speaker, that one of their spin lines 

that they used last year is they were opposed to grants, Mr. 

Speaker. This government has said that they are opposed to 

grants, and they called the film tax credit a grant, which it was 

not. And at one point I think the Premier said it was a cheque 

whether or not you spend the money, which is patently false. 

The money had to be spent here in Saskatchewan and it often 

was paid out two years after the fact, Mr. Speaker. But I think 

it’s ironic that the grant piece that this . . . Some of their spin 

line was all about grants, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the transition funds that this government set up as they’re 

transitioning to Creative Saskatchewan has provided some good 

support for some of the other creative industries for sure. But I 

need to point out that that, Mr. Speaker, is a grant. So how is it 

that a year ago they were diametrically opposed to grants in 

their talking points, but have turned around and put in place a 

grant, Mr. Speaker? A real grant, Mr. Speaker. They put in 

place a true grant in place. So we have yet to see what the 

money in Creative Saskatchewan, how that will be 

administered. But if it is going to be administered like the 

transition fund, that is a grant. So how can you say a year ago 

that you’re opposed to grants and then do the exact, do that 

exact thing that you are so opposed to, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[14:30] 

 

One of the things that I find quite disturbing is I’ve engaged in 

some heckling conversation a few weeks ago with three 

members, and one of the members had told me that I was 

making a mountain out of a molehill. And the two other 

members agreed and said, oh we haven’t heard from anybody, 

Danielle. What are you talking about? Well I can take them to 

my office and show them the stack of email and stack of letters 

that I’ve received from people from across this province, Mr. 

Speaker — people involved in the film industry, people who 

benefited from film industries, catering companies, hoteliers, 

lumberyard folks, people who have clothing boutiques. The cut 

to the film employment tax credit has a ripple effect across the 

province. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? It also has a very real personal 

impact. I think they, the people who have been so negatively 

impacted, will be distressed to hear that their government was 

asking for financial analysis just shortly before the budget, long 

after they’d made the decision. This was not a thoughtful 

decision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so the people who have really experienced the negative 

personal consequences, rightfully so, have very little faith or 

trust in this government, Mr. Speaker. I had mentioned last 

night a gaffer who had built his career here in Saskatchewan — 

27 years. He had come from BC [British Columbia]. He wasn’t 

working in the film industry that whole time, but he was in on 

the ground floor in this industry and had to sell his house at the 

end of October and has moved back to BC to declare his 

residency in BC to be able to be eligible for their film tax credit. 

But it is hard to break in in a new community, Mr. Speaker. So 

do you know where he is? He’s in Manitoba working on a 

project, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had mentioned last year I had the opportunity . . . I won’t call 

it a privilege. It’s actually incredibly sad. I had three pages of 

names of people who have left Saskatchewan or were in the 

midst of planning to leave Saskatchewan because of the cut to 

the tax credit because they couldn’t earn a living. I had 

mentioned the gaffer originally from BC who has had to go 

back there and after he had made a life here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I talked about two producers who were the co-creators of Dust 

Up that was featuring crop dusting. And one of those 

co-producers is from Nipawin, Mr. Speaker, and she was one of 

the co-producers and is an award-winning actress. She actually 

is expecting, Mr. Speaker, she and her husband. And they have 

had to move to Toronto. So there are future grandparents who 

are very unhappy with this government’s decision to cut the tax 

credit — huge personal ramifications. These are just a couple of 

stories. 

 

And as I said I took 90 seconds last fall and read into the record 

many of the people who had been impacted. But it goes far 

beyond just direct film workers, Mr. Speaker. So I find it quite 

galling that three members could say that we haven’t heard 

anything, Danielle. We haven’t heard anything on this. The 

reality is this had a huge impact on so many people, and not just 

those who worked in the industry. And again I am beyond 

belief at this government. One of its spin lines was that we 

don’t believe in grants. And they’ve gone ahead and their 

support of the industry now is a grant. 

 

I need to point out this minister thinks that somehow I am not 

supportive of any of the other creative industries. That’s the 

farthest thing from the truth, Mr. Speaker. I spend a great deal 

of time fostering relationships and connecting with people. I 

know that they have some concerns about the board of directors 

for Creative Saskatchewan. There’s some potential mistrust that 

they have. They’ve seen what has happened with the 

filmmakers in this province, and there’s much trust to be still 

earned, Mr. Speaker, from the creative industries. And I need to 

point out that you could have raised the bar for the other 

creative industries without killing an entire industry, Mr. 

Speaker. We could have elevated the other creative industries 

without knocking one down, Mr. Speaker. So that I think is 

important to note. 



2996 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

So this government does not have a stellar record on arts and 

culture, and we’ll see how Creative Saskatchewan shakes out. I 

have many questions. In estimates, there’s some changes to 

some budget lines. I know the industry organizations are very 

concerned. They have funding in place, I believe, I’ve been told 

until the end of August. The industry organizations are the 

direct link with the creators, Mr. Speaker. They are the voices 

of the many creators in this province, and they’re concerned 

that their funding may not be in place beyond August. So we do 

have questions that we’ll take into estimates, into committee, to 

get a further sense of this budget, Mr. Speaker. But we do have 

concerns. It is not — contrary to the picture that the minister 

has painted — all rosy. This government doesn’t have a stellar 

record on arts, culture, and heritage here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Just a couple other things. I know that I had ample time last 

night to speak, but there’s a few other things that I would like to 

touch on, Mr. Speaker. There are a few other things that I would 

like to touch on, on the many papers that I have on my desk and 

many sticky notes. I noticed in the budget summary, I think it’s 

important to note that page 13, the supports to the most 

vulnerable, it talks about: 

 

The following programs will receive decreased funding 

due to lower utilization, perhaps an indicator of a growing 

economy and increased opportunity to find employment. 

 

It talks about “. . . a $3.1 million utilization decrease for the 

Saskatchewan Employment Supplement.” Well part of the 

reason that there’s decreased use of that supplement, Mr. 

Speaker, is the parameters haven’t changed since 2008. The 

government did make a change to it in 2008, but that is already 

several years past, Mr. Speaker. And I’m actually hearing from 

people; I’ve had a few people come into my office. 

 

I flagged for the minister, last year, a concern around the 

employment supplement where there was one couple. She was a 

child care . . . She had a home child care. He worked for the 

school board and got a small raise, which is awesome. They 

were very excited about their small raise. But they discovered 

that that small raise bumped them out of receiving the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement, Mr. Speaker — just 

barely. 

 

And it wasn’t the employment supplement itself that meant a lot 

because it didn’t. It actually wasn’t a huge amount of money. 

But what comes with that employment supplement are family 

health benefits. And this family was cut off of family health 

benefits. He was a diabetic, some of their children had 

challenges, and she had some health challenges. So getting the 

increase in fact ended up being very hurtful. And the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement was created to help 

ensure that people . . . it paid to be employed, Mr. Speaker. So 

we’ve seen a case of that. 

 

Just about a month ago, Mr. Speaker, we had another individual 

who is in school finishing her master’s and has done a little bit 

of contract work in her master’s. Her husband has worked for 

many years, and he was laid off. He’s on unemployment . . . or 

he’s on employment insurance, pardon me. And they were not 

eligible for the employment supplement just the way the 

formula worked. They were initially told that they made too 

little money to be eligible for the employment supplement. So 

we’re still trying to get to the bottom of that issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is exactly who the Saskatchewan employment supplement 

was designed for. It was designed to encourage people to work 

and to . . . but a little extra support so they could stay in the 

workforce, Mr. Speaker. This is not a family . . . The second 

family, not dissimilar from the first, aren’t people who have any 

interest in being on social services or social assistance. Nobody 

really does, Mr. Speaker. Living on social services or social 

assistance is not a pleasurable experience, Mr. Speaker, to say 

the least. 

 

But the reality is this second family doesn’t know what they’re 

going to do when his employment insurance runs out, actually 

April 1st it runs out, Mr. Speaker. They’re in a bit of a bind. So 

for the government to postulate perhaps an indicator of a 

growing economy and increased opportunity to find 

employment, I need to put on the record that it is because the 

parameters of that program haven’t changed. That is the 

problem there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would say the same point around child care parent subsidies. 

And I mentioned this last night when I talked about child care. 

So parent child care subsidies, something called the turning 

point hasn’t changed since the early 1980s, Mr. Speaker. This is 

the point at which you’re eligible for the full subsidy. The 

reality is it is $1,640, $1,640 and money over that you don’t . . . 

You slowly lose the full subsidy. That $1,640, Mr. Speaker, is 

not far above minimum wage. So people who make minimum 

wage are not much more, aren’t eligible for the full child care 

subsidy. That makes absolutely no sense. So I would argue that 

this nice language around increased opportunity to find 

employment isn’t the true picture here. The true picture is the 

fact that parameters around important programs have not 

changed, Mr. Speaker. So I think that that’s important to point 

out. 

 

There’s just a couple more things that I want to talk about, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve talked a little bit about Dales House today. And 

Dales House is one of the organizations that provide service to 

at-risk children, young pre-teens and teens who are high risk 

and have high needs, Mr. Speaker. We have a similar facility in 

Saskatoon called Red Willow. 

 

They were told last June that they are on the chopping block, 

and the language that the minister used is “when capacity in the 

community is created,” Mr. Speaker. But what this has done, 

these two organizations . . . Well the minister within just a 

couple of months closed some other facilities with public 

servants operating them. But these two in particular are on the 

chopping block. So what has this done? It’s made it very 

difficult to find staff because why would you want to go work 

at a facility that you know that’s closing? So it’s made 

recruitment of staff more challenging, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Morale at these facilities is low. They’ve been told that they 

needed to have a plan, or a plan would be in place February — 

so last month. And then they were told no, no, no, we’re still 

closing you still, and we’ll have a plan in place by June. So 

these staff members are working under duress, Mr. Speaker. 

And they’re also being called on . . . And happily these are 

professional individuals, but they are picking up the slack and 

being asked to care for children who have . . . children outside 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2997 

of their mandate, under six, six and under, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We heard about one case two weeks ago where there were 

children, five children under three. But the reality is, I’ve been 

told, that it’s not an anomaly to have children not that young, 

but outside of the mandate, under six, stay in this converted 

classroom, Mr. Speaker. That is not acceptable. And I think the 

worst part is that this is being used as a contingency plan, Mr. 

Speaker, for children in the care of the ministry when they’re in 

a pinch. And to have that hanging over their heads that they’re 

closing, all of this creates for not very good circumstances for 

the employers first of all. Well not first of all, but for the 

employers on one hand and for our most vulnerable citizens, 

our little people, Mr. Speaker. This is not fair or right. And this 

budget confirmed in fact that there is a plan to in fact close 

Dales House and Red Willow, and I think that that’s incredibly 

unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The thing about these government-run facilities is they don’t 

have the option to turn people away. Some of the CBOs 

[community-based organization], if some children are more 

challenging . . . And there are lots of children who have had 

extremely challenging upbringings. There are CBOs who 

provide excellent care, but they have the ability and the option 

to say, I’m sorry, we can’t take that individual. But these 

government-run facilities are there as a last resort, Mr. Speaker. 

And so there’s some, in light of especially what we heard today, 

but in light of the budget and . . . This uncertainty for these 

organizations is huge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to talk also, Mr. Speaker, about an organization in my 

own, or not an organization, a facility in my own constituency, 

actually, of Saskatoon Riversdale. Many of you might be 

familiar with Gordie Howe Bowl, which is a football stadium. It 

currently has grass. And the Hilltops have played on it. The 

minor football teams, the high school football teams play on it. 

But last year there was . . . They’ve been hoping to put in 

artificial turf for many, many years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so this last November, the city put in . . . They have a 

memorandum of understanding with an organization, a 

foundation called Friends of the Bowl, and they are trying to 

raise money for artificial turf — 4 million. They need $4 

million for turf and about 5 million for a clubhouse basically, 

Mr. Speaker, or a service building. So they are getting about 

$600,000 from the city. But I know that they were, having 

spoken to them a couple of months ago . . . This is where I have 

many questions in estimates. But they were hoping to get some 

money from the province to help with artificial turf, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And what will this artificial turf do? Well not only will it 

support minor football. It’ll support our high school football 

teams. But the opportunity to put artificial turf in means that we 

have soccer, spring football . . . or spring baseball, softball, field 

hockey, ultimate Frisbee, the high school athletics. So I’m 

curious to find out a little bit more in the budget and to see if 

there actually was money for this. 

 

I know that the member from Regina Dewdney took part . . . or 

wrote a report, actually, called Growing Minor Football in 

Saskatchewan, which was a $20,000 expenditure, before he 

became an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], Mr. 

Speaker. And one of his recommendations was in fact for the 

provincial government to put in place a program to support 

minor football and that involved some capital infrastructure, 

Mr. Speaker. I’d asked a couple of years ago in written 

questions if anything had been done about this, and they’d said 

the report had been received and that’s it. 

 

[14:45] 

 

But I think we need to look to this report, Growing Minor 

Football in Saskatchewan. We need to look at this 

government’s commitment to the active families benefit and to 

the rink grants that have gone out. And I know that Gordie 

Howe Bowl is not only a huge part of the community of 

Saskatoon Riversdale or the constituency of Saskatoon 

Riversdale, but it’s an important facility for the Hilltops of 

which I know we’re all incredibly proud here in this Assembly, 

especially those of us from Saskatoon. And myself, my father 

actually was a former Hilltop and was part of the dominion 

championship team in the ’50s. So this is really near and dear to 

my heart that Gordie Howe Bowl gets artificial turf sooner than 

later. They were hoping to have it up and running, artificial turf 

in by 2014, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is about, this is about encouraging physical activity but 

it’s also about safety. You get a rutted field, you have knee 

injuries. You have all kinds of things that happen when you 

have players on grass, Mr. Speaker. And as the season goes on 

and on, it gets more and more rutted and causes huge problems, 

Mr. Speaker. So I hope that this government somewhere in the 

budget has seen fit to put in place some dollars for minor 

football capital and as per the recommendations from the 

member from Regina Dewdney, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the one last thing that I’d just like to touch on is — in my 

many notes here on my desk — P3s, Mr. Speaker. So this 

government has voiced its support of P3s, and there are big 

concerns with them. And we’ve heard some of the big concerns. 

And I have some huge concerns when the government talks 

about bundling schools together in particular. 

 

There’s a good case in Edmonton actually, a K to 9 

[kindergarten to grade 9] school in Edmonton that currently has 

742 students enrolled, and it was built on a P3 model, Mr. 

Speaker. That area has grown and grown, and they’ve run out of 

space in that particular school. They’ve had to forfeit 

enrichment classes like the art lab and the wood, shop 

classroom as well as some of the smaller auxiliary rooms. They 

are totally out of room, Mr. Speaker. And the reality is that area 

is growing, and there are no plans for the construction of a new 

school in the area despite pre-existing areas zoned for school 

development. So the school boards aren’t planning on building 

any more schools so you would think, well perhaps you could 

add portables which isn’t ideal, but perhaps you’d add portables 

to that school. But because that school was constructed over a 

P3 arrangement — and there are restrictions in this particular 

deal for adding additions to the structure — in this case they are 

restricted to adding two portables to this school, and those 

portables cannot house more than one classroom each, leaving 

this particular school with the capacity to expand by only two. 

So we have some concerns on how P3s play out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that the IMF [International Monetary Fund] 



2998 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

has flagged is that if you’re doing a P3 you have to make sure 

it’s on the books. We have some concerns that this government 

is deciding to pursue P3s in an effort to build infrastructure but 

to keep that infrastructure off the books as they have done with 

flooding relief, those kinds of things. So we will be watching 

this very carefully and continuing to read the literature on P3s 

which there have been, there are some huge problems with P3s, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I know that I have more to say, but I know that there are 

many others in this Assembly who would like to enter into the 

debate on this budget. But I need to say I will not be supporting 

this budget for all the reasons that I’ve mentioned last night and 

today, Mr. Speaker. I will not be supporting this budget and I 

will be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to take part in the budget debate. Since my appointment to 

cabinet last May 28th, I’ve been very busy naturally. And I’d 

just like to thank my constituency assistant, Janet. Obviously 

I’m not able to be in the office as much as I was before my 

appointment to cabinet. She’s doing a great job looking after 

constituency concerns and keeping me informed of what’s 

happening in the constituency. Of course I’d like to also thank 

my staff in my office — Megan, Selena, and Theo — who’s 

doing a wonderful job in the office and dealing with my 

ministerial duties. 

 

On budget day of course it was a very important day for the 

province. And of course we had quite the extreme weather 

through that period. And I had a delegation come from Biggar 

as well as Borden and Langham that came down for the budget 

presentation, and some of them made it back home and some of 

them had to stay overnight in Regina. But I’d like to thank all 

those individuals who came down to Regina to listen to the 

budget. 

 

Of course I think an acknowledgement and a thank you needs to 

go out to a number of people that worked very hard putting this 

budget together, and naturally the Finance minister, the 

Treasury Board, the Finance officials naturally, Premier, 

cabinet, and all caucus members who worked very hard in the 

preparation of this year’s budget. As we know, Mr. Speaker, 

this is a . . . The budget’s theme is balanced growth. It’s a 

balanced budget. It’s the sixth consecutive balanced budget by 

this government. And that’s a very important point to continue 

to make, that we were one of the . . . I think the only jurisdiction 

in Canada that have had six consecutive balanced budgets. And 

I suspect we’ll be the only budget that’s brought down this year 

that is balanced. 

 

And it’s balanced, Mr. Speaker, in the General Revenue Fund 

and also on a summary basis. That’s very important. The 

auditor recognizes that. And I think a lot of the thank you has to 

go out to our Finance minister and officials who worked very 

hard to make sure it was a balanced budget. But it’s also . . . 

Besides having the finances balanced, it also balances the 

priorities of the Saskatchewan people. It’s a balanced approach 

to address both the opportunities and challenges that come with 

growth. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, overall the spending is up 3.1 per cent in 

this year’s budget, a modest and sustainable increase that allows 

us to make key investments. I’d like to . . . Just before I go into 

some of the health areas and some of the areas that are in my 

area of responsibility, I’d just like to make a few points from 

the budget document about different priorities in my 

constituency. 

 

And you know, my constituency of Biggar is much like, well 

like all constituencies in the province; it has a growing 

population. Biggar and the constituency has a very active and 

growing manufacturing sector. Agriculture is obviously very 

important. And so we have a lot of growth, more people coming 

into the province. You know, there’s pressures on infrastructure 

as far as real estate and communities that are developing new 

subdivisions, and people are building new homes. So it’s very 

gratifying to see that happening in the constituency, more 

people living and working in the constituency, paying taxes and 

taking part in a very active, robust economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just allow me to make a few points about schools 

in the budget. And for the first time in over 40 years, our 

schools are seeing significant increases in enrolment as our 

population grows and our families are making Saskatchewan 

their home. And that’s very true in the constituency of Biggar, 

not only the communities that are close to Saskatoon, but the 

ones who are further out. Biggar, Wilkie and other communities 

that are further out are seeing that impressive growth and 

increasing enrolments in the schools. 

 

So our Finance minister stated in the budget that it is a total 

funding of 119.6 million, an increase of 7.2 million into funding 

for a number of school projects: 36.9 million to continue 

construction on 10 third party grant funded projects; 31.9 

million to continue construction on shared ownership projects; 

28.2 million, an increase of 9.5 million, for preventive and 

emergency maintenance, renewal, capital asset management, 

and 40 relocatables; 18.7 million for the construction of major 

capital projects in Hudson Bay, Leader, Martensville — they’re 

approved in principle, 2012 and ’13 — 1.9 million to begin 

planning on new projects in Langenburg and Gravelbourg; $1 

million for expansion of 15 new pre-K programs; and $1 

million for automating the school capital request process. So 

schools and education is a very high priority with this 

government. 

 

The other, obviously, area of concern this year is flooding, and 

I’d just like to state some of the items in the budget concerning 

public safety and sound stewardship. The budget has addressed 

and provided $2.7 million for provincial disaster assistance 

program claims and operations; $1 million in new funding to 

provide capacity for provincial emergency response; and 2.2 

million, a $760,000 increase, for the provincial contribution to 

capital upgrades as a partner in the provincial public safety 

telecommunications network. So our budget addresses those 

concerns and we’ll continue to be . . . The province and the 

government will continue to be there for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Under partnerships and municipal government, the 2013-14 

budget builds upon the commitment to provide steady and 

reliable revenue to our partners in municipal governments. And 

there’s a considerable amount of money that’s directed towards 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2999 

the municipalities so that they can meet their commitments and 

work in partnership with the province to better the lives of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And of course under the Ministry of Agriculture, under the 

leadership of the member from Thunder Creek, the Minister of 

Agriculture will continue a commitment to fully fund the 

province’s portion of Growing Forward program to support the 

businesses and interests of Saskatchewan farmers: $198.3 

million, an increase of $21.2 million, to fund crop insurance; 

20.7 million to fund AgriStability under the new Growing 

Forward 2 agreement; $32.4 million to fund AgriInvest under 

the new Growing Forward 2 agreement; and more than 70 

million in funding for non-business risk management programs 

under the new Growing Forward 2 agreement. 

 

And so again, Mr. Speaker, it shows our commitment to rural 

Saskatchewan, to agriculture, to municipalities, to schools, to 

parents, children, and the infrastructure. This is a very 

responsible budget. 

 

Just one thing, Mr. Speaker. As the Ministry of Agriculture and 

the minister announced, just to remind all the producers that 

March 31st is the deadline for crop insurance enrolment. So I’d 

just like to remind producers that the deadline is fast 

approaching, and if they’re going to enrol, they should do that 

very soon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to be part of a government 

that is making health care a priority. Since our government has 

taken office, we’ve increased the health budget by 41 per cent. 

The regional health authorities received 46 per cent more 

funding than they did when members opposite were in 

government. We have over 1,000 more nurses practising in 

Saskatchewan than we did five years ago. Our promise was 800 

nurses, and we’ve far exceeded that. We have over 270 more 

doctors practising in Saskatchewan today than we did five years 

ago. Since our government took office, the number of people 

waiting more than six months for surgery has dropped by 58 per 

cent thanks to our surgical care initiative. These are real results, 

Mr. Speaker, and this year’s budget builds on that success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year we will spend a record of $4.84 billion in 

health care in Saskatchewan. That means a 3.5 per cent increase 

in health care spending over last year. That’s an increase of 

$163 million this year. Our regional health authorities will get 

$3 billion in this budget. That’s an overall increase of 4.5 per 

cent. The Saskatchewan surgical initiative will receive 70.5 

million this year, an increase of 10 million over last year. The 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency will get an 8.6 per cent increase 

in funding, which equals $12 million more than last year for a 

total investment of $150.7 million. This year’s budget invests 

almost $164 million in health care infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, a 

very impressive budget for health care. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, after 16 years of NDP government, they 

devastated rural Saskatchewan. Closure of 52 hospitals. Since 

we formed government in 2007 we have building . . . continued 

to try to rebuild the province and the infrastructure all across the 

province, but in particular in health care. And in rural 

Saskatchewan this means that we continue to work on new 

long-term care homes or integrated facilities. And I’d just like 

to list the homes that are being worked on right now in 

communities of Rosetown, Tisdale, Shellbrook, Radville, 

Redvers, Maple Creek, Kerrobert, Kelvington, Kipling, and of 

course my home community of Biggar. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, since my appointment as Minister of Rural 

and Remote Health last May, April 28th, a big part of my 

responsibility has been to tour Saskatchewan. And I have 

visited 45 communities since my appointment in May 28th, and 

it’s been a very rewarding tour of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

And the communities definitely have a common concern. One 

of the common concerns is physician recruitment and retention. 

And I’m going to talk a bit more a little later about the very 

impressive things that our government has been doing since we 

formed government in 2007. And we’ve built on what the 

former Minister of Health has done since 2007 in doctor 

recruitment and retention. 

 

Besides the important capital investments I just mentioned of 

the 13 new long-term care homes, we also are building a 

children’s hospital, announced the building of Moose Jaw 

hospital, the Plains surgical centre in Regina. So we’re moving 

ahead as in the budget to where we’re committing money 

towards the building of the North Battleford hospital. So we’re 

making great strides in capital investment as well. 

 

There was $23.6 million overall investment in rural health 

services. Something that the people in rural Saskatchewan 

speak very highly of is STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Society]. We have committed $10.5 million to continue to 

support STARS. We promised to bring STARS to 

Saskatchewan. We’ve delivered that, and we’ll continue to 

invest in STARS which plays a very key role in rural 

emergency health care. STARS is now operating out of both 

Regina and Saskatoon and, to date, STARS has already flown 

over 220 missions in Saskatchewan. This is a commitment to 

emergency care in rural Saskatchewan and it’s very beneficial 

to the people in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also committed in the budget 9.8 

million for primary health care. There’s a $4.3 million increase 

from last year. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have been working 

diligently on setting up collaborative emergency centres and 

this $4.3 million will go to generally as primary health care. But 

of course collaborative emergency centres is a form of primary 

health care, and this investment will allow us to establish four 

to five collaborative emergency centres, or CECs, in the coming 

year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just a brief explanation of what CECs are. 

They’re open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, staffed by a 

primary health care team during the day, and a team that 

includes a nurse and a paramedic with physician oversight by 

telephone or telehealth at night. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is one of the things along with many 

other initiatives that we’re going to bring into rural 

Saskatchewan, will be really a recruitment tool and a retention 

tool to keep physicians working in the province and attract 

physicians to work in rural Saskatchewan because the 

physicians in the community will not be on call. The CEC will 

be looking after the nighttime on call, and the physicians will, 



3000 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

as part of a primary health care team, will be looking after clinic 

duties, same-day, next-day appointments for people. So that’ll 

keep people out of the emergency centres at night, and the 

physician will not be on call 24-7. That certainly gives a better 

quality of life, and that will certainly be one of the things that 

will keep doctors in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Just briefly, Mr. Speaker, $3 million dollars was set aside for 

rural locums. That’s a $1.5 million increase from last year. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, right now we have 12 to 15 doctors rotating 

through our locum pool at a given time. This investment will 

allow each southern region and the North to recruit two 

region-based locums. We’ve seen this program is very 

successful and is helping to stabilize physician services in 

communities like Kipling, Fort Qu’Appelle, and Kindersley. 

 

Now the other important piece of rural health care was the 

announcement made by the Premier at SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities]. We’ve committed 

$250,000 for the rural physician recruitment incentive. This is a 

promise made by our government and kept by our government, 

and we expect that this year about 15 new doctors will qualify 

for the program and about 30 doctors per year will qualify once 

the program’s fully utilized in five years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are things that are in the budget, but 

they were just building on all the many initiatives that we’ve 

taken as a government in health care. And of course the creation 

of the Physician Recruitment Agency, or Saskdocs, is working 

very well. They are attracting doctors to go through the 

made-in-Saskatchewan assessment. And the physician 

recruitment incentive of course will be doctors that have . . . 

Recently graduated doctors in the last two years that are 

Canadian-trained and international grads who have been 

recently graduated in the last three years are eligible for the 

incentive. And of course they need to work for five years in 

rural Saskatchewan to take advantage of the $120,000 that’s 

being available for the incentive. 

 

So we expect great things out of these announcements, and to 

keep and attract doctors into rural Saskatchewan. That builds 

upon of course, we’re not . . . We’re also, are educating more 

doctors. So we have . . . We’ve increased the medical seats at 

the university, 40 . . . and now there’s a total of 100 and 

doubled the number of residency seats from 60 to 120. So we’re 

training more doctors, and we’re certainly attracting more 

international grads to come to our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just one or two more points right from the budget that is 

noteworthy — $27.4 million, a 3.2 million increase for the 

seniors’ income plan; a $10 per month increase beginning in 

July 2013, to a maximum of $25 per month to clients living in 

special care homes. That’s a continued commitment to our 

elderly and seniors and people of this Saskatchewan. Also, Mr. 

Speaker, $2 million for an innovative home care service pilot 

for seniors in Regina; $350,000 of an increase to expand 

Alzheimer’s First Link services. Again, Mr. Speaker, a 

commitment to the people of Saskatchewan in health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other colleagues that would 

like to speak. But I just want to once again say our government 

has a balanced growth budget, and we’re controlling spending. 

We support a growing economy and growing population, and 

this budget supports those in the province who are most 

vulnerable like seniors, those with disabilities, and women 

facing violence. This budget provides an increased funding for 

municipalities, for highways and infrastructure, to fill more 

training opportunities for education and of course for health 

care. Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I will be supporting the 

budget motion. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The theme of 

the 2013-14 provincial budget is balanced growth. This year’s 

budget is balanced. It controls spending and continues to make 

investments to ensure better quality of life for all Saskatchewan 

people. It also delivers on the commitments we made in the 

plan for growth. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan remains the only province 

with a balanced budget. This is key to achieving our growth 

plan goal of 1.2 million people by 2020. Through prudent 

management of the province’s finances including debt 

reductions, saving hundreds of millions of dollars in interest 

payments, we lay a solid foundation for the future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I continue on, I would like to take 

this opportunity to thank some people. Firstly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, my colleagues at Treasury Board for their knowledge 

and guidance during this budget process. As a new member of 

the Treasury Board, I was very impressed by the presentations 

of all ministries. I would like to thank the Finance ministry and 

the Finance minister for all the support and resources needed to 

obtain a balanced budget decision. I would like to thank all the 

third parties for their presentations and future plans. This 

includes universities, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology], health regions, and school 

divisions. I would also like to thank my constituency assistant, 

Cheryl Hume, for her dedication to the constituents of Cut 

Knife-Turtleford while I spent extra time on this budget 

process. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is our government’s sixth consecutive 

balanced budget. Our population grew by 21,690 people in 

2012 to an all-time high of 1,089,807 people according to 

Statistics Canada. From January 1st, 2008, to January 1st, 2013, 

Saskatchewan’s population increased by 82,302 people. 

Saskatchewan’s 2012 population increase of 21,690 people 

consisted of a natural increase of 5,672, a net interprovincial 

in-migration of 2,647, and net international in-migration of 

13,321 people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to talk about how this 2013 

budget supports municipal growth in Saskatchewan. 

Municipalities will receive record revenue sharing for the third 

straight year, helping to foster economic growth and enhance 

the quality of life for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in 2013-14, 264.4 million in municipal revenue 

sharing will be provided, an 11.4 per cent increase from 

previous years and a 108 per cent increase over the 2007-08 

budget. 

 

Overall provincial funding to municipalities in 2013-14 will be 

$362 million, up 19.6 million from the 2012-13 budget and up 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3001 

120 million or nearly 50 per cent from the 2007-08 budget. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in 2013-14 urban revenue sharing for all cities, 

towns, villages, and resort villages will rise 11.9 per cent to 

$170 million. Revenue sharing for rural municipalities, which 

includes organized hamlets, rises to 8.5 per cent to $74.7 

million. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 2013-14 budget will also provide 50.9 

million in provincial support to municipal infrastructure through 

a number of ministries and program funding including: 33.4 

million from the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure 

through programs that support municipal roads, urban 

connectors, and truck hauling agreements; 13.3 million from the 

Ministry of Government Relations through provincial and 

federal-provincial-municipal cost-shared infrastructure 

programs; 3.2 million from the Ministry of Parks, Culture and 

Sport for the building communities program. 

 

This budget also provides funding to the municipalities from 

other ministries, which include grants for libraries, urban parks, 

policing, and other programs totalling $46.7 million. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to offset an average 67 per cent 

increase in property values over the last four years, the 

government is lowering the education property tax rates on all 

classes of property to keep the impact of reassessment revenue 

neutral overall. The new education mill rates will be 2.67 mills 

for agricultural land, reduced from 3.91 mills; 5.03 mills for 

residential property, down from 9.51 mills; 8.28 mills for 

commercial property; and 11.04 mills for the new resource 

property category. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 2013-14 agriculture budget, which 

affects most of the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency, there is 

significant investment. The agriculture budget will be 406.9 

million for 2013-14. 

 

Crop insurance coverage levels will increase to a record of $194 

per acre in 2013, more than double the coverage offered in 

2007. This year’s $198.3 million crop insurance budget is the 

largest in the history of the program and a 91 per cent increase 

since 2007. 

 

This budget also has an increased commitment to research and 

innovation with a record $27.7 million agriculture research 

budget, a 104 per cent increase since 2007. This includes a $3 

million investment in the Global Institute for Food Security. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 2013-14, the Ministry of Agriculture 

will provide 71.2 million for strategic incentives through the 

federal-provincial Growing Forward 2 framework, an increase 

of $25 million over the previous framework. In addition to 

research, funding we have targeted will target to areas such as 

rural water infrastructure, trade and market development, and 

farm business management. Further details of the Growing 

Forward 2 programming will be answered in April. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a record 4.84 billion invested for health 

care for 2013-14. We’ll continue to reduce surgical wait times 

and improve the quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. The 

investment marks $162 million or a 3.5 per cent increase over 

last year’s health budget. In total, health care funding has 

increased 1.4 billion or 41 per cent over the past six years, 

demonstrating the government’s commitment to improving 

health care for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan surgical initiative will 

receive 70.5 million in 2013-14, an increase of $10 million or 

16.5 per cent. This will result in 7,000 additional surgeries over 

last year. Since 2007 there are 61 per cent fewer people waiting 

more than six months for surgery, and 46 per cent waiting . . . 

waiting more than three months for surgery. Ninety per cent of 

patients who had surgery between August 1st, 2012 and January 

31st, 2013, received their procedure within six months and 78 

per cent received it within three months. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency will 

receive 150.7 million to provide enhanced cancer care services, 

a 12 million or 8.6 per cent investment over last year. Annually 

the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has more than 6,400 

new-patient appointments. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, recruiting doctors in rural areas and 

keeping them once they’re there is a huge priority for our 

government. The new rural physicians program will provide 

120,000 in funding over five years to recent medical grads who 

establish a practice in rural communities of 10,000 or less. This 

program will help improve patient access to physician services 

in rural areas. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, 9.8 million, an increase of 4.3 million, for 

innovative approaches to improve access to primary health care. 

This is including the introduction of the collaborative 

emergency centre, or the CECs, to improve health services for 

Saskatchewan people. CECs are designed to enhance areas to 

high-quality, comprehensive primary health care that is capable 

of dealing with unexpected illness or injury in a timely fashion. 

One of these centres may open in Maidstone in the Cut 

Knife-Turtleford constituency this year. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, 350,000 for the expansion of Alzheimer 

Society’s First Link program as well as to establish six 

dementia advisory networks to improve the system of care and 

support for people with dementia, their family, and caregivers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 2013-14 health budget is the biggest 

ever. The health budget has steadily increased over the last six 

years, not like the last five years of the NDP government where 

173 doctors, 455 registered nurses and registered psychiatric 

nurses, 155 pharmacists, 95 physiotherapists left Saskatchewan 

to work elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last four to five weeks I have sat here and 

listened to the NDP talk about how we the government don’t 

listen to the people of Saskatchewan. I would say that this 

budget truly indicates what the people are saying. They want 

responsible, balanced budgets, and that’s what they are getting. 

 

I would suggest to the opposition that they listen to learn, not to 

respond. Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a AAA credit rating, 24,400 

new jobs last year in the province, and the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada at 3.8 per cent, along with 

another balanced budget, Saskatchewan is very well-positioned 

to lead the country in economic growth. 



3002 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the motion but will 

not be supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

honoured to have this opportunity to discuss a few points about 

this year’s budget. But first I would like to thank my staff who 

are in our office in Fairview — Adrienne Stone, who is on 

maternity leave after having twins, you are sorely missed but I 

know you are where you need to be, and Karen Favel, who 

works tirelessly in the office. And I also wanted to welcome 

Aaron Slippery who is with our office on a casual basis and is 

one of many vulnerable youth. And I hope that he uses this as a 

stepping stone to a career that he will love — working with 

computers. 

 

So one of the factors I would like to focus on is how this budget 

focuses on people all the while bearing in mind fiscal 

responsibility and the challenges of growth. Although I do have 

an educational background in business, I have grown up the 

daughter of a social worker who has worked for many years in 

the Indian Child and Family Services field. The value of 

investing in people is certainly not lost on me and those serving 

on the government side of the House. I am one of many 

members who serve on the child and youth agenda committee.  

 

And when I look at the diverse background of my constituents 

in Saskatoon Fairview, I see myself reflected back in a lot of 

their eyes. Mr. Speaker, my constituency consists of a large 

portion of new immigrants of Filipino and Southeast Asian 

origin. We have a vibrant Muslim community and a growing 

Afro-Canadian population and of course those who have lived 

in the area for generations of Eastern European origin. And also 

we have a vibrant First Nations and Métis community. In the 

words of Tupac Shakur, and I quote, “I am a reflection of the 

community.” Also my daughter being a reflection, as her father 

is from a different country as well. 

 

This is the new Saskatchewan — families moving to 

Saskatchewan from a variety of different countries and very 

diverse cultural backgrounds — very different than the 

Saskatchewan that I grew up in and very different than the 16 

subsequent years that the party opposite had governed. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m grateful to the people of Saskatoon Fairview. I 

represent all of these people, and I am very honoured to be their 

voice. 

 

And I would just like to have the following on record before I 

start discussing the budget. Mr. Speaker, no one time in my life 

previous to public life has my ethnicity been brought up so 

many times in this Chamber by a couple of the members 

opposite. As Frederick Douglass once said, “The soul that is 

within me, no man can degrade.” 

 

I just would like to reflect a little on this topic and put on the 

record that I am not just of First Nations and Métis ancestry. I 

must put myself in the shoes of those who I represent when I sit 

in this Chamber, which in essence means that I am an 

assortment of all the cultures that exist in my constituency. I am 

also a combination of the economic backgrounds of Fairview. I 

do not pick and choose a select few from my constituency and 

solely concentrate on representing them. I take into account all 

those who live in my constituency, regardless of ethnicity or 

economic background. 

 

And that brings me back to what is most important in 

Saskatchewan — its people. Mr. Speaker, a population of 

people who total 1,089,564 and working towards the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth, a bold goal of 1.2 million living 

here by 2020. I wanted to speak a little bit about the investment 

that this government has in its people. Mr. Speaker, being the 

child of someone who has worked in child welfare for much of 

her career, watching my mother’s dedication to the children of 

Saskatchewan has affected me in a profound way. Also one of 

my constituents is the executive director of Foster Families who 

does very important work. 

 

This brings me to my next topic. In particular I would like to 

talk about the child welfare transformation, which funding 

consists of $7 million to increase supports for agencies that 

provide services for children in care and their families and 

800,000 for new intensive family support programs to assist 

families in crisis. Another 1.8 million in funding will be 

maintained for the structured decision-making tool to help 

front-line workers assess child risk and safety. And as a result 

of fewer children coming into care, funding for out-of-home 

residential and extended family care can be reduced by 3.8 

million to offset some of the additional investments, for an 

overall budget increase of 5.8 million. Investment in families is 

evident in this budget, Mr. Speaker, and I’m confused as to why 

those members opposite will vote against the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to have a conversation with 

Dr. Ryan Meili last Friday at the Future 40 event here in 

Regina. I was very honoured to be included in among 39 others 

who help make this province the best in Saskatchewan. Dr. 

Meili is always a pleasure to talk to, and his contribution to this 

province is vital to the health of the people of this province. 

Though I have not seen many reasons to be hopeful that the 

members opposite will include him and his contributions going 

forward, I think they would be wise not to shut him out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to take part in the FASD 

[fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] walk in Saskatoon put on by 

the FASD network of Saskatchewan. I’m very pleased they 

have received continued funding in the amount of $600,000 to 

provide an intensive FASD prevention program to pregnant 

women who are at high risk of having a child with FASD. This 

budget reflects the commitment of 76.1 million for child and 

family services, community-based organizations. And those 

members opposite are going to vote against it. 

 

I had the opportunity to go to the grand opening of the Egadz 

downtown youth centre in Saskatoon, which actively supports 

services that empower youth at risk. And it was at this opening 

that I disclosed that I too was a teenage runaway at 15, and an 

organization such as this helped me when I felt I had no one 

else to turn to. I definitely know first-hand the value of 

community-based organizations and my six-month stay in a 

transition house as a youth. And I am very proud to be a 

member on this side of the House in terms of the support our 

government . . . to programs such as this. And those members 

are going to vote against the budget. 

 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3003 

Mr. Speaker, it is the ability to relate to constituents which 

make us effective MLAs. It allows us to put a face to where the 

resources are allocated. Investment in people is key to the 

success and effective growth of this province. Our government 

is cognizant of this and this is why we are investing in people. 

I’ve been asked many times from members opposite how I feel 

about our government’s record. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take 

this opportunity to say that I am very proud of our 

government’s record and will gladly compare our record with 

theirs. Investing in people has been possible while still 

introducing the Saskatchewan Party government’s sixth 

consecutive balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many people in Saskatchewan who are 

dealing with taking care of aging parents and those who are 

affected by Alzheimer’s. Mr. Speaker, our government has 

committed to increasing the funding by 350,000 to expand 

Alzheimer’s First Link services. And those members opposite 

are going to vote against the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 800,000 allocated for women’s shelters across 

this province and the new women’s shelters in Melfort is 

integral. These shelters allow families to stay in their 

communities and the children to not have to switch schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re investing in our province, in our people by 

allocating a 1.544 million increase for the Saskatchewan 

Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission to 

purchase an additional 300 training seats in 2013-14; 6.6 

million for First Nation and Métis education and employment, 

including 3 million for the response to the joint task force on 

First Nations and Métis education employment; 1.5 million to 

add 300 more spaces for adult basic education and help reduce 

the program wait list. And those members are going to vote 

against the budget. 

 

One point five million for work readiness employment 

development initiatives. Mr. Speaker, I would have gladly 

compared our record to theirs. The budget reflects a 500,000 

increase to the skills training funding that is allocated to our 

training institutions for industry-driven training programs, 

programs that will have real outcomes such as jobs at the end of 

the training. 

 

And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, Fairview has a significant 

newcomer population, and our government has allocated a 1.5 

million increase for immigrant settlement support program. And 

the budget reflects a 900,000 increase for the provincial training 

allowance and a 119,000 increase for the apprenticeship 

training allowance. 

 

The budget also provides increases to support the government’s 

commitments to build on programs that assist First Nations and 

Métis people with accessing education and employment 

opportunities, and a 1.5 million increase for industry-driven 

quick skills training projects that link industry with training 

providers and job seekers, and prepare First Nations and Métis 

for jobs. And examples include northern career quest, they get 

700,000, and inroads to agriculture, 200,000. And a 1.5 million 

increase to begin work toward eliminating the wait list for adult 

basic education by 2015. And 150,000 to aircraft maintenance 

engineer training program at the Saskatchewan Indian Institute 

of Technologies, part of the 500,000 increase to training 

institutions for industry-driven skills training. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other day I was able to attend a meeting with 

SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies] and I was 

able to meet students who are in the aircraft maintenance 

engineer training program. And Ray Ahenakew, the president 

of SIIT, has indicated that 33 per cent of their funding comes 

from the province. And I am proud to be an alumni from there, 

and I am looking forward to the graduation ceremony this year. 

 

As George Washington Carver once said, “Education is the key 

to unlock the golden door of freedom.” So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to conclude that I support this budget 

going forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

and my honour to rise today to speak in support of our 

government’s budget. I’d like to thank the people of Coronation 

Park for placing their trust in me, and I continue to listen and 

engage. 

 

I’d also like to thank my mother for continuing to tune in into 

the legislative channel and ensure that my tie is straight. Thank 

you, mom. And I’d like to thank my CA [constituency assistant] 

Kalee for her work in our very busy constituency office. 

 

This is the sixth balanced budget this government has tabled, 

and I’m proud to be part of a government that takes such 

prudent care of its citizens’ hard-earned money. In today’s 

world, a balanced budget is rare and an important achievement 

for any government. And I applaud and congratulate the 

Premier and the Finance minister for their leadership in 

ensuring Saskatchewan maintains our solid fiscal footing. We 

truly are the envy of other provinces, indeed other jurisdictions 

in the world. 

 

Yes, this budget is balanced in a fiscal sense, but it’s also 

balanced in another way, Mr. Speaker. This budget does more 

than balance revenues and expenditures; it balances priorities. It 

balances the needs of urban and rural Saskatchewan. It balances 

the needs of southern and northern Saskatchewan. It balances 

the needs of our province, our communities, and our citizens, 

especially our most vulnerable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has a strong record of supporting 

our province’s most vulnerable. We’ve taken thousands of 

low-income families and individuals off the tax rolls. We’ve 

increased benefits to seniors and for people living with 

disabilities. We’ve increased funding to community-based 

organizations. We’ve worked to eliminate the 440-person 

wait-list for residential and day program services for people 

with intellectual disabilities. And as we’ve done so, we’ve 

actually served over 130 more people who weren’t on the 

original wait-list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to say that this year’s budget builds on 

that strong track record. Last fall the Premier launched the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth, our government’s vision for a 



3004 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

proud, prosperous Saskatchewan through the year 2020 and 

beyond. The plan for growth set out some ambitious goals for 

our province on many different fronts, be it in terms of 

province’s finances, infrastructure, health care, or education 

needs. 

 

But the goal that captured my attention, Mr. Speaker, is one that 

focuses on quality of life. The plan for growth outlines that, to 

quote, “The purpose of growth is to secure a better qualify of 

life for . . . Saskatchewan people.” That’s a powerful vision, an 

exciting vision, and a balanced vision; a vision not just of 

prosperity and a good life for some of our people, but for all of 

our people. 

 

The plan for growth also set out a goal of making Saskatchewan 

the best place in Canada for people living with disabilities. Mr. 

Speaker, this vision and this goal are not only near and dear to 

my heart, but are guiding my work as a Legislative Secretary to 

the Minister of Social Services for disability issues. I was 

honoured to be offered the opportunity to work with members 

of the disability community and partners across government in 

helping achieve that goal. I’d like to thank the Premier for the 

opportunity and for his confidence. I want to thank the Minister 

of Social Services for being so welcoming and for sharing my 

commitment to make a real difference in the lives of people of 

this province. And I want to thank the community members and 

organizations I’ve already met with for their dedication and 

determination to improving the lives of people with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that this budget delivers on the 

goal of making Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for 

people with disabilities. How about, and also making 

Saskatchewan the best place in Canada to live because you have 

a disability. It includes $330 million for new and enhanced 

programming and increased program utilization for people with 

disabilities. That’s an increase of $18 million, Mr. Speaker. It 

builds on our already strong record of increasing funding that 

benefits people with disabilities by over 62 per cent and more 

than $126 million since forming government. 

 

The Saskatchewan assured income for disability, the SAID 

program, is at the heart of our government’s commitment to 

improving the lives of people with disabilities. Last June we 

implemented the first instalment of a four-year commitment to 

increase SAID benefits by $100 per month for people in 

residential care, and $350 and $400 per month for single 

individuals and couples respectively, living independently. This 

year’s budget includes the second instalment of the planned 

increase to be rolled out in June. Mr. Speaker, I can’t stress 

enough the importance of the SAID benefit. Many of my 

constituents in Regina Coronation Park are people living with 

significant, chronic, long-term disabilities. Whether they live 

independently or in residential care, SAID plays a crucial role. 

I’m proud to be part of a government that recognizes this and is 

acting on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anybody who’s watched a friend, family member, 

or neighbour live with a disability knows the kinds of supports 

that are often required. And not everyone is able to afford those 

supports on their own. This budget recognizes that and provides 

$2.5 million for more Saskatchewan Aids to Independent 

Living. This important program provides supports like 

prosthetics, mobility equipment, rehabilitation, oxygen, and 

insulin pumps for children. This budget also recognizes the 

important role accessible transportation plays in supporting full 

and active participation in our communities. 

 

Paratransit services are crucial in allowing people with 

disabilities to get to work, to appointments, and to social 

activities. But the availability is limited and people who use the 

services need to book their arrangements far in advance in those 

cases. I can guarantee that people with disabilities want to be 

included in their communities, want to have purposeful 

employment, and want to be independent. This budget will help 

ease some of the pressures on the province’s paratransit services 

by increasing funding to the transit assistance for disabled 

program by $325,000. That brings the total funding for the 

program to three and a half million dollars and will enable it to 

expand to additional municipalities and to double the capital 

grants available for paratransit services and buses. 

 

This budget also commits $12.5 million to help 

community-based organizations recruit and retain front-line 

staff, and to increase the level of care allowances in approved 

private service homes which provide 24-7 days a week care for 

people with intellectual disabilities. 

 

This year’s budget also recognizes that some disabilities can be 

prevented, Mr. Speaker. Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder or 

FASD is still far too common in our province and it’s 

absolutely 100 per cent preventable. My partners in 

communities . . . Many communities across the province are 

already doing good work in raising awareness to promote 

prevention. This budget includes an increase of $600,000 to 

support three projects in Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Regina, 

to offer intensive fetal alcohol spectrum disorder prevention 

programming for pregnant women who are high risk of having 

a child born with FASD. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes that we need to 

support our most vulnerable citizens, and that goes beyond 

people with disabilities. It includes housing, Mr. Speaker, 

which is why this budget sets aside important funding for things 

like $3.8 million increase to the Saskatchewan rental housing 

supplement to enable more households to access the program 

and to keep pace with increases in the cost of rent. 

 

This budget also continues our commitment to the 

Saskatchewan advantage housing plan which will invest $344 

million in 12,600 new housing units across Saskatchewan by 

2016. It includes $9.2 million for the third year of the 

federal-provincial affordable housing agreement, which is 

building new affordable housing units, supporting home 

renovations and adaptations, and providing rent and housing 

supplements. 

 

This budget is also doubling the funding for Habitat for 

Humanity from $1 million last year to $2 million for the coming 

year. Habitat will use this funding to support 40 new 

homeowner units across Saskatchewan. According to the 

Habitat CEO Dennis Coutts, our government is leading the 

country in support of Habitat for Humanity. This partnership is 

all about empowering families with low income to achieve 

home ownership. And anyone who’s been to a Habitat 

sod-turning or a building site or a key ceremony will tell you 

the incredible difference it makes in the lives of families who 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3005 

participate. 

 

Helping our most vulnerable citizens means helping our 

province’s children and youth, Mr. Speaker. Community-based 

agencies across the province are helping our children and youth 

each and every day. It’s important work. It’s valuable work. 

And it’s work that our government has recognized and through 

a $6.7 million increase to child and family services CBOs. 

Those groups will receive $76.1 million in funding overall. This 

includes that $6.7 million recruitment and retention salary 

funding increase for 24-7 care homes. It includes $800,000 for 

intensive home and family supports. It also includes $374,000 

for a salary lift for the remaining CBOs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, supporting vulnerable citizens also means 

supporting seniors, the men and women who have helped build 

Saskatchewan into what it is today and have laid a strong 

foundation for the Saskatchewan of tomorrow. This budget 

increases funding for the seniors’ income plan by $3.2 million 

for a total of $27.4 million. This includes a $10 increase to 

monthly benefits beginning in July. That’s on top of the 

increase last year. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we’re doubling the maximum 

monthly benefit for seniors in special care homes. And we’re 

increasing the monthly income threshold for the seniors’ 

personal care home benefit to $1,875. This budget includes an 

additional $3.1 million for seniors’ care, including a two-year 

pilot in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region called first quick 

response home care which will enable more clients to receive 

intensive home care supports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that at least 18,000 people in 

Saskatchewan are living with Alzheimer’s disease or related 

dementias. We’re also providing an additional $350,000 to the 

Alzheimer Society to expand its Alzheimer’s First Link 

program and to build six dementia advisory networks. This 

brings our funding to $400,000 in total. And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is a sevenfold increase from last year. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to highlight some important 

investments we’re making to support women and children 

fleeing domestic violence. We all know that domestic violence 

exists. It exists here in the cities and it exists in rural areas as 

well. But while the violence exists in both cities and rural areas, 

it can be much harder for women to find support and services 

outside of the major centres. A rural woman fleeing violence, 

wanting to create a fresh start for herself and her children, 

simply has fewer places to go. That’s not right. It’s not fair. 

And I’m proud to be part of a government that is doing 

something about it. 

 

This budget provides $375,000 to support services for women 

and children who are escaping violence. That funding supports 

the expansion of existing transition houses here in Regina and 

in Prince Albert. And even more importantly, it supports the 

creation of Angel’s Lighthouse shelter, a new transition house 

in Melfort which will be the first transition house opened in 

Saskatchewan with capital and operating funding provided by 

the province since 1989. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of sharing a desk with the 

member for Melfort. That’s right — I said privilege. I know that 

this project will mean that the women and children in his 

community and across that entire region . . . And I congratulate 

him on his leadership and support of the project, both as a 

member of this Assembly and during his tenure as mayor. Mr. 

Speaker, I can’t think of anything more important than the kind 

of investments this budget is making in improving the lives of 

Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have used the concept of 

fairness, common sense, doom, and stubbornness in order to 

advance their narrative fable. I’m going to assist them in their 

view of fairness. As any parent can attest, fair is not equal. Do 

parents treat all of their children the same? Do teachers believe 

that students learn and comprehend at the same rate? I think 

not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why do the members opposite channel Henny 

Penny and Chicken Little and believe that the sky is falling? 

Chicken Little believed the world was coming to an end. 

Thankfully this government is hopeful for this province’s future 

and isn’t going to prophesize catastrophic doom. Our 

government produced a budget that cares about people and this 

province. I’m sorry, Chicken Little, but the sky, and in this case 

the living sky, is still in place. 

 

I know that some of my colleagues across the floor like to use 

the word stubborn when they describe our government. Well if 

you ask anyone who knows me, they’ll agree that I can indeed 

be stubborn — stubborn about doing the right thing; stubborn 

about helping those who need it; stubborn about showing up 

each and every day and doing my best. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

just doesn’t apply to me. It applies to all my colleagues on this 

side of the floor in this government. 

 

If you look at the number of desks over on this side of the floor 

compared to the sad few over on the opposition side of the 

House, it seems like the people of Saskatchewan think we’re on 

the right track. This budget will keep us on that right track, Mr. 

Speaker. It sets out a path for Saskatchewan that we can all be 

proud to follow. 

 

This budget is a good budget. It’s a balanced budget, a 

responsible budget. And I’ll reiterate, I use the words from the 

members opposite, a common sense budget. And more 

importantly, it’s a budget with heart. And it’s a budget that I am 

pleased to support, and I will not be supporting the opposition 

amendment to the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to rise today to speak to the budget for Saskatchewan for the 

years 2013 and ’14. 

 

I want to start off by saying thank you to all of the people of 

Saskatchewan and all of my colleagues here in the legislature 

for the kind words that they said about me in my role as the 

leader of the New Democrats over the last year and a number of 

months. I especially appreciate some of the comments from the 

members opposite that were made. And I know that when we 



3006 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

work here for many years, we have strong opinions on many 

things including budgets — and we’ll hear about that in a few 

seconds — but we also get to know each other and respect each 

other. And so I want to say thank you especially to the members 

of the legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular budget has a significant 

number of issues, but it starts right at the heart of the budget. 

And I know, as a member of this legislature who worked on 

many budgets over many years, that there are some 

fundamental things that you do when you prepare a budget. And 

one of the things that I see in this budget, unfortunately, is that 

the Premier has told the Finance minister, I want to have the 

numbers balance no matter what. 

 

And so what we have is not dissimilar from a situation where 

you have a couple who one says to the other, we really want to 

buy these things; we want to do these things. And the other 

says, no, honey, we don’t have enough money to do that. But 

the one who wants to spend says, no, we want to go and spend 

that money. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in this budget I think that the Premier has 

told the Finance minister that we want to do some things and 

the Finance minister said, “Well as long as we don’t have some 

of these expenses that we really know are expenses in this 

budget, we can still give you that illusion of a balanced budget.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of very simple, 

straightforward issues that have not been included in this budget 

which put it into deficit right off the bat. Number one, the 

money for flood work. And we see that every day. It’s still 

staying cold outside, as we know, so we’re not getting the water 

there, but we know our neighbours down in South Dakota, in 

Bismarck, Minot, they’re planning very carefully. They’re 

working like crazy over at Fargo and Moorhead as the Red 

River is melting at the south end and flowing north. And here in 

Saskatchewan, we put zero in our budget for the flood issues. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we use a figure even of $75 million or 

$100 million, which is the amount over the last few years, this 

budget’s in deficit. But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what we 

also know is that when the Minister of Health told all of the 

main service providers, the regional health authorities and the 

Cancer Agency, to come forward with the leanest budget 

possible, and they did that, they then give them almost $54 

million less than what they needed. And they’ve said in here, 

and it’s quite an interesting quote. I don’t know if I’ve ever seen 

a quote like this in a budget summary. But on page 12, they 

said: 

 

Regional Health Authorities and the Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency have been tasked with finding $53.9 

million in efficiencies in 2013-14. This will be realized 

through administrative savings and other efficiencies, 

increased use of shared services co-ordinated through 

3sHealth, as well as through attendance management and 

efforts to reduce lost time due to injuries, premium pay 

and sick time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I asked about what this meant, I was told, 

we gave them $53.9 million less than what they knew they 

needed. Now, Mr. Speaker, I know and trust the people who run 

the Cancer Agency and the regional health authorities, that they 

had already looked at these administrative savings when they 

had brought their lean, careful budget into the process. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, take off $54 million here is another way to create 

that illusion that this budget is balanced. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s not an acceptable way of advising the people about 

what’s happening in the finances of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the latest edition of the CAmagazine, the 

chartered accountants magazine from March 2013, there’s an 

article about enhancing audit quality. And the fundamental 

question asked in the article is, could auditors have prevented 

the failures of the 2008 financial collapse, which we know has 

affected many parts of the world and it affected us here in 

Saskatchewan. And one of the comments of a speaker who went 

to the conference for chartered accountants and others who 

were interested, and the conference was called the Audit 

Quality Symposium and the speaker was James Doty who was 

the Chair of the US [United States] -based public accounting 

oversight board. And it’s basically a counterpart I think of the 

Canadian Public Accountability Board which we have in 

Canada. And he said, “If the story, if the numbers, are too good 

to be true, the auditors are supposed to call it.” Now Mr. Doty 

said that because they were looking and trying to figure out 

what happened five years ago that so many auditors got it 

wrong in the financial situation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we here in Saskatchewan have our 

Provincial Auditor making comments to the government, to the 

Finance minister, to the Premier, saying that, your books are 

misleading, that you’ve got two sets of books. You should be 

doing it the way every other part of Canada is presenting the 

books, to the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they have not . . . They’ve been in government now five years, 

and they have not listened to that advice to move along like all 

the other jurisdictions in Canada, so that we are now the sole 

jurisdiction that’s reporting our finances the way we are. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that allows them to give this illusion of a balanced 

budget by pushing pieces of this to other places. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we also know, and which the public is 

slowly starting to figure out, is that last year’s increase in the 

debt of the government was $1.1 billion. This year’s increase is 

another 835 million. That’s almost $2 billion in two years. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been down this path before where we 

know that it gets us into trouble. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that 

the members opposite want to take little pieces of this budget 

and go and see about the good news, but when the fundamental 

face of the whole budget is a problem for the province, then 

we’re all in trouble. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to ask questions 

about that, and we will be asking questions about that because I 

think there may be some other places where there are 

adjustments — if I can put that in quotes, “adjustments” — to 

some of the expenditures that are going to come and a 

recognition that there will be some changes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Finance and some of 

the others talked about, well how do you respond — I think the 

Premier — how do you respond to some particular issues, the 

response was, and I think this was the Premier actually who 

responded around the issues of education and some of the 

increased costs because of increased numbers, 4,500 more 

students, oh well we’ll deal with that in September. Well that’s 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3007 

another way of getting around presenting a budget that actually 

reflects what everybody knows is going on. 

 

And it’s what happened last year. When you look at the total 

number of supplementary estimates that were brought forward, 

it was hundreds of millions of dollars. And that’s why the last 

three years in a row, at the end of the year, we have a deficit. 

We have a deficit in the . . . And we’re spending more money 

than we’re taking in. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is something that 

the Premier needs to account for. That’s something that the 

Minister of Finance needs to account for because it 

fundamentally affects the long-term future of all of us. 

 

We on this side of the House have said that there are other 

methods that the government are using to push the costs out on 

to our children and grandchildren. And there’s no question that 

the various methods that they’ve looked at around the P3s are 

another method of using a charge card, of sort of saying, well 

we’ll put into the budget how much it costs each year. There’s 

quite a number of examples of that. And I mean practically you 

can look at how you can work together with partners on 

financing different things. I acknowledge that. But it appears in 

this particular situation that once again you have this leader 

who wants to spend and please lots of people, and his Finance 

minister has figured out a way to push some of that cost down 

the road. 

 

Now two years ago or I guess it’s even only . . . Yes two years 

ago in the budget, we knew, or we thought we knew, that there 

was going to be money to the University of Saskatchewan to 

pay for the Academic Health Sciences Building, and it was 

$100 million. Well when we got to last year’s budget, the 

amount showing up for that Academic Health Sciences 

Building was $4 million, the same number that’s in the budget I 

think this year — somewhere around $4 million. And guess 

what that is? Well that’s the interest on 100 million that they 

forced the university to borrow. 

 

Now we all know that that kind of strange business about how 

you manage your affairs doesn’t work in the long run. 

Somebody’s going to have to pay the $100 million at some 

point, and presumably it’s going to be the people of 

Saskatchewan. So what it’s using, the Minister of Finance’s 

devices . . . He’s pleased the Premier. Well we got a balanced 

budget, but we’ve pushed costs way out down the road. So we 

call it a charge card budget because that’s what they’re doing. 

They’re paying fees now, paying the interest. And fortunately 

for us and maybe as people of Saskatchewan, the interest rates 

are quite low. But unfortunately we also know many people are 

kind of living their lives that way where they’re buying things 

that are maybe just a little more expensive than they would 

otherwise buy. And, Mr. Speaker, I see that some of that kind of 

a characteristic is coming back to haunt us here. 

 

Now we know back in 1992 there was a report prepared by the 

auditors of the province and, Mr. Speaker, that report was called 

the Gass report, and what they did was they took some of the 

best accounting minds in the country and they came together 

and looked at the results of the decisions during the 1980s, and 

the net result was that the province was on the brink of 

bankruptcy. Our Finance minister at that time, Mr. 

Tchorzewski, and the Premier met with the federal government 

and were able to work out some methods of effectively saving 

the province or there was some accommodations made by the 

federal government and so that the finances could be put in 

shape. But we had quite a number of years where we all had to 

put more money in on income tax, more money in on other 

taxes to make sure we could pay for that. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m raising a flag here today to say that we 

may be starting down on that same kind of a track with this 

Premier and this Finance minister, and they’re not just playing 

with their own money, they’re playing with the money of all of 

us, of our children and our grandchildren. And, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not appropriate that that type of disregard takes place of the 

Provincial Auditor, of others who are looking at this particular 

situation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are ways that you can spend more 

money than you take in, but you need to tell people that’s what 

you’re doing and let them judge you about that. And there are 

times in anybody’s business or life where that might be an 

appropriate thing to do, but you need to be direct about it and 

explain what you’re doing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this fundamental flaw in the whole budget 

then goes back to influence a lot of the choices that are made 

and the decisions that are made. And unfortunately our children 

are suffering, not just by the fact that they’re probably going to 

have to pay for it all, but also as it relates to the funding for our 

K [kindergarten] or pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] 

education, and then also for some of the people at the 

universities. 

 

I’m the member for Regina Lakeview, and I have many people 

who are involved in businesses and involved in some of the key 

service agencies, organizers of the province. But I also have 

many members who work with Crown corporations. They work 

with the provincial government. They’re professors at the 

university. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the universities and 

the University of Regina and Luther College and Campion and 

First Nations University are frustrated and a bit mystified by 

how they’re being treated by this government. 

 

I think the civil service is wondering about some of the 

decisions and choices that are being made and by some of 

what’s happening with them. And that’s reflected to me when I 

meet with them in the neighbourhood. And, Mr. Speaker, when 

there’s that kind of unease, people ill at ease about what’s 

happening with this government, it forces us as members to 

look and see, well what’s going on here? Why are all these 

different things surfacing that are causing people to be uneasy 

about the direction of the Premier and the Finance minister as it 

relates to the budget? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what I’m hearing. We’re listening to 

people, not just in urban areas, not just in rural areas. I’ll give 

you an example on the highways. I mean that’s always an 

interesting one. But I think it’s about, well it’s almost two years 

ago that I asked the Premier about this and he came back to me 

and he said, you’re right, we’re spending a lot more money on 

highways, but it’s costing us almost twice as much to build the 

same kilometre of road. And so every time I hear the Highways 

minister or the Premier or any of these other members talk 



3008 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

about dollars for highways, I’m always asking myself — and I 

know the public are doing this as well — okay, it costs a lot 

more to build that. How much are we actually getting? 

 

And then you get people calling us and saying, well ask about 

this road; ask about that road, and what’s going on. And I know, 

I know that in many parts of the province, people are uneasy 

about how this issue is being dealt with. We know, for example, 

some of the promises have been made in the North and haven’t 

been kept, but that’s another whole issue that’s of concern. But, 

Mr. Speaker, people want to understand how their dollars are 

being used and how they’re providing services for the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now as a former Health minister, it was interesting to me that 

the announcement about the long-term care facilities are all the 

same ones that were announced four years ago. You know, 

there aren’t any new ones. They’ve built a couple on that list 

but they’re the same ones that were there in 2009. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s some major concerns about what exactly is 

happening as it relates to that particular area and that particular 

responsibility. 

 

But I’m not going to spend a long time on it, other than to say 

that it’s the services that are provided for people . . . It’s the 

roads. It’s the education for their children, whether it’s in 

elementary or high school or at a technical institute or 

university. It’s those issues that are the concern of the 

grandparents, the parents, and obviously the children 

themselves. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s how a budget like this gets to be 

measured. And unfortunately I think there are some definite 

concerns that are raised, as in that particular area. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, the things that a budget are supposed to do is to 

provide some long-term stability and some long-term plans for 

the province.  

 

And I know that the Premier likes to talk about many things. 

He’s pretty good at some of the PR and the photo ops and 

things like that. But we know that the big sort of splash last fall 

was this pamphlet that he put out about a vision for the 

province. And I couldn’t see any vision then. I still have a hard 

time understanding exactly what the long-term vision for the 

province is, and I think the public are in that boat as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve attempted to resurrect some of that 

with this budget. But once again, there are these allusions or 

these things that just don’t quite hang together, or as some 

auditors put it, the smell test. Like does this thing actually hang 

together? Or like as the auditor said, it’s their role to make sure 

they point out that some of these things aren’t working right. 

 

And so what the people of Saskatchewan want is a long-term 

plan for the future. They want to know that it’s sustainable, that 

it’s built on some very practical things, and that it’s smart 

growth. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what we’ve been hearing. 

We’ve been hearing there’s some short-sighted decisions. And 

we heard a lot about some of the decisions over the last year 

and the lack of understanding by the ministers as they worked 

those through, whether it was the film employment tax credit 

or, in the midst of all of the curtailing of what they called 

government reducing the civil service, reducing services to the 

public, they add three more MLAs at a cost and don’t even 

seem to blink and recognize that that’s a very hypocritical 

move. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what the people of Saskatchewan want is 

a plan that will allow them to understand where the 

government’s going, what they’re going to do, what they’re 

going to do with some of the crucial aspects and attributes of 

our Saskatchewan economy, whether it’s related to long-term 

business and economic solidarity, whether it’s related to the 

role that some of our service Crowns provide for us, whether 

it’s something as straightforward as keeping control of the 

information around our land titles system and corporate 

registries and personal property registries. Those are questions 

that people are asking. 

 

Now I’m not sure whether the Premier has really thought 

through the long-term consequences of some of the decisions, 

but we’ve seen over the last few years and what we’ve seen as 

we’ve asked more questions is that some of these decisions 

seem to be made on a whim or on a Twitter or who knows 

where. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a way to run a railway. It’s 

not a way to run a government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at some of the decisions that 

the Premier has made, and we also look at some of the things 

that he emphasizes in his press conferences or other things, we 

can often see that they’re distractions. He likes to go off and do 

something in Alberta or he likes to go do something in 

Washington. He likes to take some shots at federal politicians 

because he thinks maybe he can distract from what’s going on 

here. 

 

But three years in a row where you spend more money that you 

take in. These two years now, we’re going to increase the debt 

by almost $2 billion. We have classroom sizes that are getting 

bigger and bigger without any recognition by the minister of 

what’s going on. We have a whole number of things that need 

to be taken care of at home, and he’s off doing other things. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a reflection on what is happening 

here. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that all Saskatchewan people 

deserve to have a more accurate budget. They deserve to know 

that the information that’s being provided is something that will 

stand the scrutiny of our Provincial Auditor and others, and that 

it will accurately predict what services we’re going to have and 

what services we won’t have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, lots of words here, lots of PR. But I think 

that sort of the common sense Saskatchewan perspective says, 

something’s not quite right. And so what I would say to the 

Premier and others is, let’s keep track of what’s best for the 

middle class of Saskatchewan. Let’s keep track of what’s best 

for the ordinary people of Saskatchewan. We’re tired of benefits 

to friends or insiders of the government. We’re tired of benefits 

going to big corporations that are controlled somewhere else. 

We’re more concerned about how it’s going to affect our 

children in school, how it’s going to affect our parents or 

grandparents as they get health care. We’re more concerned 

about how it affects people in our family roots in various parts 

of rural Saskatchewan. Because all of those things matter to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3009 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask people to be very careful when they 

listen to what is said about this budget by the government 

because there are some fundamental flaws that are at the base of 

the budget. So, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the amendment 

to this budget and against the main motion. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 

honoured to be here to be able to join on the debate of the 

budget motion. But before I begin, I would like to thank some 

people. First I would like thank my CA for taking care of every 

detail that comes up at our Saskatoon office. As well as I would 

like to thank Connie and Helen for filling in when Matt is away. 

 

Second, I would like to thank all the people in Saskatoon 

Meewasin who voted for me and allow me to represent them 

here in the Legislative Assembly. I would also like to thank all 

the volunteers who worked and helped me on three different 

campaigns to help me get to where I am today. Fourth, I would 

like to thank all the people in Meewasin again for their support 

in giving me this honour. 

 

I would also like to thank all the ministers, who I have the 

utmost respect for, on all their work in developing this balanced 

budget. I would also like to thank the Finance minister from the 

constituency of Canora-Pelly for all his work on this balanced 

budget 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to, also like at last to thank my 

family: to my loving wife Sheila who was there through the 

good and the hard times and never once tried to stop my pursuit 

to be an MLA, also my daughter Shanaya who is a rock for me 

and helped me door knock in every election and never 

complained about my persistence. They are the only reason I 

am here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

I would like to start with this quote: “Saskatchewan budget 

released today — you’re not going to find a better one in 

Canada this year.” That quote is from Colin Craig, prairie 

director for the Canadian Taxpayers Federation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the sixth balanced budget in a row for 

Saskatchewan. And Saskatchewan has become the envy of the 

nation and the place to be. Not like when the opposition was the 

governing party, and it was the place you had left, as seen in the 

early years when the population was declining when they were 

in . . . governing party. I saw a lot of this when I finished 

school, when I graduated from mechanical engineering 

technology many years ago. Everybody that I graduated with 

pretty much all moved to Alberta or BC or somewhere else to 

work. I also saw it when I graduated from business 

administration years later and almost everybody left again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through prudent management of the province’s 

finances, including debt-reduction saving hundreds of millions 

of dollars in interest payments, we lay a solid foundation for the 

future of Saskatchewan and our children. Mr. Speaker, there is 

over 1,089,000 people in Saskatchewan today, with a 

population growth of 2 per cent in 2012. Second best in Canada, 

thanks to the economic atmosphere created by this government. 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of two provinces to enjoy net 

interprovincial in-migration and the lowest unemployment at 

3.8 per cent. Best in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has a strong commitment to our 

students and labour force development: 448.6 million to support 

base operating of Saskatchewan’s universities and federated and 

affiliated colleges, an increase of 9.2 million; 149.6 million in 

operating funding for Saskatchewan’s technical institutes and 

27.6 million in operating funding for regional colleges; 117.4 

million in student supports, an increase of 19.6 million or 20 per 

cent which includes 63.9 million in refundable and 

non-refundable tax credits for the graduate retention program; 

34.5 million for the Student Aid Fund; 7.5 million for the 

Saskatchewan advantage scholarship and 6.5 million to 

establish the Saskatchewan advantage graduate grant for 

education savings; 1.5 million for work readiness - employment 

development for First Nations and Métis people; 3 million to 

support future recommendations of the joint task force on 

improving First Nations and Métis education and employment 

outcomes; 1.5 million increase for the Saskatchewan 

Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission for an 

additional 300 seats in 2013-14 as well as 119,000 increase for 

the apprenticeship training allowance. This is quite a difference 

than when the NDP were the governing party and the graduates 

left to work elsewhere, also known as the brain drain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the University of Saskatchewan, 16 million in 

operating and capital funding for the new health science facility. 

The NDP loves to criticize the Health Sciences Building when 

they had 16 years to fund it. Could have cost 125 million at its 

inception, but the NDP dragged their feet. The 16 million adds 

to the record spending we have provided to the University of 

Saskatchewan; also 17 million for the Canadian Light Source, 

international vaccine centre, Water Research Chair, and other 

initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year the agriculture budget is 406.9 million 

with record crop insurance funding. Insurance funding levels 

will increase to $194 per acre on average, which is 198.3 

million, the largest in Saskatchewan history. Mr. Speaker, this 

ensures Saskatchewan farm families have the support they need 

to grow. Mr. Speaker, David Marit, president of SARM, had 

this to offer regarding our agriculture spending: 

 

Agriculture and agriculture producers are one of the 

primary drivers of our growing economy and a focus of 

the Premier’s Growth Plan so these investments are 

greatly appreciated. 

 

Also 27.7 million increase to agriculture research, a 107 per 

cent increase since 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP neglected farmers for years, ripping up 

the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] program, leaving 

farmers stranded. We will never take lessons from the NDP 

when it comes to helping farm families in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, new mines and mine expansions could create 

thousands more jobs in northern Saskatchewan. However, Mr. 

Speaker, our royalty system has been a barrier to new 



3010 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

investment in uranium mine expansions. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

removed those barriers to uranium mine growth. A new 

structure recognizes actual cost incurred by industry and it 

replaces allowance-based systems. Allowances were as much as 

50 per cent below the industry’s actual expenditures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s a quote from Mr. Tim Gitzel, president and 

CEO of Cameco, offered his support of the new royalty 

structure with this quote: 

 

While the long-term fundamentals remain positive, 

uranium mining is addressing some short-term 

uncertainty. The changes announced by the provincial 

government will give us added confidence to continue the 

large investment we are making to sustain and grow 

productions from our Saskatchewan operations. 

 

With production increases and new investments, uranium 

royalties are expected to exceed $5 billion in total over the next 

14 years. New mines and mine expansions could create 

thousands of more jobs in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, making sure students are receiving the best 

possible education is challenging with enrolments increasing for 

the first time in many years. Funding has increased by 6.7 per 

cent from last year’s budget. Operating funding will be 1.775 

billion, up 23 per cent from last year. Seventeen million is in 

the budget to address growth pressures some school divisions 

are facing. Five point nine per cent is being provided to initiate 

a new student assessment program. This program has been 

affectionately referred to as standardized testing by the 

members opposite. However, Mr. Speaker, the assessment 

program supported by Janet Foord from the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association, who when asked if the NDP’s 

assessment of this new program was fair, replied, no I don’t. 

School boards and school board associations have been 

involved in this, and it’s not standardized testing. It’s an 

assessment of students and where they are at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 119.6 million in capital funding is being provided 

to advance a number of school projects, a 6.4 per cent increase. 

Since 2007, more than 600 million committed toward 43 major 

school capital projects and approximately 900 additional, 

smaller school capital projects. Five hundred new child care 

spaces are nearly 600,000 for new pre-kindergarten. 

 

Mr. Speaker, municipalities will receive record revenue sharing 

for the third straight year, helping foster economic growth and 

enhance the quality of life for Saskatchewan people — 264.4 

million will be provided in this budget, 11.4 per cent increase 

over last year, and 108 per cent increase over 2007-2008. 

Municipal funding will be 362 million overall, 50 per cent more 

than 2007 and 2008, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Debra Button, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] president, offered this in response 

to revenue sharing: 

 

The government has acknowledged the challenges faced 

by the urban communities in Saskatchewan. We 

appreciate that, their special acknowledgement of our 

northern members and that they continue to share 

significant revenue to help all urban governments address 

their unique challenges.  

 

Mr. Speaker, record 4.84 billion investment in health for 

2013-2014. This will continue to reduce surgical wait times and 

improve quality of life for Saskatchewan people, 3.5 per cent 

increase over the last six years. Saskatchewan’s surgical 

initiative will receive 70.5 million, a 16.5 per cent increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Cancer Agency will receive 150.7 

million for enhanced cancer care services, 8.6 per cent 

investment over last year, which allows operations of 

prevention and early detection programs, innovative research, 

provisions of safe patient and family-centred care at cancer 

centres in Regina and Saskatoon. 86.5 million to continue work 

on long-term care facilities in 11 communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are opening more beds in the new 

Saskatchewan. It’s a far cry from the NDP closing 1,200 

long-term beds, turning their backs on those who needed care 

most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, physicians recruitment strategy is paying off with 

more than 240 additional physicians practising in Saskatchewan 

today compared to 2007; 17.8 million investment will support 

the doubling of post-graduate training seats to 120 to further 

boost physician numbers in Saskatchewan and improve access 

for residents. 

 

Fifty million for the Moose Jaw hospital replacement. We 

replace hospitals instead of the NDP closing 52 hospitals when 

they were the governing party — 52 hospitals. 

 

Health system aggressively pursuing transformation in many 

ways: lean management system; improving primary health care; 

transforming the patient experience through sooner, smarter, 

and safer surgical care; and enhancing our safety culture with a 

focus on both patients and staff safety. 

 

Highways, Mr. Speaker. I heard people like Sean Wilson, 

SHCA [Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association] board 

chairman: “This is definitely a budget that we can work with 

and a positive message is being sent to our industry that the 

future of our province’s growth is dependent on the investment 

we make to . . . [our] infrastructure.” 

 

The budget includes work on major new multi-year projects that 

support the Saskatchewan plan for growth and our vision of a 

province of 1.2 million people by 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Shantel Lipp, president of the Saskatchewan 

Heavy Construction Association, said our infrastructure 

spending in this budget, this “. . . budget announcement shows 

the government is listening. Infrastructure investments tops the 

list of public priorities.” 

 

Highlights of the highways . . . [inaudible] . . . budget include 

63.6 million for multi-year projects such as starting the Estevan 

truck pass, passing lanes between Balgonie and Fort 

Qu’Appelle and west Regina bypass, 168.1 million to repair and 

upgrade existing highways including grading on Highway 15, 

east of Highway 11, part of a high-clearance corridor, and 

grading and paving the Dalmeny access road and Highway 305 

from Highway 11 to Highway 12, repaving about 280 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3011 

kilometres of highway, 49.1 million to rehabilitate or replace 

bridges and culverts, 25.5 million for the municipal roads of the 

economy program. 

 

NDP can heckle all they want about the P.A. [Prince Albert] 

bridge. They had 16 years to build it. Crumbling roads, turning 

rural highways into gravel roads, yet another reason we will 

never take lessons from the NDP. There is more work to be 

done, but we are certainly doing much more than the members 

opposite ever did in 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us not forget over the 16 years the NDP were 

governing, they raised the PST three times. They raised income 

taxes twice. They raised the business tax four times and raised 

fuel taxes twice. And all during that time the NDP created a 

drop in population. Mr. Speaker, it would’ve been even worse, 

as their platform would spend an additional 5 billion to existing 

expenditures, signed and developed by the new NDP leader, 

putting us even further in debt. They also wanted to double 

royalty rates, killing any mining growth and chasing companies 

away again like they did with K+S potash many years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a growing place. We need to 

keep on growing and moving forward. Members opposite want 

to hold us back and put us into debt and drive away business 

with bad economic plans. This budget ensures that we will 

never go back to those days of have not province. 

 

Increases to infrastructure ensures we will have safe roads to 

travel. Increases to health care ensures that we will have 

prompt, quality health care. Our employment numbers indicate 

that we are a province that works, and that what we are doing is 

working. 

 

This balanced budget ensures that we will retain our sterling 

credit rating while other provinces are going into massive debt. 

This budget keeps us in the driver’s seat, not just in Canada, but 

in North America. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, with all that said, I will not be supporting the 

amendments from the negative nine. That is why I will be 

supporting the budget motion and this government of 42 

members. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

last Wednesday the Minister of Finance delivered a balanced 

budget. This budget is balanced, Mr. Speaker, in every way that 

a budget can be balanced. The General Revenue Fund is 

balanced, Mr. Speaker, and it’s balanced as well on the 

summary financials. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are happy that we report the 

budget in both ways, Mr. Speaker, both in the General Revenue 

Fund and the summary financials. But the NDP complain that 

we report too much. They think we should only report the 

summary financials. That’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. All of the 

information is in this budget. It’s all contained in this budget, 

and it’s interesting that the NDP never did report anything but 

the GRF [General Revenue Fund] until the last few years that 

they were in government. They would . . . They’d steadfastly 

refuse to report the summaries at all. We insisted on it for many 

years, Mr. Speaker, and then finally they relented and started to 

report both ways like we do now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to be associated with our Minister 

of Finance, as I am with all of my colleagues. I’ve worked with 

the minister since 1999 when I first got elected, and in recent 

years I’ve served with the Minister of Finance on Treasury 

Board and I appreciated very much his able leadership. And I’m 

proud that this budget is balanced and proud of the work that 

the Minister of Finance and Treasury Board and all of our 

ministers and all members on this side of the House have put 

towards this budget. Everyone on this side of the House 

contributed something to this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This budget, entitled Balanced Growth, is about more than a 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. It’s also about improving the 

quality of life for every Saskatchewan resident, looking after 

the needs of those among us who need a hand up, Mr. Speaker, 

with increases in spending in education, health care, social 

services, long-term care homes. It’s also about addressing the 

challenges of growth, Mr. Speaker, through more money for K 

to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education, post-secondary 

education, skills training, highways, as well as municipal 

revenue sharing, housing, a new hospital for Moose Jaw, 40 

portable classrooms to add to schools that are becoming 

crowded because of growth around this province, Mr. Speaker, 

and many school renovations and new schools around the 

province. Mr. Speaker, it’s about quality of life with more 

funding for the arts, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] Heritage Centre, and more funding for parks and 

recreational facilities around this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget truly addresses the challenges of 

growth. But when you try to explain that to the NDP members 

opposite, their eyes glaze over and for good reason. They don’t 

understand it, Mr. Speaker. They never did. Under the 16 years 

of the most recent NDP government, there was never any 

growth. There was only decline, and they learned to govern for 

decline. 

 

In a famous article about 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker, they 

actually bragged about people leaving the province at a slower 

rate that particular year. No growth, low levels of support in 

their budgets for social programs, health, education, 

post-secondary institutions, highways, agriculture, and nothing 

to find at all for municipal revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker — 

that’s the NDP brand in this province. They didn’t know how to 

create growth, and they didn’t get that it takes economic growth 

to provide the revenue to do those things that affect the daily 

lives of people. This budget is balanced fiscally, economically, 

and socially, Mr. Speaker. And I’m proud of it, as are the 

people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to give some particular attention now to 

agriculture and how agriculture has been treated in this budget. 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget we see record crop insurance 

coverage of $194 an acre on average across this province, Mr. 

Speaker, up from $174 an acre last year which was a record at 

that time — record funding for the program, Mr. Speaker, of 

$198 million. 



3012 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, in research we see record spending in research of 

$27.7 million, including $3 million for the recently announced 

Global Institute for Food Security. Mr. Speaker, research is an 

important component that will help us meet our goals under the 

plan for growth, the Saskatchewan plan for growth that was 

announced last fall by the Premier. And a couple of the 

ambitious goals under the plan for growth are to increase 

exports from 10 to $15 billion annually, Mr. Speaker, and to 

produce 10 million tonnes of crops, Mr. Speaker. We can’t do 

that without research. Research is a very important component. 

 

I remember 35 years ago, we didn’t know very much about 

lentils at all in this province. In fact I’d say that many producers 

wouldn’t know what a lentil looked like. Now with, because of 

excellent research, mostly around the University of 

Saskatchewan, and innovative producers, we are the world’s 

leading producer and exporter of lentils. 

 

The same can be said for the canola story, Mr. Speaker. Forty 

years ago there was no canola. We had a spindly plant that we 

used to try to grow called rapeseed. It was low yielding. The oil 

was basically unfit for human consumption. It was high in 

erucic acid. Erucic acid causes cholesterol to form in humans, 

so it was not recommended really for human use. It was mostly 

an industrial oil at that time. The price was always low, it didn’t 

yield very well, and it could only be grown at all in certain 

areas of the province, Mr. Speaker, that had cooler temperatures 

and very high rainfall. That, through research, evolved into the 

plant that we now know as canola, and we are the largest 

producer and exporter of canola in the world, Mr. Speaker — 

both canola seed, canola oil, and canola meal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the whole time that the NDP were in 

government there was a dispute between the irrigation districts 

and the RMs [rural municipality] that those irrigation districts 

were in about funding for irrigation bridges. Those are the 

bridges over irrigation canals, Mr. Speaker. The RMs claimed 

that this was an irrigation asset. They were put in place on, 

mind you, on municipal road allowances at the time that the 

irrigation canals were put in place and they should be the 

responsibility of the irrigation districts. The irrigation districts 

claimed that they were an asset of the municipalities, were put 

in place to complete the municipal roads that they were on, Mr. 

Speaker, and that the municipalities should pay for them. 

 

So nothing got done, Mr. Speaker, resulting in many weight 

restrictions on these bridges. They’ve fallen into disrepair. The 

NDP didn’t care. Some of these bridges have been closed, Mr. 

Speaker, and many more will be very soon if something wasn’t 

done. And we did something, Mr. Speaker, in this budget. 

We’ve provided $1 million for maintenance to the irrigation 

bridges in the irrigation district, Mr. Speaker, and that is very 

popular with both the municipalities in those districts and the 

districts themselves. 

 

Growing Forward 2, Mr. Speaker, which will come into force 

and effect on April 1st, over $70 million investment for 

strategic initiatives such as rural water infrastructure, research 

farm, business management and trade and market development, 

environmental programs, and so on. Mr. Speaker, that’s an 

increase of $25 million annually over last year. 

 

This is the fourth largest budget ever announced in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the five largest agricultural 

budgets have been introduced since 2007 when the 

Saskatchewan Party became the Government of Saskatchewan. 

In the last six years, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 

announced 50 per cent more in funding for agriculture on 

budget day than the NDP did in their last six years. The average 

agricultural budget over the last six years under the 

Saskatchewan Party was $405 million, a total of $2.5 billion. 

Average agricultural budget over the past six years under the 

NDP, $273 million, Mr. Speaker, for a total of only 1.6 billion. 

 

The NDP closed 31 agricultural extension offices around this 

province. They refused to commit any funding to AgriStability 

and AgriInvest upfront. Mr. Speaker, producers had to wait and 

wonder if there was going to be any funding. And by the time 

that we knew how much funding there was in this province, our 

applications were in last and they were in the pile on 

somebody’s desk in Winnipeg where the programs were 

administered at that time, and they were always dealt with last. 

And it was at least a year and a half, often two years, before 

producers even knew what they were going to get for a 

particular agricultural year, a particular crop year. And it was a 

hopeless situation, Mr. Speaker. The NDP steadfastly refused to 

fund those programs upfront, and we have, every single year 

since we’ve become government, Mr. Speaker, in 2007, and we 

will continue to do so. 

 

In 1991-92 — I think it was the spring of ’92; I remember it 

well — the NDP tore up GRIP contracts with producers. I had 

one myself. I was in that program and I haven’t been in too 

many since. But it was a pretty good program and it was the 

only program we had, Mr. Speaker, and then the NDP wanted 

to cut costs so the first thing they did was go to the agricultural 

community. And even though producers had signed their GRIP 

contracts for the year 1992, the production year for 1992, they 

tore up those contracts, Mr. Speaker. They had to go to court to 

defend themselves over it, Mr. Speaker. They were sued. It was 

a mess, and producers have never forgotten it. That was 

disrespectful beyond belief, Mr. Speaker. And they’d do it 

again. They’d do it again tomorrow if they had the chance. Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP increased crop insurance premiums regularly 

without increasing coverage and they cut the spot loss hail 

program twice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the federal 

community pastures. We’ve set aside $1.15 million for the 

transition of the federal community pastures. We’ve stated and 

I’ve stated ever since it was announced this past early summer 

that the federal government was divesting of the PFRA [Prairie 

Farm Rehabilitation Administration] pastures . . . And under 

that agreement, those pastures come back to the province that 

they’re in, Mr. Speaker, an agreement that was signed in 1940, I 

think. And so we get these back. 

 

And we didn’t ask for this. We didn’t want it and we don’t want 

it still. But it’s happening, and it’s happening under a timetable 

that is dictated by the federal government. They’re turning 10 of 

them over to us soon for operations in the 2014 grazing season, 

Mr. Speaker, and those will be the first 10. And the last of them 

will be turned over to us in 2018. And patrons have been our 

priority the whole time. We are concerned that the patrons have 

the opportunity to use this grass in the future as they have in the 

past, Mr. Speaker. 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3013 

The pasture patrons can currently receive up to $120,000 per 

pasture to assist with setting up their business entities and any 

training they may need on the specifics associated with their 

pasture. We’re not going to take over managing of these 

pastures, Mr. Speaker. The patrons and the cattle industry and 

cattle producers are the best stewards of grassland that we can 

find in this province. It’s a skill, Mr. Speaker, that’s been 

passed on from generation to generation. They’re proud of their 

ability to manage grassland and they do it very, very well. 

 

[16:45] 

 

I’m hearing a little activity on the other side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. The member from Nutana has stated that — stated in 

this very legislature, Mr. Speaker, and other places — that cattle 

producers who have for generations been stewards of the 

grassland in this province are not, are not good stewards of 

grassland. She thinks that federal, she thinks that federal 

bureaucrats are better at that. I guess that’s, I guess that’s 

typical for the NDP way of thinking. I mean, if it’s expensive 

and it’s unionized, it’s got to be better, right? 

 

She also referred to the PFRA pastures as cow daycare. Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — As what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Cow daycare, you heard me. That’s 

what she said. Disrespectful. Disrespectful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to do our level best to see that the 

patrons go on to operate these pastures. And I believe when the 

dust settles, they’ll be very happy that a Saskatchewan Party 

government was in place through this transition and they get the 

opportunity to either purchase or lease these pastures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have no rural representation, and it’s no 

wonder. It’s no wonder when they’re as disrespectful to rural 

Saskatchewan as you would glean from the remarks from the 

member from Nutana. It’s no wonder they have no rural 

representation, Mr. Speaker, but they think they know what’s 

best for ranchers and the environment that ranchers have 

protected for well over 100 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP spent 16 years attacking farmers, 

ranchers, and rural Saskatchewan and they want a chance to do 

it again. They want a chance. They won’t get one, but they’d 

like it. They’d sure want it. They want it so bad it hurts. 

 

The NDP continually, Mr. Speaker, wasted taxpayers’ money, 

investing in losing private business rather than supporting 

agricultural programs. They did it every single year, Mr. 

Speaker. I did a little calculation of my own and it worked out 

to nearly $100 million a year that they squandered for a number 

of years in a row. Nearly $100 million a year that they 

squandered on investments and private industry that virtually all 

lost money for the taxpayers. 

 

Not only didn’t they properly fund programs, Mr. Speaker, they 

cut programs and services to farmers and ranchers. Mr. Speaker, 

I think the jury’s in on who best serves rural Saskatchewan, the 

NDP or the Saskatchewan Party government, but I want to read 

some quotes from independent people and agencies regarding 

this budget and how it affects agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a news release from SARM says this, and I quote: 

 

During a time of fiscal restraint these funding increases 

reaffirm the government’s dedication to help fund the 

municipal infrastructure needed to foster continued 

economic growth. This commitment is important to rural 

Saskatchewan because the growing industries driving this 

province’s economy are located in rural municipalities. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

The Province is also committing to fully fund Growing 

Forward 2 programs, continuing to fund SARM 

administered pest control programs and encouraging 

irrigation opportunities . . . these investments are greatly 

appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskCanola Chair Joan Heath said this, and I 

quote: 

 

SaskCanola is very pleased to see the ministry’s 

continued increased emphasis on innovation and research 

funding. A significant part of the success of canola has 

been a direct result of research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a news release put out by the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association, they say this: “The Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association is encouraged by the provincial 

government’s commitment to agricultural research.” The news 

release goes on to say: “The SCA does appreciate the increase 

in Growing Forward 2 framework funding as well as the 

commitment to hold the line on education property tax on farm 

land.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Western Grains Research Foundation says: 

 

Producers will benefit from the Saskatchewan 

Government’s increased commitment to research . . . I 

would like to thank the Government of Saskatchewan for 

their commitment and Minister Stewart for his ongoing 

support of agricultural research and innovation in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are a few quotes from leaders in the 

agricultural industry. We appreciate their comments and the 

confidence they have shown in this great balanced budget. And 

as I said previously, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of this 

budget and very proud of our Minister of Finance. And 

accordingly I support the motion and this budget. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to . . . 

[inaudible] . . . this balanced budget, our sixth balanced budget. 

You know, since we formed government, all our caucus 

members have always been involved in designing the budget. 

That’s one of the things, the great part of this party. But now 

that I’m on Treasury Board, I’ve been involved even a little bit 

more. And I admire the work of the Finance minister and the 

Finance officials that do work year around to help us, providing 



3014 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2013 

us the right information to do this budget, but also to the caucus 

members that gave us the information, their input that they’ve 

been gathering up over the year of what their constituents have 

been telling them.  

 

And naturally I mean, same as in Arm River-Watrous, health 

care is always at the top of the list of that. And that’s something 

that we recognize in this budget, Mr. Speaker. You know, we 

will be spending a record of 4.84 billion on health care in 

Saskatchewan. This means a 3.5 increase in health care 

spending over the last year. You know, our regional health 

authorities will get 3 billion in this budget. That’s an overall 

increase of 4.5. 

 

And you know, I’ll talk about under the NDP how they used to 

always . . . That’s one of the reasons that I got into politics was 

they were always looking on the decline. They were closing 

things in rural Saskatchewan. We had long-term care facilities 

that were on the waiting list for a number of years. One of them 

was Watrous. They were on the waiting list since ’91 looking 

for an okay, for the go-ahead from the government to build it. 

Under our government, we’ve built Watrous. It’s up and 

running. We’re also building the other 10, working towards that 

as the communities come together, knowing that they’re going 

to need the long-term care as they go on. 

 

That’s something that differentiates us than the NDP in any of 

the budgets. Our budgets have always dealt with growth, Mr. 

Speaker, and looking towards the future. That’s one of the 

reasons that I got into politics was because before ’99 the 

province was always — and it was run by the NDP — it was 

looking on decline, how to manage decline. 

 

We can talk about the education system when they used to 

predict how many students they would be losing per year. You 

know, since we’ve come in we’re dealing with the increase in 

students. I mean that’s a good thing. That’s dealing with 

growth. And that is one of the things that propelled myself and 

all my colleagues to get into politics. And that’s why we have 

49 members on that side and they have nine. 

 

You know, I’ve listened to many speeches on their side and it 

disappoints me that, you know, all they talk about is the 

negative things, not how we’re dealing with growth . . . how, 

you know, basically things that would almost hold the province 

back. 

 

Uranium is one. We realized, you know, talking to the industry, 

that there hasn’t been any significant increase in mine 

production and they gave us reasons why. They gave the 

minister and our caucus reasons why. So we’ve looked at 

adjusting the royalty rates. I’ve never heard one good thing 

from that side on that — and two northern members — that’s 

going to help their constituency, going to provide good, union 

paying, high paying jobs to that area, plus over the province. 

Even though these are union jobs, they still can’t say, I haven’t 

heard one of them say in a speech, but you know what, that was 

a good move; this is going to help grow the province, Mr. 

Speaker. I haven’t heard one of them say that. 

 

You know, we talk about Keystone. You know, we had the 

motion here and I was here when they voted against it. They 

voted against that motion. And yet after, with the new member, 

with the new leader, he finally, after days, after days of the 

press going to him, says, yes I kind of support it. But he still 

will not go against his federal leader who is against Keystone, 

who is against the pipeline expansion and against tar sand 

expansion, which . . . When I go door to door, as many as my 

colleagues do, I mean the people say, that’s good for the 

province; the growth is good. They can’t say that. I’ve yet to 

hear that in any of their speeches how we need to be working 

together. How can we work together to convince Obama and 

the United States that this pipe, we need this pipeline? The 

United States needs it. They realize it. But you know what? 

They have a federal leader that is talking against it. 

 

They still cannot work towards growing this province. That is 

the negativity of them, and that’s why they’re sitting with nine 

you know, and they’re going to be in the future if they don’t 

change that. I hear the same stuff from the current leader that I 

heard from the previous one, Mr. Lingenfelter, same stuff. 

Same stuff. Just the same old, you know, almost the rhetoric, 

trying to . . . how can we not grow this province. You know, 

let’s keep it the same. 

 

I can remember when . . . I was here when Mr. Lautermilch 

made the comment right here in this House saying, you know, if 

more people leave, well there’s just more for the rest of us. 

Well how does that work? You know. 

 

But this budget is dealing with growth which we have over the 

six years. Highways, in my constituency we have Highway 15. 

We’re going to start work on it. We’re going to make that a 

long, a wide-load corridor, Mr. Speaker, and we need that to get 

the wide loads off No. 11. As you know, No. 11 is getting 

busier and busier every year. We need to move that. We know 

that. And it’s costly. It’s going to cost us between, you know, 

30 to $40 million when that’s completed. But that’s something 

we’re planning for. We’re starting work on that. That’s in this 

budget. That’s helping out the constituents, it’s helping out the 

residents, and it’s also getting traffic off No. 11, moving the 

heavy, wide loads as the oil industry and other industries are 

growing throughout this province. 

 

I mean I’ve got to look at my constituency of any major town 

— Watrous and Wynyard and Dundurn and Hanley, Kenaston 

— they’re all growing in population. That is a good thing, Mr. 

Speaker. That is what this budget is all about. This is what these 

budget speeches are about is how we want to grow this province 

and how they want to hold it back. 

 

When we look at designing a budget, it’s how can we help this 

province grow, and also how can we improve the quality of life 

for the residents. Because to improve the quality of life, Mr. 

Speaker, you need money. You need to bring in business. You 

need to have jobs for the people. You need to have the money 

to do things such as the transition house that we did in Melfort. 

You need money for that. 

 

The increases that we’ve given to social services over the years, 

that comes from hard work, from people working, from 

businesses being there, from more business moving in so we 

have more money. The more businesses you have, the more 

money you have for your social programs, for health care, for 

social services. Then you can go building highways and schools 

and hospitals and expanding what you’ve . . . as you’re working 



March 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3015 

towards growing your budget. 

 

You know, we deal with . . . As each ministry brought forward 

their plan to Treasury Board, I mean it all dealt with growth. It 

all dealt . . . Two things, two things it would bring forward was 

how to grow the province, but also how can we also improve 

the quality of life for the people of Saskatchewan. Each and 

every ministry that brought that to Treasury Board, and myself 

as a member, that’s what, those are the two things that the 

ministers always were working towards, two principles that we 

had for this party. And that is why we have 49 members over 

here and that’s why they have nine because they still cannot 

realize that growth . . . You have to have growth to improve 

your social and the quality of life for your residents of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m very proud of this budget and I think you can gather from 

what I’m saying that I plan to be supporting it. I’m against the 

amendment that the opposition brings. They bring forth the 

same amendment over the six years, and it always talks about 

negativity and how to hold this province back. 

 

I can remember how they tried to hold it back over the many 

years, letting the highways decline, our education system 

decline, letting our health care decline, closing 52 hospitals. 

Remember when they closed the wing in the Davidson 

long-term care facility? How many rural service centres did 

they close? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thirty-one, a 

member tells me. They’ve closed so many things over the years 

that it’s even hard to name, but I can still remember it because 

when you go around door knocking to people, they remind you. 

When you’re door knocking, they’ll say, we don’t ever want 

that party back in power again because all they will do is hold 

this province back. They’ve held the growth of it back, and 

they’ve held the people back. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, the time of 

adjournment, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow 

morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2985 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2985 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2985 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2985 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2985 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2986 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2986 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2986 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2986 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2986 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2986 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Youth Receives Emergency Medical Services Awards 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2987 

 AIDS Programs Life Skills Graduation 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2987 

 Business Supports Close Cuts for Cancer 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2987 

 Let’s Launch the Saskatchanaut 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2988 

 Saskatchewan Scouts Awards Ceremony 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2988 

 Cupar Canucks Win Championships 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2988 

 Health Care Efficiencies 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2988 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Children in Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2989 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2989 

 Venture Capital Funds 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2990 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2990 

 Decision Regarding Film Employment Tax Credit 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2991 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2991 

 Surgical Wait Times 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2992 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2993 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2993 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2993 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence for Members to Attend Conference 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2994 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2994 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2998 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3000 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3002 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3003 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3005 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3009 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3011 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3013 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


