




















































Hansard: November 20, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 16A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4107 

 November 20, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to introduce 16 students from Campus Regina Public. Mr. 

Speaker, I look forward to having a conversation with them 

after our routine proceedings. Accompanying them are their 

teachers: Scott Gardiner, Harvey Basi, and Laura Ironstad. I ask 

all members to welcome them to the House here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you and through you 25 public service 

employees that are seated in your gallery. They are here today 

as part of a tour and a bit of an education about what we do in 

this building, which I think is helpful that we can figure out 

what each of us do. And on behalf of my colleagues, I would 

like to thank them for all that they do. 

 

We all know, Mr. Speaker, that we can’t do our jobs unless 

they’re doing theirs. And we know that they do their jobs very 

well every day, and we are so very thankful for that. So I 

welcome them here to their Assembly, and I look forward to 

meeting with them after question period today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission in 

welcoming these 25 public servants to their Legislative 

Assembly. As the minister has said, in the work we strive to do 

for the people of Saskatchewan, you don’t get very far as a 

politician without the work of our able public servants. 

 

So on behalf of the official opposition, thank you for the work 

that you do in serving the people of Saskatchewan. And I join 

with the minister in welcoming you here to your legislature 

today, and I look forward to joining you for about 20 minutes 

for a chat not too far off in the afternoon. So we’ll have a good 

talk then, I’m sure, but welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would invite members to join with me in welcoming guests that 

have joined us in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. As you’ll 

know, November is Diabetes Awareness Month, and so it’s a 

great honour to have the representatives and volunteers from the 

Canadian Diabetes Association here in the Chamber with us. 

 

Joining us from the Canadian Diabetes Association is Warren 

Wagner, the regional director, there’s Warren; Brie Hnetka, 

who’s the senior manager for programs and partnerships; and 

Aileen Leo, who’s the executive director for government 

relations. 

 

As well joining these individuals are people from the Canadian 

Diabetes Association advocacy volunteers, Mr. Speaker. And I 

will enter their names into the record, Mr. Speaker: Bob 

Gawley; Melissa and Tim Johnson and their two children, 

Emma and Salem — Emma is 13 years old and I believe Salem 

is 11; Lynne Eikel; Paul Kuspira; Diana Orser; Georgia 

Joorsity; Bob Lydiate; Sarah Struthers; Peter Dickinson; Tristan 

Banyay; Arlene Slimmon; Janet Bradshaw; and Melissa 

Lowenberger. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join 

with me in welcoming these individuals from the Canadian 

Diabetes Association to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming the guests from the Canadian 

Diabetes Association, both the staff and the volunteers. I know 

the Canadian Diabetes Association does a tremendous job 

helping people live healthier lives with diabetes, and also 

working to find a cure. 

 

I know my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana as well as other 

members of this Legislative Assembly live with diabetes every 

day, and it’s been very enlightening as my colleague from 

Nutana has gone on this journey in the last couple of years 

learning how to live well with it. And it is indeed no easy feat, 

Mr. Speaker. But good information and good support from 

organizations like the Canadian Diabetes Association go a long 

way. 

 

So again I’d just like to join the minister in saying welcome, 

and I look forward to the presentation and program later this 

afternoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to request 

leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Coronation Park has 

requested leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, sitting in your gallery I’ve got the coaches and the 

players from the Standing Buffalo Fighting Sioux peewee 

lacrosse team. And I’m going to introduce them first, then I’m 

going to tell, I’m going to tell everybody about their exploits. 

But if you can just give a wave when I say your name. So 

coaches Russ Matthews; coach, Chief Roger Redman; Don 

Larson; manager, Larissa Yuzicappi. 

 



4108 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

And then in terms of players, I’ve got Brandon Yuzicappi. I’ve 

got Brody Brown, Isaac Chicoose, Sandis Laswisse, Cain 

Thomson, Ayden Tawiyaka, Ethan Yuzicappi, Colton 

Goodwill, Layne Soo-Oyewaste, Tre Yuzicappi, Zach 

Ironeagle, Skyla Wajuntah, and Nolan Deegan. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got the director of Sask Lacrosse 

with us, Bridget Pottle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Standing Buffalo Fighting Sioux peewee 

lacrosse team won three gold medals this summer as the only 

First Nation team in all of the tournaments. The unprecedented 

success for a First Nation team was the culmination of five 

years of commitment by the youth and families from the tiny 

First Nation of 500 people. Students started practicing lacrosse 

at school five years ago. It quickly became popular with the 

community. Standing Buffalo has had teams registered in the 

Queen City Minor Box Lacrosse League for the past five years. 

This year the community had teams registered in the novice 

division, 10 and under, and the pee wee division, 12 and under. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this team won the 37th annual Calgary, Canada, 

Canada Day lacrosse tournament gold, the three-day 

tournament from the novice to the midget A division. It was 

played in Calgary over the Canada Day weekend. Over 100 

teams this year were participating. They were the only First 

Nation team in any division. Teams had reps from California, 

Denver, Washington, nine other teams from across Western 

Canada. It was a 12-team tournament. Standing Buffalo 

defeated the Kelowna Kodiaks in the final game 8 to 6. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re not only provincial and national 

champions, they’re North American and international 

champions. And we should all be very proud, and I’d like all 

members to join me in welcoming and congratulating the 

Fighting Sioux on their championship. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition I’d like to welcome the Fighting Sioux 

to their legislature to congratulate them on this national 

championship and on all the great work. Chief Redman, Coach 

Russ Matthews, all the folks that are here — the Yuzicappis, the 

Thomsons, the Goodwills, a lot of famous names here in 

Saskatchewan, not just from Standing Buffalo First Nations, 

Mr. Speaker. But it’s quite an accomplishment, and keep up that 

great achievement and that great work. Wašte. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I 

would like to introduce in the west gallery, Carlene Schmaltz. 

Carlene, give us a wave, please; Carlene’s here. She works with 

diabetes back in Carrot River, Mr. Speaker, and she’s with the 

Canadian Diabetes Association. She has a great passion for her 

work, Mr. Speaker, and anytime you talk to her she’s always 

going on about how diabetes . . . some of the prevention things 

that could be done and some of the drugs that she also would 

like. 

 

Also, there’s another little catch with Carlene. Her husband, 

Cory Schmaltz, is the coach of the provincially-famous Carrot 

River Wildcats football team. Now, Mr. Speaker, they had a 

very good season. They didn’t lose a game until they got into 

the playoffs. But, Mr. Speaker, wait till next year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the House, I’d like to 

introduce in your gallery, three special guests — Mikayla 

Schultz, Dylan Ferrier, and Stephanie Cox — if you could give 

a wave. These folks are board members of TransSask, a group 

that’s dedicated to support and resources for the trans 

community here in Saskatchewan. And Mikayla and Dylan 

have their own radio show; it’s called Gender Talk on CJTR. I 

would ask all members to give them a warm welcome to their 

legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 

and to you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 

my friend and constituent seated in the west gallery: Mr. 

Warren Wagner, previously introduced by the Minister of 

Health. And I’d like to take this opportunity to thank Mr. 

Wagner for the great work he does with diabetes. I hope all 

members will welcome him. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to welcome in your gallery my Aunt 

Shirley here to the legislature here today: Shirley Thurm, a 

long-time teacher and someone who’s certainly very involved 

in her church, very involved in the community, very involved in 

the writers’ guild, and someone important in my life. And I’d 

also like to introduce with Aunt Shirley, her good friend Dave 

Cawood, a lifelong teacher as well, and someone who’s 

certainly a good friend to my Aunt Shirley and provides a lot of 

support and care as well, which certainly I appreciate as well. 

So I ask all members to welcome these two individuals to their 

Assembly. 

 

And while still on my feet, I just want to give a warm shout-out 

to Russ Matthews, someone who has devoted his life to 

breaking down barriers in sport or barriers that challenge many 

families and children to access sport, and someone that was the 

founder of the Outdoor Hockey League here in Regina. I’ve 

crashed around the ice a little bit with Russ Matthews, usually 

on the wrong side of his elbows, and I’ve also seen his work 

first-hand within the community, bettering the lives of many 

young people. So in joining with the warm welcome to these 

international champion lacrosse team, I welcome Russ 

Matthews. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the members opposite as well in welcoming Mikayla, Dylan, 

and Stephanie to their legislature. And again welcome and 

congratulations on all your advocacy and your great work in 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4109 

furthering the issues in terms of transgendered people. So thank 

you for that. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome, 

sitting in the west gallery, Emma Corkish. Emma’s presently 

working with Street Culture and involved with Street Culture 

Kidz. And very proud of all the work that you’ve done and just 

to get, really, really happy to get you into this Assembly. So 

welcome. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to say a few words 

about Russ Matthews. Russ and I played lacrosse together for 

many years, and certainly a great advocate not only for his 

community but also for kids in sports. And I value him as a 

great friend and really, really happy that he’s here, brought his 

team with him. And thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present petitions calling for greater protection for 

transgender rights. And we know that the declaration of sexual 

orientation and gender identity presented to the United Nations 

General Assembly on December 18th, 2008 reaffirms the 

principle of non-discrimination, requires that human rights 

apply equally to every human regardless of sexual orientation or 

gender identity. 

 

And we know that the Canadian Human Rights Act establishes 

the principle that all individuals shall have an opportunity equal 

with other individuals to make for others the lives that they are 

able and wish to have and to have their needs accommodated, 

consistent with the duties and obligations as members of 

society, without being hindered in or prevented from doing so 

by discriminatory practices. 

 

With the understanding that all citizens of Saskatchewan fall 

within the jurisdiction of the aforementioned articles, and 

noting with concern that acts of violence and related human 

rights violations as well as discrimination practised against 

persons because of their gender identity or expression. 

 

[13:45] 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan introduce a 

legislative bill that will provide protection under the law to 

all residents of Saskatchewan through the inclusion within 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code of the terms 

gender identity and gender expression as prohibited 

grounds for discrimination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note that this petition is signed by nearly 1,000 

people, 937 people from across the province here, and I do so 

present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefit from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO [rental purchase 

option]. These families are very proud homeowners in their 

communities. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School. 

 

These petitioners point out that the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School in north central Regina is now quite literally 

falling apart, has been closed indefinitely, and is no longer safe 

for students or staff. There’s been a temporary solution arrived 

at, Mr. Speaker, with the refurbishment of the old sanctuary at 

the old Sacred Heart Church, but a permanent solution is 

required. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners point out that the school and 

community have raised this issue with the Sask Party provincial 

government since 2007 without resolution. They point out that 

the Sacred Heart Community School is the largest school in 

north central Regina with 450-plus students, 75 per cent of 

whom are First Nations and Métis. They point out that 

enrolment has increased by 100-plus students over the past four 

years and that attendance and learning outcomes are steadily 

improving, and they point out that as a matter of basic fairness 

and common sense that Sacred Heart Community School needs 

a gym. 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows, they: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause this 

government to immediately replace the gymnasium of 

Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Moose Jaw, 

Regina, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

National Child Day and the Child and Family Agenda 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes, yes. You haven’t heard enough of me 

today. But thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m honoured to rise in the House to recognize that today is 



4110 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

National Child Day in Saskatchewan. National Child Day is 

celebrated on November 20th each year in recognition of 

Canada’s adoption of the United Nations Convention on the 

Rights of the Child. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, our children are this province’s most 

precious resource. I’m very pleased to recognize this day, as it 

reminds us all about the importance of ensuring our children 

have the opportunity to live healthy, happy, and productive 

lives. In order to help achieve this objective, Mr. Speaker, our 

government continues to invest in the child and family agenda. 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, the goals of the child and family 

agenda are that children get a good start in life, youth are 

prepared for the future, and families are strong and 

communities are supportive. 

 

Since 2011-2012, this government has invested $53.7 million 

into the agenda which has helped to hire new front-line child 

protection workers, support pre-kindergarten programs, increase 

services to children and youth with autism spectrum disorder or 

fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, and support the building 

partnerships to reduce crime initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the child and family agenda is now expanding its 

mandate to include additional work in the areas of education, 

health and family supports. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

International Transgender Day of Remembrance 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a heavy heart that I join 

many across the world on the 15th International Transgender 

Day of Remembrance. On this day we remember that many 

people who have been victims of these homicides, and we raise 

public awareness of hate crimes and provide a safe place for 

public mourning. 

 

A report released this summer revealed that 238 transgender 

people across the world had been killed in the last year and a 

total of 1,373 have been murdered since January 2008. Sadly 

the report only includes murders of transgender people that can 

be documented or are reported; it may not be a complete picture 

of the scope of crimes committed worldwide. The Trans Murder 

Monitoring Project found that the highest number of murders 

disproportionately affect minors. In the early months of 2013, 

18 of the first 22 people who lost their lives were under the age 

of 18. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this kind of hatred is unacceptable, and it is only 

through compassion and acceptance that we can begin to help 

transgender people feel safe in their communities. It is 

encouraging to see Saskatchewan youth working to end this 

violence. There will be a Transgender Day of Remembrance 

vigil at the Administration and Humanities Building at the 

University of Regina tonight at 7:30. 

 

We at the Saskatchewan NDP [New Democratic Party] have 

called for changes in The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code in 

order to provide better protection for all Saskatchewan residents 

through the inclusion of terms gender identity and gender 

expression as prohibited grounds for discrimination. 

 

I call on all members of this Assembly to give honour to the 

hundreds of transgender people who have lost their lives 

because of transphobia and homophobia. I hope that we can 

strive towards creating a world this kind of violence does not 

exist anymore. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Festival of Trees 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For those of you 

that have not heard the news, there’s a phenomena in Moose 

Jaw that continues to astound year after year. This past Saturday 

was the 22nd annual Moose Jaw Health Foundation’s Festival 

of Trees. Marj and I along with 430 other guests, including the 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Moose Jaw 

North and his wife, experienced a night of amazing fundraising 

in the Friendly City. 

 

This year’s theme was A Mad Mad Christmas, and we were 

treated to an evening of ’60s-themed music, decor, and food. 

The ceiling was treated with stunning red lampshades above 

each table, a mirrored bar, snow machines, and a vintage living 

room, along with a shoeshine stand, but above all, of course the 

elaborate displays and auction items that have become 

synonymous the Moose Jaw’s Festival of Trees. 

 

What sets apart this particular Festival of Trees is the depth of 

continuous community support. You’ll find guest tables of 

supporters who attended the very first Festival of Trees and 

now their children are attending as well. Mr. Speaker, this 

amazing event raised nearly $250,000 towards surgical booms 

in the new Moose Jaw Regional Hospital which is scheduled to 

open in the summer of 2015. 

 

A night such as this is meticulously planned by many 

volunteers and local groups. Mr. Speaker, the residents of 

Moose Jaw have once again shown their generosity. I ask all 

members to join me in congratulating them on yet another 

hugely successful event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly to 

recognize the importance of Saskatchewan Addictions 

Awareness Week. This important week runs from November 

18th to the 24th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, addictions is a complex health issue that affects 

Saskatchewan families and communities. Over 47,000 

Canadian deaths are linked to substance abuse every year. The 

youth of our province are more vulnerable to the impacts of 

drugs and alcohol. Data shows our children are being exposed 

to a wide array of drugs at younger and younger ages. 

 

We need to make sure any effect to curb addictions also 

addresses mental health issues. Too often depression and 

anxiety are self-medicated with substances. The stigma keeps 

people from getting the care they need. Nor can we overlook the 

relationships between addictions, substance abuse, and poverty. 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4111 

Saskatchewan’s North and rural communities face additional 

challenges in dealing with poverty and addictions. I want to 

thank the addiction workers for the great job they do with 

limited resources and staff. 

 

Government needs to do its part to address the physical 

isolation, limited treatment options, and limited access to 

services. Mr. Speaker, we need to do more, not just recognize 

Saskatchewan Addictions Week. We need to follow up with 

action. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Grey Cup Festival 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week people 

across the country will get a chance to see first-hand why 

Saskatchewan is truly the best place to live, work, and raise a 

family. All eyes will be on our province this week as we kick 

off the first day of the 101st Grey Cup Festival, which runs until 

the championship game on the 24th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the celebration in Rider nation officially kicked 

off at noon. The member from Dewdney brought greetings on 

behalf of the government, and my seatmate and I were fortunate 

enough to get one of the many coveted seats in the Mosaic 

underground pavilion to kick off the opening ceremonies. 

 

Along with the grand opening, many other venues are open 

today: the Telus Street Festival, Mosaic Underground Tent, and 

the official opening of party central, Riderville. Mr. Speaker, 

the rest of the week features an array of activities that includes 

the Safeway Grey Cup Parade, Taste of the Nation, Cheer 

Extravaganza, and concerts by the Barenaked Ladies, Hedley, 

and Big & Rich. On game day, people can have fun at the 

pre-game party with The Sheepdogs from Saskatoon, hit the 

Countdown to Kick-off, or head to the practice field for a 

pre-game party. All events this week are sure to be a good time 

for you and your whole family, if you’re going to the game or 

not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite everyone in the Assembly to dress in 

green and take in the spectacular Grey Cup festivities in our 

Queen City. Really Regina is the place to be this week, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

National Diabetes Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, November is National Diabetes 

Awareness Month. This is an opportunity to raise awareness of 

diabetes and the challenges experienced by people living with 

this condition. Mr. Speaker, a diabetes diagnosis can have a 

significant impact on a person’s life. There are medical, 

financial, and practical challenges. Adjusting to life with 

diabetes can affect the entire family. 

 

Our government has taken important steps to support people 

living with diabetes and their families. We expanded the 

Saskatchewan insulin pump program to include residents up to 

25 years of age. The provincial drug plan provides coverage for 

test strips, a variety of insulins, and other therapies. We’ve 

increased support for the live well with chronic conditions 

program, a self-managed program. We’re also strengthening the 

primary health care system in our province to better serve the 

needs of patients. People living with chronic conditions such as 

diabetes will receive greater assistance from teams of health 

providers and improved supports to self-care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I want to thank the Canadian Diabetes 

Association leadership, staff, and volunteers for devoting their 

time and energy to helping people affected by diabetes. Their 

care, passion, and dedication are truly making a difference to 

the well-being of people in our province. 

 

I ask all my colleagues in this Legislative Assembly to join me 

in recognizing their contributions. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Opposition Support for Trade Agreement 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, we have some 

good news and some bad news to report in the House today. 

The good news is after months of asking the NDP to take a 

position on economic policy, they finally have. The bad news 

is, it’s still not the Leader of the Opposition defining that 

policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very surprised to see in my hometown paper 

today the unofficial spokesperson and economist for the NDP, 

failed leadership candidate Mr. Erin Weir, slamming CETA 

[Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement]. Mr. Weir took a break from slamming 

Saskatchewan’s record job growth, proclaiming trade with the 

world’s largest import market is a bad thing. Maybe other 

members of the NDP caucus thought they needed a new 

spokesperson. 

 

After all, minutes after voting against the motion supporting 

CETA in principle, the Leader of the NDP went outside the 

Chamber and told the media he does support the agreement in 

principle. That has to be some kind of a record flip-flop, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Weir has been telling us for months that 

Saskatchewan’s manufacturing is dying, then slams an 

agreement which will make almost all of Saskatchewan 

manufactured goods duty free. 

 

And two weeks ago, the member for Athabasca got up in the 

House and supported fracking in the province, Mr. Speaker, and 

we thanked him for that support. Then the NDP caucus claims 

we’re twisting reality in an attempt to hide from their own 

comments. Can someone tell us over there, where they stand, 

Mr. Speaker? Obviously the leader can’t tell us where he 

stands; the rest of the NDP leadership hasn’t told him yet. 

 

[14:00] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



4112 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

Combatting Bullying 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen a fair bit 

of discussion over the past months, Mr. Speaker, about the issue 

of bullying. And that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, because it 

demands our attention and it is a serious matter. 

 

The opposition’s concern about the anti-bullying report that was 

released by this government last week is that it didn’t provide a 

lot of detail, and it didn’t really have much of an action plan. 

But perhaps, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon this government is 

able to provide some of that detail. We know today that the 

federal government is introducing legislation dealing with 

online bullying. And we think this is a good thing, Mr. Speaker, 

and we welcome that. The anti-bullying report said that this 

government will simply assess the implications of these federal 

changes. 

 

Surely this government has been consulted on this, these 

changes to the Criminal Code, so my question to the Premier: 

what implications does this government anticipate as a result of 

these changes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, and I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the 

question. This is an important issue. And the short answer to his 

question is we need to see exactly what the federal government 

is considering introducing into the House of Commons to 

determine whether or not in fact provincial legislation would be 

required. Certainly if it is, it’s something that we would be open 

to. I think it’s something that we would look at, but that’s 

unclear at this point. 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, that of all of the provinces in the 

country, I think we were amongst the earliest to indicate our 

support for the federal Justice department, the Justice minister, 

as they look to ways to protect people in our country from 

cyberbullying. And that remains the position of the Government 

of Saskatchewan. We’ll determine if provincial legislation is 

required once we see and understand fully exactly what the 

federal government is introducing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The anti-bullying 

report also made mention of a website, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 

long been supportive of a website to anonymously report online 

instances of bullying, Mr. Speaker, online so that the right 

actions can be taken and so that youth are indeed safe. So I was 

pleased to see this referenced in the report that was provided. 

 

I was disappointed, however, in the long delay before the reality 

of having the website available for youth in the province and 

also disappointed at the lack of detail around this change in 

general. So my question to the Premier: who will be responsible 

for monitoring and following up on all the concerns brought 

forward through this anonymous reporting tool? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again I thank the Leader 

of the Opposition for the question. This model that he’s 

referencing is based on the British Columbia ERASE [expect 

respect and a safe education] Bullying initiative, as members of 

the House will know. And I first heard about the initiative in 

detail at the summer premiers’ meeting in Niagara though 

certainly our officials and the Legislative Secretary who was 

focusing on this was aware of it well before then, and its details. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure, in answer to the member’s 

question, that we have a collaborative effort in terms of 

follow-up on any reports back through either the app, which is 

also an important part of this initiative, or the other means, the 

website, other means that folks will have, principally young 

people will have, to report incidents of bullying. And of course 

a collaborative effort is going to mean the Ministry of 

Education is very much involved. But we’re going to need to be 

able to work with and rely on the leadership of local educators 

and school boards as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s own Legislative 

Secretary for the anti-bullying initiative report states that 50 per 

cent of gay and transgender young people have thought about 

suicide — 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker — and 37 per cent have 

attempted suicide. We know that gay-straight alliances are 

helpful to these young people. 

 

When it comes to GSAs [gay-straight alliance] the report says 

that schools “should respond positively,” but that’s quite a 

vague statement, Mr. Speaker. We don’t know what tools or 

information will be provided to students and to parents, and we 

also don’t know what training and guidance will be provided to 

teachers and to school administrators. So my question to the 

Premier on the issue of GSAs: what are the details, to the 

Premier, beyond simply saying that schools should respond 

positively? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to be 

corrected but I believe shortly after the member raised some of 

these questions, I think it was in the spring session, to the credit 

of the hon. member, that there was a bit of an audit of the 

website that government can provide, that is available to the 

education system, to ensure that there were appropriate links 

even now for those who are looking for the very thing that he is 

requesting in terms of supports for those who want to set up 

GSAs in our province, in schools across Saskatchewan. And I 

would note, Mr. Speaker, that there appears to be no 

impediments to that, certainly none that have come to our 

attention as a result of the work of the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview or the efforts of the Minister of Education. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Amendments to The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I 

presented a petition calling for the inclusion within The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code for the terms gender identity 

and gender expression as prohibited grounds for discrimination. 

To the Minister of Justice: is he open to acting on this petition? 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4113 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s our position that discrimination against 

transgender people in Saskatchewan is unacceptable. We as a 

government have committed to make sure that all Saskatchewan 

residents, whether they’re transgender people, other groups, 

have the protections of the law against discrimination, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Supreme Court has said that human rights legislation is to 

be interpreted in a broad fashion. We have asked for an opinion 

from the Ministry of Justice; we have asked for an opinion from 

the Chief Commissioner of the Human Rights Commission to 

determine if an amendment is necessary to the code. In their 

opinion, the existing wording does protect against 

discrimination with respect to this particular group, Mr. 

Speaker. We have great confidence in the Human Rights 

Commission and the commissioner with respect to his opinion, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Manitoba, 

Alberta, and now, just this month, Newfoundland and Labrador 

all recognize that this is an important human rights issue and 

have included it in their Human Rights Code. 

 

Today is Transgender Day of Remembrance in which we 

remember those who have been killed as a result of transphobia. 

It’s a good day to commit to action. To the minister: will he 

commit towards better protection for transgender people 

through amendments to The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned 

in my last answer, we did seek an opinion from the Human 

Rights Commission as well as the ministry as to whether or not 

any changes were necessary to the Human Rights Code. The 

Human Rights Code does include both sex and sexual 

orientation as prohibited grounds. And the case law from a 

number of jurisdictions determined that those grounds are 

satisfactory to protect against discrimination in that regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll quote from the letter that the Human Rights 

Commissioner had sent to us, a copy of which I have shared 

with my friend across the way: 

 

Canadian courts have consistently interpreted human 

rights legislation in a broad and purposeful manner. Courts 

and tribunal decisions from across Canada consistently 

recognize that transgender persons are protected under the 

grounds of sex and/or gender. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned before, we have great 

confidence in the opinion of the Human Rights Commission 

with respect to this matter and we will not be moving with any 

amendments to the code at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Revenue Sharing With Municipalities 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, property tax payers in 

Saskatoon are facing a big tax increase, in part because the 

provincial government has actually reduced the revenue sharing 

for next year. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because the government 

refused to actually work out a deal with municipalities due to an 

accounting change we flagged with them in the spring of 2012. 

At that time I asked the Minister of Finance then if 

municipalities had his commitment that they wouldn’t see a 

negative impact from the change. But the minister only said 

there was no cause for concern. He was confident that revenue 

sharing would increase. That hasn’t turned out to be the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is this government forcing higher property 

taxes onto families and businesses by not upholding their end of 

the bargain on sharing of PST [provincial sales tax] revenues? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago, our 

government came to an understanding with SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], the major 

municipal organizations in this province, to, after years and 

years of asking for a consistent approach to revenue sharing, 

Mr. Speaker, that they’d have some continuity and something 

reliable that they could count on. 

 

What was achieved was an understanding to tie revenue sharing 

to one point on the PST, Mr. Speaker. It was completely 

understood at that time that it wouldn’t always increase, not 

every year, Mr. Speaker. There’d be times when it would drop, 

as the member suggested, for next year. But, Mr. Speaker, let’s 

put this in perspective. He’s talking about the property tax 

payers in the city of Saskatoon. Revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, 

under the last year of that government, $17 million. Mr. 

Speaker, this year, as the member should well know, Mr. 

Speaker, under this government, $47 million. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that government, as was 

referenced, announced with great fanfare the revenue-sharing 

agreement, something that we supported and something we 

were working towards as well. But barely before the ink was 

dry, that very agreement was undermined by accounting 

changes and taking dollars directly away from municipalities. 

 

The Minister of Finance said just a couple of years ago that he 

would work with municipalities. He committed to have a 

discussion and figure out a solution. The minister said: 

 

. . . municipalities have our commitment that we’re going 

to work with them to establish an interpretation of the 

recent accounting principles that have been placed upon 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Instead of working with municipalities, why did this 

government stubbornly dismiss how this would negatively 



4114 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

impact municipalities and decrease their revenues? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe that member 

has the audacity to stand in this House and talk about municipal 

revenue sharing. I spent my entire career before politics 

working in the municipal sector, Mr. Speaker. I was there when 

they cut revenue sharing in the ’90s, Mr. Speaker, when they 

downloaded to municipal governments. Mr. Speaker, that 

member has no credibility on this issue. I was there at SARM 

during the years of property tax revolts. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

amazing. As far as I can recall, this may be the first time those 

members have even raised this issue. And why, Mr. Speaker? 

Because compared to the dark days at the end of their 

government, revenue sharing has increased 108 per cent under 

this government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Recommendations on Long-Term Care 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a habit of 

commissioning reports, then putting them on the shelf to collect 

dust. To the minister: why does this government not implement 

all the recommendations in the 2010 long-term care initiative 

report? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, that was a report that was issued by this government, 

Mr. Speaker, under the direction of the former minister, 

working with a legislative secretary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There were a number of ideas in fact that we have implemented 

already from that report. For example, Mr. Speaker, under the 

former government, those low-income seniors living in private 

personal care homes that had a certain low income level, Mr. 

Speaker, never received a subsidization from the provincial 

government. That was one of the main features that came out of 

that report from the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, 

Mr. Speaker. And this government did in fact implement that 

initiative, Mr. Speaker, as well as a number of other initiatives 

from that report. It was very well worth the government’s 

initiative to do that report from that member and implement a 

number of the recommendations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier appointed the 

member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley to be the legislative 

secretary to the Minister of Health for the long-term care 

initiative. She wrote a report pointing out many problems with 

how this government handles seniors’ issues and she made 

recommendations which the government didn’t implement all 

of them. 

 

Her report said, “While none of the recommendations are a 

perfect ‘fix’, they are steps in the right direction to provide 

Saskatchewan’s seniors with the best possible programs and 

services.” One of the legislative secretary’s key 

recommendations was for a seniors’ advocate. To the minister: 

why did this government ignore this recommendation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — As I said before, Mr. Speaker, the 

member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley did a great job in 

looking at the issue of long-term care and seniors’ care within 

our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

She made a number of recommendations that were put forward 

by the government, to the government, Mr. Speaker. A number 

of those recommendations have already been acted on. I 

mentioned already the personal care home subsidy for seniors in 

private personal care homes who are of low income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of avenues for seniors to make 

recommendations or who have concerns about long-term care, 

Mr. Speaker. The government felt, through whether it be the 

Ombudsman’s office, whether it be through directly to the 

quality of care coordinators, which is an important role within 

the health regions, Mr. Speaker, that that function was largely 

already served. And that’s why we didn’t move at that point on 

that position. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the legislative secretary said 

that her recommendations were steps in the right direction to 

provide seniors the best possible programs and services. But 

instead of taking steps in the right direction, we keep hearing 

that seniors’ care is getting worse under this government. 

 

The legislative secretary’s report said: 

 

There is a need for a seniors’ (or vulnerable adults) 

advocate. In particular, there was general agreement that 

vulnerable adults need someone who can advocate on their 

behalf particularly when it comes to health services and 

navigating the health system. 

 

With all the concerns we keep hearing about seniors’ care 

getting worse under this government, it seems like the 

government should’ve taken its own legislative secretary’s 

recommendation. So again to the minister: why did the 

government ignore this recommendation? There are needs that 

are not being met. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we have moved, as I have mentioned, on a number of 

the initiatives, recommendations from the legislative secretary. 

We’ve also moved on initiatives outside of the 

recommendations from the legislative secretary, whether that be 

the dramatic increase in funding for Alzheimer’s, Mr. Speaker, 

through the First Link program, Mr. Speaker, through the 

construction and maintenance of new long-term care facilities 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4115 

across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that seniors, whether it be through 

resident and family councils, have an avenue to bring concerns 

forward to the regional health authorities. They’ll now have a 

survey, Mr. Speaker, that they can directly, to the ministry and 

to the minister into the future, that they can bring forward those 

concerns. 

 

There are organizations that do a great job working on behalf of 

seniors, whether that be, Mr. Speaker, the Seniors Mechanism 

or an organization in Saskatoon, aging seniors, Mr. Speaker, as 

well as concerns that are brought through the health regions, 

Mr. Speaker, through the mechanisms that have already been in 

place for those types of concerns. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, again the Premier appointed the 

legislative secretary to make recommendations about long-term 

care. One of her key recommendations was, “Create a Seniors’ 

Secretariat within the Ministry of Health using existing . . . 

resources.” But as usual, this government is just ready for 

excuses about why it didn’t follow through. 

 

Now three and a half years later, we keep hearing shocking and 

heartbreaking stories about the quality of seniors’ care in this 

province. And now we know many seniors do not have a spouse 

or a family member that is able to advocate on their behalf. To 

the minister: is this government willing to admit it made a 

mistake when it stubbornly dismissed a key recommendation 

from its own legislative secretary? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

no, I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite is 

totally correct in her statement. I think we have taken steps to 

address a number of the recommendations that were put 

forward in the member’s recommendations to the former 

minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One thing that we have done, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve provided 

additional funding to the Provincial Ombudsman’s office to 

deal directly with health care cases, Mr. Speaker. That has been 

additional support through a long-standing organization in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, that seniors can access, Mr. Speaker. So 

additional support was put in place through an office that was 

already established and well regarded within the province, 

which I think fills the need that the member had identified in 

her report. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Support for Teachers 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More and 

more teachers are contacting the Premier, the minister, and 

MLAs on both sides of the Assembly to express their complete 

frustration with that government. Here’s a quote from a letter a 

rural teacher sent to the minister and copied members on both 

sides of the Assembly: 

Your government keeps talking about conversation with 

educational stakeholders as being essential. Yet as both a 

parent and a professional educator, I don’t recall having 

been consulted ever about any of these changes. Please 

know, and I’m not alone in this, your words are absolutely 

meaningless without action but all we seem to get from the 

Saskatchewan Party are words. The bottom line is, you 

made a mistake. Now fix it. 

 

To the minister: when will this government fix the mess it’s 

made in education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 

question. Mr. Speaker, we want to do things that will improve 

the relationship because we value the good work that teachers 

do. We value the contribution that they make to the well-being 

of the citizens and children in our province. And we want to 

make sure that they are well supported by way of having the 

requisite supports and suchlike for them. We have, Mr. Speaker, 

increased in each and every year the overall operating grant for 

pre-K [pre–kindergarten] divisions, over 23 per cent since 

November of 2007. 

 

We’ve had a number of other initiatives and we’ve announced 

which ones are being paused, which ones are going ahead. 

We’ve had meetings with STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation] and a number of individual teachers and teachers’ 

groups, including the various teachers’ associations, and that 

will be ongoing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, all that government’s 

rhetoric, all that government’s spin isn’t going to change how 

teachers feel about that government’s record, because they 

know the reality in the classroom. Here’s another quote from 

the letter to the minister: 

 

I’m concerned not only with the contempt your party 

seems to have for our profession but also with increasingly 

difficult situations that exist, not all but many of which 

your government has either created or neglected in our 

school divisions and classrooms. 

 

To the minister: when will this government . . . why has this 

government continually chosen an approach of contempt and 

disrespect to our province’s hard-working teachers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would take 

great exception to the premise of the member’s question. In 

fact, we value and respect the teachers in our province a great 

deal. Mr. Speaker, I can advise that, if nothing else that they 

should take with them, is the great increase in funding that we 

have made to education in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the total . . . [inaudible] . . . funding for pre-K in 

our province is now $1.775 billion. This funding is over and 

above the $600 million capital investment and historic $165 

million relief for property taxes. We’re continuing to work with 



4116 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

our sector departments to develop a new funding formula, to 

work with them and do better things so that we ensure that we 

are able to deliver the best possible education to our students. 

 

We know that our teachers work hard. There are many 

challenges. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the nature of our society. 

There are changes. There are changes with technology and other 

things and we’ll continue to work with them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the problem here is that 

that government’s entirely out of touch with the reality in 

today’s classrooms. Yet it’s taken a government-knows-best 

approach and rammed through with its own agenda. We hear 

that same sort of nonsense in the response from the minister 

where he knows he’s stuck teachers with bigger class size and 

cut supports, yet tries to tell them that somehow everything’s 

fine. 

 

A teacher from Martensville wrote in, saying, “There are just 

too many damn cooks in our kitchen tying our hands and 

thinking they know better than us front-liners what is best for 

our students.” 

 

To the minister: when will this government stop tying the hands 

of teachers? When will this government show some respect for 

teachers as a valued educational partner? 

 

The Speaker: — The member knows the rules when it comes 

to the use of language in this Assembly and I would ask that, 

even in a quote, he pick his words carefully. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there was a written question regarding class size and 

pupil/teacher ratios. I’d like to urge the member to talk to his 

neighbour next door and get the information from him. Because 

when he does, he will realize that our average class size of 17.9 

is something that other provinces strive to achieve. We are one 

of the best provinces in the country for class size. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote the former Education . . . 

the member for Saskatoon Centre. He said, “It’s not only class 

size. It’s class composition and meeting the unique needs of all 

children in the classroom.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the 

members opposite that we’ve increased supports in the 

classroom. Regular teachers, we have now 439 more; student 

support teachers, 86 more. We have 21 per cent more 

psychologists; speech language pathologists, 22 per cent more; 

medical facilitators and nurses, up 105 per cent; social workers, 

up 6 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made a major commitment in our 

province and are going to continue to do it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we see sort of the arrogant 

brush-off of real, valid concerns brought forward here again 

today. And if the minister was actually reading the emails that 

were being sent to him, I think he’d realize just how completely 

frustrated Saskatchewan teachers are. The same teacher from 

Martensville says: 

 

I have never felt so tired as I have these last three months. 

It feels like I am working harder now than I was in my 

first three or four years teaching. And to see student 

performance going down instead of up in the middle of 

this, well the word frustrated doesn’t nearly approach the 

way I am feeling right now. If this government continues 

treating teachers this way, I predict many teachers will be 

leaving for greener pastures because of burnout. 

 

To the minister: when will this government stop treating 

teachers this way? When will they show them some respect? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have a strong and 

aggressive student-first policy and program in our province 

which is going to improve the performance of the students in 

our . . . [inaudible] . . . We have an unacceptable graduation 

rate. We have to try and work with the teachers and try and 

make a better relationship. Appointed Patricia Prowse and Russ 

Mirasty to work with STF, work with the various stakeholders 

that are there. That work is under way and we’re hearing good 

things about it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I can tell you that’s a far cry from what happened when the 

members opposite were in government. During that period of 

time, they chose to close 176 schools. What happened during 

that time? Those students moved to Calgary. So when he talks 

about the teachers going to greener pastures, they may very well 

follow the students that he shipped off to Calgary, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ll take no advice and no lessons from those people. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment 

Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 116, 

The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Government Relations that Bill No. 116, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the minister. 

 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4117 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi 

intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 117, 

The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Government Relations that Bill No. 117, The Municipalities 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 185 through 190. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 185 to 190. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 

question 191. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered question 

191. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 112 — The 

Accounting Profession Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today and join debate on Bill No. 112, The 

Accounting Profession Act. Again, Mr. Speaker, there are 

different types of legislation that come to this Chamber. Some 

being brought forward by self-regulating professions, some that 

in turn with the . . . what is brought forward by those 

self-regulating professions is sometimes of a housekeeping 

nature. In the case of this piece of legislation though, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not so much a piece of housekeeping legislation, 

it’s more of building a new house. 

 

So in terms of the accounting profession and the Institute of 

Chartered Professional Accountants of Saskatchewan and the 

required consequential amendments, it’s an interesting piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, and one that we understand that the 

CAs [chartered accountant], that the CMAs [certified 

management accountant], the CGAs [certified general 

accountant] all had a very definite hand in promoting, and 

which again on the face of it looks to be a fairly helpful piece of 

legislation, and not just attending to housekeeping within the 

self-regulating professions entailed in this piece of legislation, 

but indeed building a new house to carry forth that 

housekeeping. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Again, the Speaker will know that it’s always instructive to look 

to the second reading speeches of the minister when introducing 

the legislation in the Assembly. I was here in my place, Mr. 

Speaker, when this piece of legislation was introduced. And it 

was good to see different representatives of the industry here in 

attendance for not just the tabling, but some of the 

promulgation, Mr. Speaker. And again, referring to the 

minister’s second reading speech, with the Act itself: 

 

. . . will establish a new self-regulating body called the 

Institute of Chartered Professional Accountants of 

Saskatchewan, CPA Sask. This bill will merge the 

chartered accountants, CAs; certified management 

accountants, CMAs; and certified general accountants, 

CGAs into one profession. The proposed Act would grant 

a new common CPA designation to all CAs, CMAs, and 

CGAs in Saskatchewan that are in good standing. This Act 

would replace The Chartered Accountants Act, 1986; The 

Management Accountants Act; The Certified Management 

Accountants Act . . . Bill 27 of 1999-2000 not yet 

proclaimed; and The Certified General Accountants Act of 

1994, [those pieces of legislation anticipated to be 

repealed upon passage, upon proclamation of the new 

Act.] 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, CAs, CMAs, CGAs together represent the 

professional accountants in Saskatchewan, constituting 4,400 

members and 970 students. And again this has been work 

supported by those individuals, and we’re quite respective of 

that. And it’s to add . . . Mr. Speaker, as is fitting when it comes 

to self-regulating profession legislation. 

 

In terms of accomplishing this merger of the outstanding Acts, 



4118 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, there will be a number of changes to be 

contemplated. We’re glad to see that the minister references 

extensive consultation with the three existing accounting bodies 

and the supportive vote to merge that resulted from that work 

and again, Mr. Speaker, the fact that this legislation is in 

keeping with trends evident across not just Western Canada but 

Canada and internationally. 

 

We’ll be interested to see how this plays around the actual 

realization of the proposed number of regulatory and economic 

benefits of a merger. In the speaker’s second reading speech, he 

had referenced the fact of “. . . a new integrated certification 

program that is internationally recognized,” hopefully 

combining the best of the old existing programs. 

 

Unification of the accounting profession creates a modern 

and streamlined regulatory regime for Saskatchewan’s 

professional accountants, reflecting the best practices of 

existing organizations, including codes of professional 

conduct, practice inspection, and disciplinary processes. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, that would seem to make sense on the face 

of it. We look to see how that will be played out in practice but 

again on the face of these propositions would seem to make 

sense. 

 

Carrying on in the minister’s second reading speech: 

 

An accounting profession and financial regulatory system 

that is internationally recognized as being robust, 

competitive, and consistent will better support 

Saskatchewan’s economic objectives. Professional 

accountants play an invaluable role in Saskatchewan’s 

economy. 

 

And again it goes on to point out the invaluable role that 

accountants generally across the piece play around capital 

investments, be they large or small, but the vital role that 

accountants of the different stripes are able to play within our 

economy in making sure that things just, not just add up, but 

that to be . . . the investments are carrying forward in a proper 

manner. 

 

In terms of the streamlining possibilities with this regulatory 

regime, again if you can simplify something, Mr. Speaker, 

while at the same time keep the instrument durable and 

adaptable to the situation as it presents and evolves in real life, 

that is a worthwhile set of goals. And again that this approach 

should help with the CPAs [chartered professional accountant] 

being “. . . trained, licensed, and regulated by the accounting 

profession to use accounting, auditing, and assurance standards 

published by the Chartered Professional Accountants of 

Canada” again would seem to be in keeping with that approach. 

Wherein the bill also: 

 

. . . provides protection to the consumer in that they can 

feel assured that accountants are qualified to provide a 

service in their designated specialty. The provisions are 

supported by the CPA transitional steering committee 

representing the three existing accounting bodies in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, with self-regulating professions that is 

indeed one of their hallmarks, that credentials should not . . . 

The profession’s relationship to the granting of credentials, 

credentialling, Mr. Speaker, and that relationship between the 

organization and quality assurance and quality control, that that 

is worked right into the mandate of the organization is of course 

important as well. 

 

We’ll see how establishing CPA Saskatchewan provides for the 

transition of CMAs, CAs, CGAs as registrants. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, moving from the actual piece of legislation to practice 

in the fields, there’s a . . . It’s not just to have good legislation, 

it’s important to have good execution. And again we would 

expect that this government will be working with the profession 

to ensure that smooth transition and that no trouble unduly 

should arise. 

 

In terms of again licensed CPAs being able to issue audit 

review and other reports of financial statements attesting that 

they’re in accordance with CPA standards, again, Mr. Speaker, 

a good, good thing, as it should be. Standards aren’t worth very 

much if Saskatchewan is playing by one set of rules and the rest 

of the world is playing for another. Unless you’re aspiring to 

the governance model of, say Albania or North Korea, what’s 

happening nationally and what’s happening internationally 

should be of importance to how organizations hold up their 

standards, measure their standards. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I’d add parenthetically to that, it’s 

interesting the approach that has been roundly condemned to 

the provincial finances by, you know, our accountant in chief, 

the Provincial Auditor, in terms of calling this government to 

account for holding two sets of books and stating quite clearly 

that the way that we account for our finances here in 

Saskatchewan is unique to the rest of Canada. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to have standards and 

if these things are going to mean something, then if somebody 

like the Provincial Auditor comes forth and, again moving from 

this basis of regulatory and legislative framework, says that 

Saskatchewan is keeping two sets of books and that they’ve got 

some fundamentally screwy things going on in terms of how the 

accounts are made, then you’d think it would behoove the 

government to sit up and take notice and not just to turn, turn 

away and clog up their ears, Mr. Speaker, or to try and shoot the 

messenger, as the case has been in some regards. 

 

So again moving to those standards, the unification and the way 

that those standards inform the regulatory, the audit function, 

the licensing, the disciplinary functions of the various 

professional streams of the accountant industry that attach to 

this legislation, all of those things are very important to 

consider as we go forward. 

 

And I know again we will depend in no small part upon 

consulting with the industry itself and looking to their guidance. 

And what has ushered forth to date, Mr. Speaker, we welcome 

that insight as to where this legislation is coming from, the 

intention of it. And we’re glad to see that the government has 

worked with the industry in a fairly close manner to bring 

forward this unification legislation here today. 

 

So to close off my remarks, Mr. Speaker, on the Bill No. 112, 

The Accounting Profession Act, I know that other of my 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4119 

colleagues are anxiously awaiting their participation in the 

debate. I know that we’ll have questions certainly in terms of 

doing our own due diligence, Mr. Speaker, and we look forward 

to a broader discussion that is afforded at the different stages of 

this legislation as it proceeds through the House. With that, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112, The 

Accounting Profession Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 99 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 99 — The Public 

Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in the 

debate on Bill 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013. I guess I want to give a few opening 

comments about pensions. And we know that people that are 

working, whether they work for a private company, they work 

for federal, provincial governments, there are many different 

individuals who pay into a pension plan. And there’s an 

organization, whether it’s a board, and I think the PEPP [public 

employees pension plan] plan here has a board that’s appointed 

to look after the best interests of the assets of the members that 

are part of the pension plan. 

 

But having talked, it’s good to have a pension. We know we 

have Canada Pension. If you work and you pay into the Canada 

Pension, you’ll get a benefit when you retire. And that’s a good 

thing that people have something, you know. After they’re done 

working hard, there’s an opportunity. We know some people 

save money and they have extra money that they save. They’re 

frugal with their money and they do a great job. But there’s an 

opportunity here to pay into a pension plan, and we see this 

PEPP plan that’s there. 

 

The minister talks about there’s, I think, 53,000 or so members 

to the plan. There’s a board that looks after I guess operation of 

the plan. And I guess they hire a CEO [chief executive officer]. 

I don’t have all the details. You know, a fund manager would 

look after the fund, however they do that. Having said that, 

retirement is good when someone is ready and they put in their 

years of service. They hope that that pension plan will take 

them till the end of their days. And you know, hopefully they 

have a good life and they live a long life. And we wish, you 

know . . . Everyone plans for that, and I know that’s the idea. 

And I think at the end of the day I want to make sure that that 

pension plan will be there for them till the day, you know, that 

it’s no longer needed and they’ve taken what they need out of 

this pension to survive and live and to have a, you know, 

hopefully a good life. And that’s what most people want. They 

want a good retirement. Maybe travel. Some people will do 

different things, maybe a cabin or whatever. 

 

But it’s important to talk about the plan. And I know they’re 

making some changes. And I think some of the changes in here 

are pretty severe, from what I can see. They’re talking about a 

board. And when you change it . . . And I’m not going to get 

into all the details, Mr. Speaker, but I think some of the changes 

that I’m seeing, and I know we’re going to get a chance to ask 

more questions and my colleagues will ask more question and 

then we’ll go into committee and we can ask some of the tough 

questions. 

 

I think there’s a lot of details. We wonder why this is coming 

forward. Like why has this amendment been brought forward or 

the Act, the changes that they want to make to the Act? Why are 

they bringing these amendments forward? Well obviously there 

must be some problems, but we’re not sure. I can’t see . . . And 

in the information we’ve got so far and the minister, you know, 

explanation when he introduced and did his second reading, I 

can’t see what the reason is in them, and maybe we can find out 

what it is. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And it refers to board members. And I just want to talk about 

one part of it, you know. It’s referring to board members. And I 

don’t know who the government consulted with or the minister 

consulted with to find out that this change is needed. I know 

some people have made comments. Some of my colleagues, 

you know, have talked about a board where you have to have 

unanimous decision. In this situation I think that’s what’s 

required of the board. It has to be unanimous in order for them 

to make a decision. And I think they’re giving now some 

changes and they’re talking about changing it as a majority. 

 

So the majority of board members could make a decision where 

it wasn’t unanimous. But having said that, I look at that and 

maybe that’s a good thing. But there must have been a reason 

why it was the way it was and that had to be unanimous of the 

board. So I wonder why the changes. Has there been some 

problems? And we don’t know what the request . . . Was it by 

some board members wanting to change? You know, I don’t 

know what it is and I would like to know that. Maybe when 

we’re in committee we can find out some of those details as to 

why the changes and why they want to go from a, you know . . . 

And I know it’s probably tough. No board I’ve sat on, I know 

of, would operate in the same way with a unanimous decision. I 

don’t know. I think, you know, would that be tying the hands of 

the board if one person was opposed to something? So that’s 

maybe the challenge. I don’t know. Good or bad, maybe there 

was a reason why this pension board operated that way, and a 

good reason why. And I’m not sure of that. And we’ll get those 

details. 

 

But now they’re changing it from a majority of the members 

can make the decision and it will move forward. Now what type 

of decisions they make, I’m not aware of. I don’t know what the 

role is in . . . I know we could ask some questions in committee, 

and we’ll get some of those answers. And it’s important that we 

have those answers to know why and what changes will this 

have and, you know, we’ll find out. 

 

But also it’s interesting to think, Mr. Speaker, you’re talking 



4120 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

about a liability in here, and there is another change that they’re 

bringing forward. And I’m wondering, why are they bringing 

this forward? My understanding when I sat on boards, and I 

know other people sit on the boards, there’s due diligence on 

the side of the board member to make sure you attend the 

meetings, or you let the Chair know why you can’t attend the 

meetings, and he’ll excuse you or she’ll excuse you. So the 

chairperson can excuse you from the meeting, and it’s noted in 

the minutes you were not in attendance at the meeting, and it 

might give a reason why. Some have where if you miss three 

meetings, then you’re asked to step down from the board, and 

the Chair can ask you to do that. Those provisions are in there. 

 

In this case, we’re seeing where . . . And I think what I’m 

reading from it . . . And I was, you know, trying to understand 

that if you’re not at the meeting and you did not attend the 

meeting and take part in the meeting, then you’re not liable for 

the decisions that are made of the board. Now I, you know, and 

I’m having trouble with that. I don’t know why this request is 

coming, so that if somebody’s not at the meeting, they’re not 

liable. Yet my understanding in other organizations, you’re a 

part of that board. Due diligence is on you. You should have 

been there. 

 

So now there’s almost like a clause in there: it would say if a 

member missed the meeting, they would no longer be liable for 

the decisions of the board because they weren’t at the meeting. 

Now I’m not sure what the clause is within the plan and the 

board that looks after the pension plan. I don’t know what it 

says about them missing so many meetings, if they’re missing. 

 

So there’s a lot of information still needs to be, you know, 

cleared and we have to get some details. And you know, I don’t 

think the minister gave us all the details at the time. He of 

course gave us what he thought was useful to start the process, 

and that’s fine. But I know there is a lot of details that need to 

be worked out. 

 

And I’m not sure who they consulted with. And to make these 

changes, of the 53,000, have they asked the members in the 

plan? Have they said to the 53,000 members, this is the way we 

used to do it, here’s why, and we want to make sure you’re 

aware we’re changing it. We used to be unanimous. Here’s the 

reasons why we don’t want to hold board members liable if 

they’re not at the meeting. Have they consulted that to the 

members that belong to this pension plan? Because I think that 

is crucial that the members of the pension plan are aware what’s 

going on and if you’re making changes. 

 

Because maybe some of the members of the pension plan know 

about these changes and maybe they don’t, but maybe some of 

them do. And for the ones that maybe are listening today, they 

want those, you know, the clarification. And I know members 

belong. Lots belong to the pension plan. And it is, you know, 

probably a good pension plan for them to have. PEPP does a 

great job. Nobody’s saying that. But I think when you’re 

making changes, we have to make sure that those individuals, 

it’s their assets, it’s their pension. And I think it’s somewhere in 

the neighbourhood of five-point-some billion in assets that the 

pension plan’s holding. I might not have my figures correctly, 

but I believe that’s somewhere around there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this pension plan, the PEPP plan is a large plan. It serves 

53,000 members. But I’m just hoping that the government has 

talked to those individuals, or has relayed the message. And 

sometimes that’s been the problem. And I want to talk about 

this a little bit because I think this is important, Mr. Speaker. 

You know, you talk about we’ve consulted, or you talk about 

meaningful consultation. There is a difference. To me it’s truly 

a difference. You could sit and say you listened, and you go off 

doing your own thing — stubborn, dismissive just like this 

government is. Or you do meaningful consultation where you 

actually try to work with and you try to find the solution so that 

people can agree. It’s meaningful and it’s sincere and it’s done 

with respect. And I think that’s clear. We need to make sure 

that happens. 

 

So we’re looking at the plan and some of the changes that the 

government’s proposing, the minister has proposed with the 

plan. Again I want to stress the plan is a good plan. And people 

want to have a good retirement. They want to make sure their 

assets are protected and, you know, whether it’s a board looking 

after it, people want their assets protected and they don’t want 

to lose what they’ve worked hard, years and years. Some might 

have 40 years in that they’ve paid into that pension plan. It 

might be 35 years, 30 years. We have many people who have 

served our province well. And I think there’s about 79 different 

organizations that belong to the PEPP plan, that takes part in the 

53,000 members I referred to. So let’s make sure, and I think 

the people want to make sure the government’s taking care. 

 

So the changes that they’re proposing — and I’m talking about 

a few of the changes that the amendments they’re bringing 

forward — will definitely impact I guess the board, governance, 

the liability, and decision making. And you’re going away from 

like where it was unanimous, and I’m concerned. And I’m 

hoping, I’m hoping that the government has reached out to 

consult with the organizations with them and they’re doing . . . 

And I don’t know who suggested this change. I would like to 

know that and I think it would be important. We’ll ask a lot of 

questions and I think we’ll have an opportunity to ask more 

questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the assets of individuals, well they want to be protected 

because nobody wants to work, you know, for years and put the 

time in and have your pension stuff you’ve put away for your 

retirement, you don’t want to have that jeopardized in any way. 

So hopefully these are good changes that the government’s 

asking to do, the amendments. But again I go back to 

wondering why, and there’s more questions to wondering why 

the changes are the way they are. 

 

And I just want to just go over this one last time when we talk 

about governance. And my understanding of governance, when 

I was involved in boards, like I said, you had an opportunity to 

sit on a board and people asked you to sit there and their 

corporations, you know, you look at a ministry that looks after 

the corporations branch and you have to report who your board 

members are, and it’s registered and you attend the meetings. 

And some of the boards I sat on, you had to show up. You had 

due diligence. And it was explained to you: you are liable for 

decisions that you make as a board. 

 

And you know, I know there are some protections to protect 

volunteer board members for liability who volunteer. But some 

of the boards are paid. And there’s a difference. When you’re a 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4121 

volunteer, yes, we have many boards that we have people 

volunteer. You want to make sure, the liability, they’re 

protected. But you hope that they have their provisions and the 

policies to protect the board members, but also to make sure 

those board members are in good faith doing what they 

volunteered they would do. And we thank them for that. 

 

But there’s also boards who, you know, get compensation, 

honorarium, and they’re compensated for, whether it’s a day of 

board meetings or whatever, there’s some compensation to 

compensate them for attending the board meetings. So on that 

area I think there’s more and should be more liability. They are 

paid as board members. We have to make sure the due diligence 

is there for them as well; they’re being compensated. And I 

think some boards are bigger organizations who have legal 

counsel and they have CEOs and they have a lot of support 

staff. 

 

So there are different ways to look at this. But on these changes 

that are happening right now, Mr. Speaker, we know that we’ll 

have more questions, and I know my colleagues will be 

discussing this more as we go along. And maybe we can get 

through the information and make sure that the pension plan 

that people of this province belong to will be protected and to 

making sure that their assets are protected and that’s, you know, 

we’re not, we’re not just . . . And you know, I don’t think from 

the changes anyone’s going to imply . . . The PEPP plan has a 

board that operates and will continue, hopefully, to operate and 

make sure that pension plan goes on for many years and will go 

on forever as people retire. And as members in the Legislative 

Assembly retire, they’ll have a pension that’s there for them as 

well. It is a pension plan that our employees have and, like I 

said, 53,000 members belong to the PEPP plan and 72 

organizations. 

 

So we want to make sure we’re doing the right things, the 

changes we make. We want to make sure we ask the questions. 

And I think the members have to feel like they’re a part of the 

plan. And when we make changes, we’re making sure 

meaningful consultation happens with them when we change 

plans and their investment for their retirement, and that nothing 

is being jeopardized. And I know the due diligence on our side, 

we will ask those questions in committee. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on 

Bill 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 

2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 98 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The Child 

Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants be now 

read a second time.] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today to speak on Bill No. 98, An Act to 

Promote the Growth and Development of Children and to 

Support the Provision of Child Care Services, and to make a 

consequential amendment to another Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right off the bat I want to say that’s an odd title. I 

think that if it’s only one other Act, why don’t they name what 

that Act is in the title, because to say make a consequential 

amendment to another Act and not name it, that’s odd. But I 

understand this is a pretty straightforward bill. 

 

But it’s more than that though because I think, as we’ve come 

to appreciate how much child care means to families and to 

children and what a good part of social growth for our kids, and 

as the title says, to support and promote the growth and 

development of children, clearly child care does that. 

 

Now I just want to refer to the minister’s second reading 

comments. And he just says that this really is repealing the old 

child care Act, which is only in English, and replacing it with a 

bilingual legislation. And he states that this came about as a 

request from the Conseil des écoles fransaskoises, the CÉF, and 

Association des parents fransaskois, AFP, for The Child Care 

Act to be made available in French. And apparently it was 

difficult, and I can appreciate that, to follow the regulations, 

especially when you’re in charge of the care of children, young 

children, that it’s important that you understand fully the 

obligations and responsibilities that are laid out in the Act. And 

if you’re not following it, then it’s a problem. 

 

But I think it’s important that we have a conversation about this 

because I am concerned. And you know, one of the things we 

really want to make sure is that we don’t have unintended 

consequences when we pass legislation. And so if you have 

now a bilingual Act but hope . . . And I have a lot of faith in the 

translators, the government translators, but if there’s a chance 

that it’s been not translated appropriately, then we have an 

issue. 

 

But I think my main point though is that if there is bad 

legislation, it doesn’t matter whether it’s in English or in 

French, it still remains bad legislation. Making it bilingual 

doesn’t improve the quality of legislation. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So I want to know, has this government, has the Minister of 

Education in his responsibilities to make sure that we have the 

best legislation possible, has he gone out and talked to all the 

stakeholders in Saskatchewan about this legislation? This is a 

time to say, you know, we’re opening up the Act. We are 

translating the Act. And if there are problems with any of the 

parts of the legislation, this is the time to correct it. This is the 

time to correct it. You know what? There is no point in having 

bad legislation in both French and English. That makes no 

sense. Let’s improve it first and then have it in a bilingual form. 

This is the time to improve the legislation. 

 

In fact we know, we know for example and, Mr. Speaker, you 

may remember that a few years ago I had put forward a private 



4122 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

member’s bill about the R-word. And we found out actually that 

most legislation had been improved and the R-word wasn’t in 

much of Saskatchewan’s legislation. And the reason for that 

was because about 10 years prior, the government had 

undertaken an initiative to improve the language of the bills in 

terms of making it both bilingual if appropriate, making sure it 

was gender-neutral if appropriate, and those kind of things. And 

at that time they took out terminology that was offensive. And 

so therefore, at that point I think the only piece of legislation 

that I could find that used the R-word was something from 

1927. And we had to do a search, but it was still there. 

Interestingly, though, the problem really was, for the R-word, 

was not in legislation, but it was in the regulations and different 

documents that this government produced. And there was quite 

a few examples of the R-word.  

 

And so here you have a situation where when we’re doing 

something to improve the language here in legislation, are they 

doing the same to make sure that actually the legislation is the 

very best it can be? 

 

So we’ll have that question: who did you consult with? Did you 

listen to them? And I know the APF and the CÉF, very 

outstanding organizations, would have a lot of expertise in 

terms of their experience of child care. But I think it’s important 

that the net be cast much broader because it’s important to get a 

broad input into any of these pieces of legislation, especially 

when they are so important to the people of Saskatchewan, the 

families of Saskatchewan. So there’s that question we have. 

 

And we also understand that one of the main points is that this 

will also give the government more powers to do investigations 

into offences that they see in child cares throughout the 

province. And we don’t really understand, and the Act is not 

clear, and the minister wasn’t really clear in his comments 

about what was meant about this. But this may mean people 

running unlicensed child care, and of course that’s important 

that we do . . . We’ve seen cases in the media over the last year 

or so — and I don’t believe there were any in Saskatchewan; I 

think it was more Ontario — where we saw overcrowding or 

kids being left unattended. And this is very, very important that 

all child care providers are accountable, and particularly when 

they’re running child care centres. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is an important piece of legislation, and 

we will have lots of comments and lots of questions about it. 

And not only because if it turns out to be a missed opportunity, 

when we could be talking about the real needs of families in 

Saskatchewan around child care spaces, availability, and the 

fact that not only do these spaces need to be announced . . . This 

government takes a lot of care to make sure that the spaces are 

announced. In fact they may announce them several times. But 

then the question is, are they actually there? Are they actually 

there? Are they provided for? And is there a capacity issue? 

You know, we often hear that it’s really tough to find spaces for 

families because they are just not available. It doesn’t make a 

lot of sense. And we’ve seen that in our own communities 

where we have child care providers talking about the 

unbelievable waiting lists that parents are facing. 

 

And again the costs, the cost. And I know this is something that 

the member from Riversdale has raised several times and 

probably will continue to raise, the issue around the child care 

subsidy that the Ministry of Education provides and the bizarre 

nature of how that has been set and has not been raised. And I 

don’t know what the current numbers are, but for many years 

they weren’t spending their full amount because people were 

not qualifying because they were making too much money. But 

in fact the amount, the numbers that, the benchmarks that were 

in the program just didn’t match the reality of what families 

make or single parents make. And it’s really, really a shame that 

we can do this in a time when we have a booming economy in 

Saskatchewan, but we don’t really have a government that is 

supporting parents to participate in this economy. 

 

We know we talk about a labour shortage, and in many ways I 

know, and we all know, that parents want to participate, 

whether they’re male or female, but they have parental 

obligations with their children. And we have to provide more 

child care at a reasonable cost and reasonable locations, but it 

has to be quality child care. So this is an important issue. 

 

So parents are doing their part. They want to participate. 

They’re going to school. They’re getting their training and 

they’re ready to do their job. But the government has been 

failing in the area of child care because while they’re very good 

at making announcements, we’re not actually seeing the spot, 

the child care spots, and we’re not seeing them where they need 

to be. 

 

So this is an issue and we will continue to raise this. This is 

important that we tackle child care. This government has made 

a lot of noise about this, but when it comes to clear answers 

about why is it that there’s a mismatch between what they say 

they’re doing and the reality that we’re seeing with our 

constituents, something isn’t just not . . . it’s just not clicking. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, you know I have to tell you that 

one time I had the most, and it wasn’t one of the most powerful 

experiences I had out door knocking. It was a hot August night, 

and I was just walking up to a step of a house, and it was a 

family arguing. And you could tell that these were young 

parents, probably in their 20s, and they had one or two children, 

and they were arguing about how they were going to make ends 

meet. And it was no point of me knocking on the door. The 

screen was there. I could hear everything. And it’s just really 

sad when you knew, you knew what the story was. And it really 

stuck with me. 

 

And so we all hope that our kids don’t have that experience. 

You know I have three kids, not yet a grandparent, but we all 

hope that our kids don’t have those experiences where they 

can’t afford to go to work because child care’s expensive, or 

giving up meaningful careers. Where you really hope that your 

children as young adults can land meaningful work but we also 

want them to have families because really in so many ways 

that’s such a critical part of who we are as a society and who we 

are as communities. 

 

So child care is critical and as both sides of this House will 

agree that it takes a village to raise a child, and child care 

clearly, clearly is part of that, Mr. Speaker. So I think that, I 

know that we haven’t had a good, long, full debate about this, 

and it’s just unfortunate that there’s not more to this bill. And 

we know that child care across Canada is being examined 

because we have many, many things happening, many things 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4123 

happening. We have problems with the fact that the income 

equality gap is growing in Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s good to see you in the chair. But 

I will continue. I don’t know if you need me to repeat the points 

that I’ve made but I may anyways. But we know there’s many 

challenges for young families, and whether it’s housing and the 

extreme costs of housing. And I could talk a bit about that 

because there is a lot of families who are deeply concerned 

about the costs of rent and what it means. And I think of 

communities in Saskatchewan, whether it be Estevan, where 

you have a vacancy rate of zero and there’s absolutely no 

chance of finding any suitable housing for a young family. But 

yet Estevan is a wonderful community in the sense of, talk 

about, work opportunities. It’s a great place. And I think that it 

really is. And it really is. And it’s a great place with meaningful 

work in the energy sector and well-paying jobs. 

 

And well we have some questions about representation, but 

what can we say. That is not what we’re here to debate for 

today . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There you go. But we 

really have issues. And you know, last year, or it was in the 

spring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I brought up a petition from the 

folks of Estevan concerned about the cost of housing and even 

the cost of renting trailer spots because it’s such a hot market in 

Estevan, such a hot market in Estevan. And you know, I 

appreciate the comments from the member from Estevan, but I 

do really think this is a challenge for Estevan in having an 

appropriate housing strategy. But this is what young families 

are facing. So they’re facing that in Estevan. 

 

But you go to Prince Albert where you have a vacancy rate of 

some . . . over 6 per cent, over 6 per cent. And things in 

Estevan, well we hope things go well in Estevan. I mean . . . Or 

Prince Albert, not quite as hot as the economy as Estevan. I 

know, I understand there’s some setbacks. And we could talk 

about the representation from Prince Albert. We could talk 

about that, and there’s some real issues there. 

 

I’ve got to tell you, you know, it was interesting. Today in 

question period, we had some comments about CETA. And I 

was reading the Prince Albert Herald. That story, that story was 

very interesting. And there was comments made, a member 

statement, about comments by Erin Weir and CETA. In fact we 

had the same debate about the Canadian-European trade 

agreement. And of course in principle we all see a lot of 

potential benefits, a lot of potential benefits there. But we want 

to see the details. We believe you need to see the details. 

 

Now it was interesting. The Premier even made that comment. 

When he talked about the federal bill when it came to 

cyberbullying, he wants to see the details. But a 

Canadian-European trade agreement? We don’t need to see the 

details. How is it for cyberbullying, you want to see the details? 

The trade agreement, no worry about the details. And what the 

member from Prince Albert said, and I couldn’t believe it, he 

said, it goes without saying that we’re going to do due 

diligence. I don’t know about that. I’ve got to tell you, when he 

uses, it goes without saying, it goes without saying, I’ve got to 

tell you. And if that’s the approach they’re taking to child care, 

it goes without saying I have some questions. I have some 

questions. Because child care is . . . Well child care is so 

critically important. 

We’ve all, you know, as we’ve raised our own kids, and we’ve 

all worked and whether it’s working on a farm, working in 

schools, working in nursing homes, or in hospitals, this is a real, 

real important issue to our economy. And you know, we’re 

looking to have this sustainable growth. And we don’t want to 

see a situation where we say child care is just not possible or 

it’s too expensive or the inspections aren’t happening, you 

know. And we don’t want to have any tragic incidences 

happening around child care. So when the bill is open like this, 

of course we’ll have comments on this. 

 

And you know, one of the areas I would want to see, and we 

haven’t had a real chance to talk about this, but when my kids 

were growing up and I was going to school and my wife was 

working here in Regina, I was attending the University of 

Regina to get my education degree. And that was back in 1980 

it would have been, the year my daughter was born, 1980-81, 

and it was the first 24-hour daycare in Saskatchewan, a 24-hour 

daycare. And I was on the board at the time. Now I would have 

been, I guess I would have been in my 20s at the time, Mr. 

Speaker. So it was very interesting. And of course the issue of 

fundraising and having appropriate funds for this . . . But it was 

interesting that you would have a 24-hour daycare. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But the reality is we have a lot of shift workers in this province. 

I didn’t realize how many shift workers . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes, and those who work out of the 

nine-to-five traditional hours of work. And we’re going to see 

more of that because of The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

because now we’ve seen this government allow the 10-hour 

workday. 

 

Now we have said, and this government has, you know, has 

pointed out to particularly me as a former minister of Labour, 

that when we were in power we authorized over 1,000 permits 

allowing workplaces to have that. And fair enough. That’s true. 

But we knew who those 1,000 workplaces were so we could 

have some knowledge of what was the social implications for 

our communities and our society where you have 10-hour 

workdays. We thought, as I recall this, that a lot of these places 

were in the North. They were either people who would go into 

work sites like remote work sites and that kind of thing. 

Surveying companies would be a good example. And I could 

talk a little about surveying companies. I don’t have my book 

with me right now though. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these kind of changes are important 

when we’re talking about our society, that now we don’t know, 

we don’t know what workplaces are going to have 10-hour 

workdays. They don’t have to register with the Ministry of 

Labour. They did before. 

 

We understand that no workplace was actually turned down for 

a permit. The company was worked with in terms of 

understanding the implications of a 10-hour workday. If they 

felt it was necessary, that was fair enough. And it was all fair 

and it was reasonable. But the challenge was, or the good thing 

was that we knew where that workplace was. We knew how 

many workers were, what the impact it would have on society. 

Now we have no idea. And of course one of the unintended 

consequences of that are children who are going to be without 



4124 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

their parents for up to 11 hours a day because of going to work, 

the travel back and forth, that type of thing. What’s the impact 

of that? I think it’s not going to be great. 

 

Now I know the minister and I had great debates about this. He 

would say, nurses and firefighters love it; can’t see why a 

teacher wouldn’t love it, you know. And I don’t know, you 

know, when you have a teacher working a 10-hour workday 

with kids, that’s not quite the same as a nurse in a 12-hour shift 

or a firefighter, is it? So you know, this is an important issue, 

and we need to understand the societal impacts of these kind of 

changes that this government has kind of brought forward. 

 

And we, you know, while the minister . . . And it is ironic. Now 

the Minister of Labour has taken on another job. I mean it sort 

of represents a sign of times in Saskatchewan where everybody 

has to have a second job, and the Minister of Labour has taken 

on a second job. And I don’t know if he has a hard time making 

ends meet or he’s got too much free time, but it’s the same 

minister who has got child care added to his portfolio. So we 

had a good discussion about that, and we will continue to have 

that because those things fit like hand in glove — where you 

work and child care. And I think that’s important that we have 

the kind of conversations about. 

 

So is this the kind of Saskatchewan we want? You know, we 

want people to have good families, good homes, good work. 

We want this province to grow, but we don’t want it to be 

reckless. And I think we can all agree that we don’t want kind 

of an out-of-control, reckless type of growth. We want it to be 

safe. We want to make sure that people can make ends meet and 

actually put a little away. 

 

We know this government . . . Now hats off to the Minister of 

Finance for the work a couple of weeks ago. And I don’t know 

if he’s here or not. It doesn’t really matter. But I do want to say 

the recognition that we should be looking at CPP [Canada 

Pension Plan] and the increases in CPP as a way to make sure 

people have a decent retirement is good. Now I know they have 

to work out the details. But there was a bit of a logjam where 

people were really reluctant to talk about CPP as a potential for 

making sure, particularly the lower income folks when they 

retired . . . You know, in Saskatchewan, in Canada we have 

done a fair amount of work in terms of the very lowest income 

seniors. And that’s about 16,000, I think the province is saying 

now, that both get the Saskatchewan Income Plan, the 

guaranteed annual income, or guaranteed allowance, and CPP 

and the old age security. 

 

So that’s one group of people. But, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve 

talked, and we talked about seniors today in question period, the 

fact that this government has chosen not to have a seniors’ 

advocate is a real problem. But we know there’s a group of 

seniors who are at the low income level, a little bit above the 

SIP [seniors’ income plan] cut-offs, who will be having a hard 

time making ends meet. 

 

And you know, I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of 

the toughest stories I often hear and I have to say, well that’s 

the way these programs are designed, is where somebody’s put 

away 50,000 or $75,000 and that’s what they’ve saved. They 

may have worked minimum wage or a couple of dollars above 

that, you know, making maybe 30,000, or let’s say 30, $40,000 

a year. So they weren’t making a lot of money a year but they 

were putting away a little bit because they believed . . . And it’s 

a good thing to do, to save money. So they did save money. But 

they found out they would have been further ahead to have 

bought a car or something with their money because having that 

savings of $50,000 disqualifies them for other benefits that they 

rightly deserve. 

 

Now some people say that you should actually save over 

$100,000 and then you’re kind of in the game when it comes to 

pension plans. And this is a debate we’ve had in this House 

before with the government about the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan, which in and of itself is not a bad thing, but you have to 

make sure you’re saving enough. But it really does have a 

problem for those people who are not quite at the bottom but 

who are working, making not a bad wage but not a great wage 

and putting some money aside. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what does this have to do with child care? 

Well this is a reality that young people are facing today when 

they’re making choices about where do they spend their money. 

Do they spend it on housing when we’ve seen rents go out of 

control? And they must have housing. They must have food. All 

right. And we all encourage them to put money aside for their 

retirement. But it’s hard to tell families when they’re in the 

20-some-year-olds, just like I was saying when I was on that 

board for 24-hour daycare and I was 20-something at the time, 

hard for me to relate to putting money aside for a pension plan. 

But I was having money put aside through the CPP [Canada 

Pension Plan]. But then child care is an important part of that 

decision. It’s hugely important. 

 

And so I know that many of my friends, my colleagues want to 

get in on this topic, you know, but I could go on about this 

because this is really near and dear to my heart. I’ve got to tell 

you, we have to talk about child care whenever we get the 

opportunity. It’s hugely, hugely important. So as I said, we’ll 

probably have questions in committee. It’s an important issue, 

and we hope that we’re not translating bad legislation and 

wasting time doing that. If it’s bad, it’s bad; whether it’s French 

or English, it doesn’t make any difference. We want to make 

sure it’s good legislation. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

move adjournment of Bill No. 98. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 98, The Child Care 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — That is carried. 

 

Bill No. 100 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 100 — The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4125 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in to the discussion today on Bill No. 100, 

The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013. I 

think one thing that it’s always important to flag when we start 

these debates in the fall is legislation. One of our jobs in the 

opposition is to go through the bills and hear what the 

government has to say about the bills. Sometimes what you see 

isn’t always the exact intention. But in the fall we have an 

opportunity to start reviewing the bills and start asking 

questions, but usually what we like to do is go and talk to 

stakeholders and find out their thoughts and perspectives, 

people who are directly impacted by new bills or changes to 

bills, and to see what they think. So in the months going 

forward this is what we’ll be doing. But in the meantime there 

are a few things about Bill No. 100, The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 that I would like to 

address. 

 

I think it’s important for everybody to understand what the 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency is and what 

their job is. And they’re an independent agency with 

responsibility to the province, to local governments, and to 

property owners. And the legislation that we’re debating 

actually right now mandates SAMA, the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency, to develop and maintain the 

province’s assessment policies, standards, and procedures, to 

audit assessments and review and confirm municipal 

assessment rolls, and provide property valuation services to 

local governments or municipalities. 

 

Right now SAMA is funded by the provincial government and 

through requisitions that the municipalities pay for SAMA’s 

field services. I think property valuations are absolutely 

imperative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and very regular property 

valuations are important because you take a young family who 

purchases or has purchased a house in recent years, and if 

property valuations aren’t done on a regular basis, then — and 

as they are right now, about every four years — what ends up 

happening is, people who have budgeted and saved and have 

done what they can to be able to become property owners may 

face a very hefty property tax hike. So I think one of the things 

the legislation proposes doing is ensuring that these valuations 

are happening more frequently. So that seems to be a very 

positive thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There is one thing in the bill that is slightly problematic. Right 

now the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency is 

funded and there is a 65/35 per cent split in sharing the funding 

responsibility for SAMA between the province and the 

municipalities. And the government is proposing, in this 

legislation, repealing provisions relating to that. And the 

minister had said in his remarks, “. . . since this prevents the 

agency from seeking greater funding from the municipal 

sector.” That could be problematic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

not sure if the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 

and Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities are 

aware of the minister’s remark. This could mean added costs for 

our municipalities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So again one of the things that we’ll be doing as an opposition, 

in our role to analyze legislation, we will be going out to 

organizations like SUMA and SARM and individual 

municipalities, as well to hearing their feedback, seeing if they 

think it’s a good idea to remove the 65/35 per cent split sharing 

of the cost of SAMA. Perhaps they do, but these are questions 

that need to be asked. And this is some of the work that we’ll be 

doing in the coming months, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But as I said, valuation on a regular basis of properties, annually 

perhaps even, is a very good idea because it avoids that 

valuation every four years and then a huge jump in property 

taxes. I saw people in my own constituency who, as I’m sure 

many of us have, who faced enormous property tax hikes and 

hadn’t prepared for quite that jump. So having the valuations 

more often, more accurately — then property taxes can more 

accurately over a period of time reflect those — is a much better 

way of doing things. 

 

But I do know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as this is the start of 

reviewing bills, we will go out and we’ll talk to stakeholders 

about this. But I will have colleagues who will continue to want 

to ask questions about Bill No. 100, The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act. And with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, for now I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 100, The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013. Is it 

the pleasure of all the members to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 101 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

the warm welcome to take my feet here today as it relates to 

Bill No. 101, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 

2013. We will be engaging in consultations with sector partners 

on this front to make sure we fully understand the 

consequences, intended and unintended, of this legislation. 

 

I’ve read through briefly the statements that have been put onto 

the record by the minister. We do look forward to time in 

committee to have the minister expand on those points. We do 

know that the legislative changes that have been brought 

forward, the minister suggests, are supported by those involved 

with the University of Saskatchewan. But we’ll be doing that 

consultation with certainly administration and governance at the 

University of Saskatchewan, with the students’ association, 

student leaders, with graduate association leaders, and making 

sure that the changes to this legislation meet the needs of that 

proud institution, making sure that the changes to governance as 



4126 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

they relate to the senate, as they relate to the management of the 

university, meet the needs to make sure that this university can 

go forward with the kind of pride that it has in the past.  

 

We know unfortunately that this government far too often 

dismisses and brushes off consultation with the very partners 

who are involved on the ground in delivering a service. We see 

that in education, particularly in the pre-K to 12 [pre–

kindergarten to grade 12] system where this government’s 

disrespected and dismissed the educational partners here in this 

province. Of course that’s the teachers, the school boards, the 

administrators that serve this province so well, and as well 

parents and teachers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what we want to do is make sure that what the minister 

has put on this record is in fact correct. We want to make sure 

that the consultation process has been broad. We want to make 

sure that the scope of considerations when opening up this bill 

were as broad as they should be because when you open up 

legislation, it provides you an opportunity to refine an Act and 

make sure you’re serving the needs of an institution and, in the 

case of the University of Saskatchewan, make sure you’re 

serving students, our province, our economy, our future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We know that this government’s record in post-secondary 

education has been one that’s gone off the tracks, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s been disappointing and it’s a concern to many. We 

see that when we’re talking about the University of 

Saskatchewan. We know that this government has broken 

promises as it relates to capital funding for that university, and 

we know that has a direct impact on the administration of that 

university but it also has a direct impact on students. We saw in 

a budget cycle just a year prior that government break a 

commitment for its then off-loaded . . . That government has 

off-loaded over $100 million of debt onto the books of the 

university. And the university has been placed under significant 

strain on that front, and of course the students of that institution 

are impacted. 

 

So we’re disappointed with where this government has gone off 

the tracks with its agenda in post-secondary education. It seems 

to us that it’s pushing forward with its own agenda, failing to 

recognize the importance of the post-secondary sector in this 

province, failing to recognize the value in our universities, and 

failing to support the important work that’s occurring at our 

universities, the important purpose that those institutions play 

within our province, ensuring the bright future that we should 

all be committed to working towards. 

 

It’s disappointing at a time where we have such tremendous 

economic strength in this province, where we have population 

growth, where we have immigration that’s occurring, that this 

government’s failing to capitalize on making the improvements 

that they should. From that economic strength, this government 

is in an unprecedented position to support students and support 

our institutions. But this government has dropped the ball on 

that front, and as a result you have students that are paying 

more than ever before. You have institutions that are working 

harder and harder to do what they can with the tight resources 

that have been offered by this government. 

 

And we need to, we should be setting the priorities in a different 

fashion where in a strong economy we should, this government 

should be making post-secondary education a priority and not 

passing on such a heavy burden to students by way of tuition 

increases, not passing such a heavy strained burden on to the 

institution that’s now been forced to make significant cuts, Mr. 

Speaker, and at a time where we have economic strength. 

 

When I go through the pieces here to what the minister 

suggested, certainly some of them seem to be very practical, 

certainly some of them seem to reflect some consultation with 

educational partners. If that’s the case, that’s a good thing, and 

we’ll be doing our consultation with those educational partners. 

We’ll be looking forward to time in committee with that 

minister and his officials to fully understand the changes that 

are being brought forward, but also to make sure we fully 

understand what other recommendations or what was the scope 

of consideration when this Act was opened up. Because as I 

say, when an Act is opened up, it provides a phenomenal 

opportunity for an institution and for a province to refine an Act 

to make sure that it’s there to serve an institution, a university 

well into the future but also to serve a province. 

 

When I look at some of the changes, I understand the minister’s 

shared that some of this will clarify the awarding of diplomas in 

the list of powers of convocation. He says that that’s under 

section 11. It’s those sort of items that we want to make sure 

from the university that they’re supportive of. We want to 

understand the consequences, intended or unintended, of these 

sorts of changes. And we’ll be doing that with the governance 

of the university, with the administration of the university, with 

the students’ association, with the graduate students’ 

association to make sure we understand all impacts, all 

consequences. 

 

I also understand that they’ll ensure that individuals elected to 

represent the senate, they’re making some changes there, and 

quoting from the minister here: 

 

. . . most specifically and especially outside the student 

members of the senate, they will work to ensure that they 

represent the senate, will be graduates of the university. 

And this is as per section 24. 

 

So we want to understand where this recommendation is 

coming from, the impact of that recommendation. Of course 

there’s probably some intended consequences. We want to 

understand if our educational partners, the university and the 

stakeholders there, have identified any concerns or unintended 

consequences. Understand that the minister’s suggested that this 

will also clarify the process by which student members of the 

senate are elected, and this is afforded action in sections 29 and 

32, the minister suggests. 

 

“As well [he goes on to say] amendments will amend the term 

of office for the senate’s nominees to the board to allow them to 

serve a three-year, a third three-year term. That is section 45.” 

 

So we want to make sure that that process respects the realities 

on a campus, respects the realities of student members of a 

senate. And we want to understand where, you know, where 

these changes are coming from. Who’s made these 

recommendations, and what are the impacts? Are they going to 

be making improvements to the current process? And if so, we 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4127 

will be happy to be supportive. 

 

We also recognize that there’s a statement about extension of a 

three-year term, or the possibility of a three-year term, and we’ll 

want to make sure we understand what that means, why that’s 

being changed. You know, certainly I can think of some 

practical reasons why that may be the case. But that’ll be 

important for us to make sure it is in the best interests of the 

institution, the university, and those students that serve for 

senate. 

 

I do want to say that I find it to be such an important role that 

those student leaders have taken on to serve in the governance 

in the university, to serve in the senate. And certainly we value 

those voices and we think we are very well served by having 

student leaders engaged in the governance of our universities. 

 

As well, I understand that they’re amending powers of the 

council to facilitate the appointment of student members on 

hearing boards. I understand this is in section 61. And they’ll be 

addressing the requirements of the corporate seal. This is 

section 98. 

 

Now as it relates to student members on hearing boards, again 

this is something that we want to make sure we’re 

understanding where these changes are being pushed from, 

making sure we understand the full consequences of these 

changes. But certainly as an opposition we’ll be making sure 

that what these changes, or what the consequences of these 

changes should provide is something that allows student 

leadership to be fully engaged and respected in the processes of 

a university. And certainly if this is strengthening that process, 

then that’s something that we’d be pleased to welcome as well. 

 

I recognize that the minister said that: 

 

. . . amendments that will allow a senator to serve a third 

three-year term will bring parity between the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, the board appointments made 

essentially by cabinet, and those elected by the senate. 

These are the members of the board that are eligible to 

serve as board . . . [and Vice-Chairs], so we think it’s [I 

was quoting the minister that we think it’s] important there 

is parity in the number of terms these individuals can 

serve. 

 

So just understanding that this is . . . We want to make sure that 

of course there’s the appointments of that government to an 

institution. But we are very interested in those that are elected 

but within the university. We want to make sure that they have 

opportunity to influence those universities. And so we’ll be 

keeping track of what those changes mean for the university. 

 

I understand the minister suggests that many of the other 

changes are housekeeping in nature. And he goes on to cite 

some of those changes. I think what we’ll be doing over the 

coming weeks is drilling down into this legislation with 

stakeholders, making sure that this government has consulted 

and listened and respected the voice of the University of 

Saskatchewan: its administration, its governors, the students’ 

association, the grad students’ association, all those that are 

impacted by these changes. 

 

We want to understand as well that to see if there’s an 

opportunity to build on this legislation. Are there potentials to 

provide amendments that would strengthen this legislation? 

Because as I say, when you have legislation open, that’s a 

phenomenal opportunity to make sure you refine that legislation 

to serve us well into the future. We want to make sure this 

serves our university, the University of Saskatchewan, well into 

the future. We want to make sure that it serves students in our 

entire province well into the future. 

 

So those will be the sort of discussions we’ll be having with 

stakeholders. Unfortunately far too often we’ve seen that 

government push forward with its own agenda without any 

listening to educational partners or with stakeholders. And 

we’ve seen the consequences of that in far too many cases. So 

we’ll engage the partners. Certainly many of the statements put 

forward by the minister seem to be reasonable at this point in 

time. We’ll just be making sure that the feeling is mutual with 

stakeholders and making sure that there’s not opportunities to 

improve this piece of legislation. 

 

But with all that being said, at this point in time I’ll adjourn 

debate as it relates to Bill No. 101, The University of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 101, The University of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 107 — The 

Wildfire Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise today and enter into the debate on Bill No. 

107, An Act Respecting the Prevention, Management, Control 

and Extinguishing of Fires. 

 

I think this is an important piece of legislation and one that has 

caused a lot of debate over the years here in Saskatchewan. So I 

want to make a few comments about this because I think people 

in Saskatchewan, if there’s one thing that concerns folks is the 

whole issue around what happens when fires get out of control, 

particularly when you’re in the forest fringe area. But in the 

North . . . But even in the South I know that, you know, we 

have a real treasure in Cypress Hills with our forest there is now 

well over 100 years. I think the last major fire that went through 

the Cypress Hills area was in the 1880s if I remember correctly, 

and there’s been some work, some controlled burns, and a lot of 

logging to control the situation in Cypress Hills. But it will be a 

tragedy that I think the whole province will feel if that area has 

and experiences a major forest fire. And that’s becoming much 

more of a reality. 



4128 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

We’ve seen news stories, whether it’s in Colorado or California. 

We’ve had the stories here in British Columbia and even in 

Saskatchewan, in La Ronge, P.A. [Prince Albert]. And I know 

when you talk to the folks from the North how meaningful this 

is and when they talk of just being in their homes and hearing 

the fires, and it’s a traumatic event. While we can we talk about 

the capital investments, clearly that’s huge, but on a personal 

note, it’s scary. It is one of the most scariest things I think 

imaginable, but fortunately I’ve not had that experience. But 

talking to others, it’s incredible. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And we also think, even though people lose their lives fighting 

fires . . . I think of the 21 firefighters killed in Montana this 

summer who were fighting a fire. And they were trained. They 

were the experts in forest fires and they were the elite of forest 

fire fighters and were caught in a fire that went back on them. 

And it should never have happened, but these are major, major 

disasters when they do happen. And so it’s important that we 

consider this. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know you and I have had this 

discussion many times over the years about forest fires, going 

back a while. So it’s good that we keep revisiting this. And I 

will want to say that I hope the minister has consulted well on 

this area. I know that particularly the RMs [rural municipality] 

that are on the forest fringe are vulnerable to significant costs. 

And I know when the Minister of Environment launched his 

consultations this spring, I understand that it caused quite a lot 

of concerns. And so they’ve retained the original 4.5 kilometre 

buffer zone and that has not changed, and that SARM has come 

on board with that. But clearly it sounds like he did get an 

earful this spring when he launched his consultations about this. 

The media stories are quite explicit about the fact that the RMs, 

the reeves, were just not willing and the costs were just too 

much. And I know that and I understand that. In my former role 

as an Environment minister, the costs were huge. 

 

But I do want to say — and again it’s a concern that we have 

with all the bills about who was consulted, glad to hear SARM 

was consulted — how were the northerners consulted? What 

was happening with that? And of course I imagine the mining 

association was consulted as well. Clearly mining in the North 

is a huge concern, because a lot can be lost by a wildfire, and of 

course that’s the home to our uranium mines and gold mines. 

And so it’s very important that that doesn’t . . . that all the due 

precautions and wherewithals is taken into account. 

 

And of course for the northerners, whether they be First Nations 

or Métis in the North, it’s hugely important that this be taken 

into account and that they are consulted with how best to 

recognize their own property and their homes, their traplines, 

their sources of incomes. And how will that be protected? And 

so I hope that there’s been due diligence in terms of 

consultations with the folks in the North. I know that this is a 

hugely important issue for them and is very telling when a 

forest goes through and the change in the landscape is stark and 

people are deeply, deeply concerned. 

 

Having said that though, we do have to acknowledge that there 

is a role of fire in the ecology of forests. And as forests age, it’s 

important that they renew in as natural a state as they possibly 

can, and fire is a natural part of the ecology. The unfortunate 

part though is that 50 per cent of the fires are caused by 

humans. And that’s not part of the natural ecology. So that’s a 

bigger problem, and the fact that humans cause fires closer to 

humans, to other humans. And so that’s the other, bigger 

problem is that they’re around homes or around commercial 

enterprises. And so we have to make sure that we can do more 

on that in terms of a pre-emptive stage. 

 

And I do want to take a minute to review the minister’s 

comments, because I do think that there were some concerns. 

And he talks about the legislation requiring “all industries, 

including public utilities working in provincial forests or 

designated parkland, to complete fire prevention preparedness 

procedures that will . . . decrease the number, cost, and area 

burned by industry-caused fires.” 

 

That sounds very good and that’s really an important part, but 

how do we put teeth to that? That’s hugely important, that 

somehow we have to make sure that happens. And so this is 

why I go over to the next part, where they’re talking about 

getting rid of permits. So again, and I talked about this earlier 

today in terms of fire permits and how that gives us a view into 

what’s actually happening in terms of who’s burning what, 

when, and how that can help us in terms of better planning. But 

as the minister talks about the new proposed wildfire Act: 

 

. . . will also enhance client service and reduce government 

administration by moving from a system currently 

requiring permits for all burning activities to a risk-based 

notification system. Only the highest risk activities will 

require permits in the future, Mr. Speaker. The remainder 

will require either a burn notification or no notification at 

all, if identified as a low risk. The ministry notification 

process will avoid the false dispatch of costly resources. 

 

So it would be interesting to know more about this. So how 

much have they actually lost due to false dispatches? I’m not 

sure if that’s a problem. And of course we had concerns earlier 

in the spring about towers and whether they are watched by 

people, are manned, they had people in them or whether they 

were going to be remote controlled and will that be . . . is that 

going to be more cost efficient or not, or will there be more 

fires? And again this is fires that are caused by people, that 

humans cause. And so we’re going to . . . This’ll be very, very 

interesting to see. I have some questions about that in terms of 

how much this all costs and what’s going to happen. 

 

But my concern is really to get away from the idea of permits 

completely. I think that there is some . . . you know, how a fire, 

a forest condition can change pretty darn quick from being low 

to being medium or intermediate. And somebody may think, 

well it looks like it’s low right now — and it all depends which 

way the wind blows — and so they think, I don’t need to get a 

permit. So they go out the next morning and start the fire. And 

it’s going to be interesting to see how this plays out, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because if they have no permit and they’re not 

required to have one, then are they breaking the law? Or should 

they have got one? But why didn’t they get one in the first place 

just to be safe? And I bet, I bet it’ll be interesting to see, that 

many people will actually go get a permit just to be on the safe 

side. Because if you have no permit, then you may be more 

liable because these things change hourly or could change 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4129 

hourly. You know, is it the condition of the fire? Is it also 

weather condition? 

 

Now I think, if I’m right, there’s the 30-30-30 rule — if the 

temperature’s 30, if the humidity is, you know, 30, and the 

wind. So you have three factors that really can cause a problem: 

humidity, wind, and temperature. And all of these . . . So how 

do you have a permit system that recognizes . . . or not a permit 

system, but a risk-based notification system when all of those 

could be factors? Or are you going to have zones to say, listen, 

this Act doesn’t apply in this area because it’s just too complex. 

It’s going to be something for locals to be really knowledgeable 

for. And I think they’re just going to have to get to know their 

conservation officer very well in terms of what’s happening 

here. 

 

So I have some questions about that, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s 

going to be one that’s going to be problematic. I know that this 

government has made lean as part of their mandate and are 

cutting back on personnel. But this is a place where, you know, 

when you have a disaster . . . And we’re seeing more and more 

of these disasters, and I think if you have only one disaster and 

it’s caused because of this lean initiative, that is tragic. And if 

it’s going to be a major forest fire and it’s because they’ve 

decided to go to a risk-based notification system and they 

should have been using permits, this is going to be a real 

problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I just want to say about the comment that 

the minister talked about, fully supported by SARM. And of 

course that’s a good thing. And as has been noted in the spring 

about how vocal SARM was . . . and in fact we raised questions 

in the House about this. And the minister, you know, is trying to 

backpedal on that a bit saying, well you know, it’s not quite 

right. But clearly the reeves made their points loud and clear, 

and it’s a good thing they listened. 

 

But I want to make a point that, has the minister consulted with 

all the affected stakeholders? And I’m thinking of the 

northerners, the reserves, the hamlets, the Métis villages, and of 

course the commercial interests as well, but also the 

conservation interest too. And of course, you know, I think 

that’s critically important. 

 

I want to talk just a minute too about the fact the minister 

recognizes that our province will align with other legislation in 

other provinces — I assume that’s what he means, Canadian 

wildlife partner jurisdictions — and treat resource stakeholders 

consistently, including industries under the US [United States] 

partnership agreement. And so I’m not . . . Again we’ll have 

questions about that, because I’m not quite sure. He’s vague in 

terms of, is he talking about other provinces? 

 

You know, one of the strengths of our interjurisdictional 

agreements, interprovincial agreements is how we can respond 

to other provinces’ needs if things are going well here in 

Saskatchewan. If fires are not at their high peak, we can go help 

other provinces — in fact, other states. And when things are not 

going well here, we can count on support from other provinces. 

And so I’m curious to know if that agreement is still in place, 

and can we count on that? That’s really important that we have 

that ability to do that. But I have some . . . I want to make sure 

that that is the case, that there’s no sort of investing all our eggs 

on the New West Agreement and saying that’s good enough. 

 

I know there is a lot of talent, a lot of skills, a lot of knowledge 

in forest fire fighting right across the country. And if we don’t 

make use of that, it will be at our loss, and we need to make 

sure that we do take advantage of that. And so when he’s 

talking about making this fit and align with other jurisdictions, I 

hope that means other provinces and also the Canadian 

government in their areas because they also are significant 

players in this. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a lot of questions about this. I 

think this is interesting that we’ve brought this up, and we do 

have some concerns about what the implications are for RMs, 

for corporations, and this type of thing. We have concerns about 

what does this mean in terms of the results-based platform that 

they have. And I think I have some real concerns about what, in 

terms of not issuing some permits or the different levels of what 

that will be required, there may be unintended confusion. And I 

hope people are safe more than they are sorry, but the 

government needs to take some real leadership in this. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know others will want 

to talk about other topics here so I’m going to be taking my 

seat. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be now moving 

adjournment on Bill 107, The Wildfire Act. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill 107, The Wildfire Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Bill No. 111 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 111 — The 

Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 111, The Personal Care 

Homes Act. It’s An Act to amend The Personal Care Homes 

Act. And, Mr. Speaker, this is one of the shortest if not the 

shortest bill that we have in this session. And effectively what it 

does is add some regulatory power to the minister to make some 

additional possible things to be done under The Personal Care 

Homes Act. And I think practically we might as well read the 

short little bit that’s here so we know what we’re talking about. 

 

Effectively what it does is add the power for the minister to 

authorize: 

 

. . . the publication of, or the provision of public access to, 

information . . . [relating to] inspections of personal care 

homes, including the contents of an inspection report and 



4130 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

information respecting a licensee’s compliance or 

non-compliance with any Act or regulation; 

 

“(a.2) prescribing the period within which the information 

mentioned . . . may be published or public access may be 

given; 

 

“(a.3) governing the manner of publication or provision of 

public access to the information mentioned in clause 

(a.1)”. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this bill is unnecessary. Everything 

that’s listed here can be done already, and we need to have an 

understanding from the minister why he’s brought this 

particular bill forward and why he’s intending to wait until next 

year to do what this bill says. It’s my sense that he can do 

exactly what’s set out in this bill right now, and he should do 

that because the public is very interested in what’s happening in 

personal care homes across the province. We know that there 

are abilities for the minister to do all kinds of things within the 

legislation. And the fact that he wants to publish this 

information and provide it for the public, whether it’s on a 

website or in the newspaper or the Gazette or anywhere else, I 

think can be done right now. 

 

And so what’s the point of having a bill like this? My sense is 

that it’s a bit of a political stalling bill. It’s a bill to look like 

you’re doing something when you’re not really doing anything 

other than having an Act with the name An Act to amend The 

Personal Care Homes Act. Mr. Speaker, we don’t need to have 

games like that when it comes to the care of our seniors, the 

care of our parents and grandparents. What we need is action. 

What we need is information. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the minister and the Ministry of 

Health to publish the information that they have already from 

their inspections and make it available to the public. I suspect if 

they had checked with the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner about this bill before it went ahead, they would 

find out they already have this power to do it. So why wait until 

next summer or next year? I think, Mr. Speaker, the reason that 

the minister puts that in his notes is so that he can stall this 

information and prevent it from going to the public until next 

summer. So I challenge the minister to start giving us this 

information right away, and let’s not delay the information 

that’s provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this information is important for people who are 

trying to make choices about where their loved ones are going 

to be cared for in level 1 and 2 care facilities. We know that 

they’re for the most part private facilities that have the level 1 

and 2 care provision, and that information is there. And we also 

know that there is a system of inspection. 

 

Now according to the work of the Provincial Auditor, maybe 

it’s not as regular or as up to date as it could be, but I think most 

of that part has been remedied as a result of a response to 

chapter 34 of the Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan’s report 

in 2012, volume 2, starting at page 295. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what’s stated quite clearly there by the Provincial Auditor is 

that the Ministry of Health, the Minister of Health is responsible 

for regulating provincial care homes, and that requires licensing 

and inspecting of personal care homes. When you go through 

and look at the whole chapter, you’ll see that there is a process 

for doing that, that there are standards that are there. There are 

inspections that are done. 

 

The final recommendation in the report from the Provincial 

Auditor says . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well why don’t 

you put this information out so it’s available for families when 

they’re making choices about where they should have their 

loved ones placed? And specifically, I’ll read the specific 

recommendation on page 304. This is the recommendation of 

the Provincial Auditor, and it says: 

 

We recommend that the Ministry of Health publicly report 

inspection results when personal care homes do not 

comply with The Personal Care Homes Act, 1991. 

 

And that’s a fairly straight-up kind of thing, Mr. Speaker. We 

don’t need this legislation for the minister to do it. And I think 

. . . I challenge the minister to produce the letter that comes 

from the Information and Privacy Commissioner about why 

they would have to do this kind of legislation. Because 

practically this is the kind of information that the minister 

should be providing to the public of Saskatchewan, based on the 

information that they have. 

 

We have scads of information that’s available on the Ministry 

of Health website, and there’s no reason that this information 

couldn’t be there right now. So I challenge the minister to go 

get an opinion from the Information and Privacy Commissioner, 

get information from the Ministry of Justice or the Attorney 

General’s legal advisers, and provide it to this House to show 

why he can’t do it now. I’m willing to look at that information 

but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this is a political stalling bill. 

It’s not necessary for it to be done right now. 

 

What we do know is that there are people all across the 

province who are upset with the care that their family members 

are getting, whether it’s in the personal care home side or into 

the long-term care home area, and people come day by day to 

raise questions about this. 

 

It’s everything from the government’s removal of minimum 

standards, but I think the bigger issue here is that there appears 

to be some kind of a cap on the funding available for health 

regions that is playing out by pushing and eliminating some of 

the staffing that’s required in some of these areas. And, Mr. 

Speaker, personal care homes are mostly outside of that whole 

scenario, except I think there’s a responsibility and a 

recognition that this, the problems that are there in the personal 

care homes, need to be publicized. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why? Why do we get a stalling bill 

around something that’s so important to our people here? I 

don’t think we’re going to get challenges, but maybe the 

minister can show us that there will be some challenges to 

providing this information. I think it’s the obligation of the 

Minister of Health and his officials to provide this information 

to the public and it’s very clear that the auditor thinks that it’s 

important that at least the minister outlines those facilities 

which fail their inspections. And all that information is 

available to the minister and to the minister’s staff. It should be 

available to the public. And I think that these kinds of 

inspections are, I suppose, related to the public health 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4131 

inspections of restaurants and food establishments and it relates 

to similar kinds of issues about how people make choices where 

they go. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this short bill is 

unnecessary and that the minister should be providing us with 

information in much greater detail than he did in his speech if 

he wants to stall providing this information to the people of 

Saskatchewan. I challenge the Minister of Health to start 

providing this information right away. With those comments, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll conclude my remarks and adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 111, The Personal 

Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 108 — The 

Athletics Commission Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter the discussion today on Bill No. 108, The 

Athletics Commission Act. This is a brand new bill, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And what it aims to do is it will sanction and oversee 

professional combative sports events in Saskatchewan, which 

would include professional boxing, mixed martial art contests, 

and exhibitions. 

 

According to the minister, the minister has pointed out that 

Saskatchewan was only one of three jurisdictions that had not 

yet regulated mixed or combative sports, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

So there seemed to be a bit of a vacuum here where some of the 

. . . particularly the mixed martial arts or any of the combative 

sports could be held in such an environment that wouldn’t be 

safe for competitors. 

 

But interestingly enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I actually have 

recently taken up kick-boxing myself for no other reason than 

exercise and stress relief, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I have to 

say, despite my coach’s suggestion that I put faces on the pads 

that I . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It appears that a number of members 

would like to enter into the debate on this bill, but currently the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale has the floor, and I would 

recognize her. And I’m sure other members wishing to enter 

into the debate will have ample opportunity. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 

saying, I’ve recently taken up kick-boxing for no other reason 

than stress relief and some good exercise — stress relief in part 

from this place. And it’s interesting. My coach has offered the 

opportunity to put pictures on my kick-boxing . . . on the pads. 

But I’ve declined actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members 

opposite will be happy to know. 

 

Anyway I’ve never been a big spectator of combative sports, 

but you know, having recently taken it up, I quite enjoy it. And 

I maybe have found my true calling. It’s too bad I’m a little 

older than most athletes who embark upon this career, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But with all seriousness, this is an absolutely imperative bill. I 

know that there were many people in Saskatoon in particular 

advocating for regulation of mixed martial arts and combative 

sports, and many other jurisdictions. It had been regulated at the 

municipal level but, as we see, seven other jurisdictions had 

taken this very . . . to the next level and have regulated it 

provincially. The one thing that the minister also pointed out is 

that in June of 2013 the federal government passed Bill S-209, 

amending section 83 of the Criminal Code, which legalized the 

sport of mixed martial arts across Canada under the authority of 

provincial athletics commissions or similar established bodies. 

So it would be very important to in fact have that athletics 

commission in place. 

 

I just want to go on and talk a little bit more about the 

minister’s remarks here. So the minister says, the reason for this 

commission: 

 

. . . this government has committed to establishing a 

provincial athletics commission [which] . . . will hold the 

authority to sanction professional boxing and mixed 

martial arts events. This commission will be designed to 

ensure a consistent standard of qualifications, rules, 

regulations, and safety protocols for all participants and 

officials across the province. [And he goes on to say] . . . 

the commission will have the authority to provide 

protocols for licence applications, event permits, as well as 

the terms and conditions of a particular event. 

 

This I think it’s an important piece, mister deputy, Mr. Speaker, 

now: 

 

It also ensures that competitors participate in appropriate 

pre-fight medical testing such as blood tests, concussion 

screening, and eye exams. It ensures that qualified medical 

staff and event officials are hired, that promoters and 

competitors have the proper licences, and that promoters 

have suitable liability insurance. 

 

And as well I think this is another very important piece: “The 

commission will also be responsible for tracking competitors’ 

fighting histories and ensuring safety protocols are enforced.” 

 

[16:15] 

 

I know one of the things that has been in the news in very 

recent years which applies to anybody who is in contact sports 

— whether you’re a football player, a hockey player, you’re 

involved in mixed martial arts or boxing — has been 

concussions. And as most of us or all of us know, concussions 



4132 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

are in fact a brain injury, and all concussions are very serious. 

We’ve had recent stories, or stories in the last few years about, 

in particular, two NHL [National Hockey League] enforcers 

who had turned out to have, well had multiple concussions over 

their careers and ended up having a condition called chronic 

traumatic encephalopathy. I’m probably not saying that 

accurately, Mr. Speaker, but both Reggie Fleming and Bob 

Probert, following study of their brains, both proved to have 

CTE [chronic traumatic encephalopathy].  

 

And what exactly is CTE? It’s a progressive degenerative 

disease which can only be definitively diagnosed after death, 

which was the case of Reggie Fleming and Bob Probert. And it 

used to be called dementia pugilistica, or DP, as it was initially 

found in those with a history of boxing. And as I’ve said, it’s 

most commonly found in athletes in football, hockey, 

professional wrestling and other contact sports, and also in 

soldiers who have been exposed to a blast or concussive injury, 

in both cases resulting in degeneration of the brain tissue and an 

accumulation of a particular protein. And that’s how they 

diagnose CTE. 

 

And what comes from CTE are symptoms of dementia such as 

memory loss, aggression, confusion, and depression, which 

generally appear years or many decades after the series of brain 

traumas. And Reggie Fleming and Bob Probert both died very 

tragically. Actually in leading up until — I read a news article 

actually — reading up until about May 2004, in the previous 

four months, three NHL enforcers had died tragically. Derek 

Boogaard had been found to have taken painkillers and alcohol. 

And Rick Rypien was assumed to, I believe he committed 

suicide, and Wade Belak. And they were all thought possibly at 

that point to have CTE. So it’s very serious. 

 

To ensure that any athletes who are participating in these sports 

are monitored pre-fight and through their careers, I think, is 

absolutely imperative, Mr. Speaker. We want to ensure that 

professional athletes are well taken care of — it is a very 

physical sport — and to ensure that we aren’t just preventing 

concussions but long-term brain injuries that lead to depression 

and in many cases they’ve led to suicide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think one of the things to prevent unsanctioned fights and 

dealing with unsanctioned fights, ensuring that there’s a 

regulatory system in place is more than a good idea. And I 

know that that’s what many people in Saskatoon who are 

lobbying city council to regulate fights in Saskatoon were 

looking for. 

 

So on the face of it, this legislation looks to be very good. It’s a 

very good idea to put in place an athletics commission, 

especially in light of the fact that the federal government has 

legalized the sport of mixed martial arts and that we were 

laggards. And we were one of only three provinces who had yet 

to put in place legislation. 

 

I think the one thing that our job now as opposition will be to 

do is to make sure that this legislation addresses what the 

minister says it’s going to do. Are there any pieces that are 

missing, or anything in it that might be problematic? So over 

the next several months, we’ll be reaching out to stakeholders to 

ask them if this meets the needs of regulating combative sports 

in Saskatchewan. 

I know the minister had said in his remarks he had looked to 

some other provinces to see what they were doing. I think that 

will be our goal too, to compare and contrast our legislation 

with what other jurisdictions are doing, again to see if there are 

any gaps or any gaps in what and how we’re regulating and if 

we can improve upon that. So that’s what we’ll be doing over 

the next few months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But on the face of it, Bill No. 108, the Athletics Commission is 

by and large an important piece of legislation to ensure that 

athletes are protected and that events are sanctioned and run 

properly. So I know that I will have colleagues who will be 

weighing in on Bill 108 at some point in the future, but with 

that I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 108, The Athletics Commission Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 102 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 102 — The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I am 

pleased to rise here in the Assembly today to have an 

opportunity to comment on Bill No. 102, An Act to amend The 

Builders’ Lien Act. 

 

It was a great pleasure last night to able to meet with a number 

of land surveyors in Saskatchewan and have an opportunity to 

discuss this bill with them. I was actually fortunate; I was 

expecting to speak to it yesterday. But as it turned out, I didn’t 

and here I am now. And I had the opportunity of having some 

conversations with a number of land surveyors last night in our 

meeting with them, and certainly one of the things I wanted to 

talk to them about was their concerns about this legislation. And 

I’m happy to report that they are the ones that requested these 

changes. And there are a number of reasons for that, which I 

will talk about in a couple moments. 

 

I think one of the telling things that was interesting though is 

when the surveyors were sitting in the Assembly yesterday. 

Some of them came in and visited about 4:30, actually I guess 

about 24 hours ago, and watched the proceedings. And he was 

quite concerned, he was speaking to his MLA from Saskatoon 

Eastview and had indicated, why is it that when you’re giving 

speeches nobody is paying attention? And there was some 

concern about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to explain the process of adjourned debates, it’s always 

kind of interesting when the public are trying to be engaged and 

interested in what’s going on in the Assembly. And I guess it’s 

a bit disappointing in a way, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t have 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4133 

more of an engagement when these debates are going on. And 

certainly I know that because most of the time these debates are 

basically comments and concerns from the opposition, that 

maybe it’s not as entertaining or interesting for government 

members to find out what we have to say about these bills. 

 

But certainly I think members of the public, when they join us 

in the Assembly at this time of the day, it’s always a bit of a 

curiosity about how many conversations are going on when 

these adjourned debate speeches are being provided. And 

people are reading the newspaper and holding it up, things like 

that, Mr. Speaker. It really makes it interesting, and maybe we 

need to think about how these procedures work a little bit better 

or how they could work maybe a little bit better. 

 

At any rate, the speaker that is . . . oh sorry. I see the member 

holding up his newspaper, but as an architect he probably would 

be very interested in these changes because architects are 

actually already protected under The Builders’ Lien Amendment 

Act and apparently they were protected for a long time. This is 

one of the things I found out last night. Architects and engineers 

have always been protected under The Builders’ Lien Act, and 

with a view that the work that they do on any building and 

construction project is important work and needs to be paid. 

 

And what’s happening with this bill is a recognition that not 

only are architects important and not only are engineers 

important and other construction agencies, but the very essence 

of certainty in building and construction these days is the 

survey fabric. And we all know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

we’ve heard of stories of disputes where, you know, people are 

arguing about where the property boundary is, and people have 

built houses that straddle two different properties. And these 

kinds of disputes cost a lot of money. And the certainty that’s 

provided by a professionally done survey plan is something 

that’s really important to building trades and construction and 

any kind of development in any area. 

 

So it’s not exactly clear why land surveyors were left out of the 

Act back when it was first introduced, but I think this 

amendment that’s being proposed here is one that I do heartily 

endorse and am pleased to see that land surveyors will now be 

included in The Builders’ Lien Act through the amendments that 

are proposed here. 

 

Now the minister indicated that there is actually three types of 

amendments that are being proposed here. And one is . . . The 

first is the one I’ve spoken to where we see the protection of 

The Builders’ Lien Act being provided to land surveyors. And 

the minister pointed out that, you know, we always have to 

strike a balance between the rights of landowners and the rights 

of contractors and tradespeople who do construction on the land 

that’s being developed. 

 

And certainly having title is something that’s very important to 

the landowner. And being able to register a lien against that title 

is something that’s not an inconsequential activity, and it can 

certainly impact the ability of the landowner to sell their land or 

the property that’s built thereon. So this is always something 

that I think the courts have been very careful about ensuring 

that the balance is there. 

 

And certainly this type of legislation, it was obvious there was a 

need for it when it was first introduced because builders were 

often being left out in the cold. They weren’t getting paid. They 

were being stiffed by the landowners, and there was no legal 

recourse for them to go except through the civil courts in a 

lawsuit which would be difficult to enforce. So having the 

opportunity to put a lien on a property when monies are owed to 

you is a great legal remedy, Mr. Speaker, for a number of 

different trades. And we’re pleased to see the minister bring 

forward a proposition to include land surveyors in that process. 

 

The second part of the bill that the minister indicated was being 

amended is the new section 4, proposed new section 4 of The 

Builders’ Lien Act. And what he’s proposing here is that there 

used to be a requirement for 1 per cent of the contract price to 

show completion. And he’s removing the . . . And also there 

used to be a requirement for either 1 per cent or $1,000, but the 

minister’s point is that that $1,000 reference was established in 

1986, so it obviously is not a very valid figure anymore. And 

rather than having a number prescribed right in the legislation, 

the minister is proposing that it be only just the 1 per cent of the 

contract price to determine completion. 

 

This is important to the landowner, Mr. Speaker, because they 

want to be able to have their property clear of all the 

obligations, and if there is a lien on their title, it’s more difficult 

for them to move that property or sell it and transfer it. So this 

will give a little more clarity in terms of a meaningful figure for 

the ability of the determination of when a contract is complete. 

Again I think that makes total sense. And based on the 

conversations I had last evening with the land surveyors of 

Saskatchewan, I think this is something that they’re supportive 

of as well. Of course, you know, we want to be able to canvass 

a wider audience than the group that was there last night, but 

certainly it seems to be that the support is there for that. 

 

The other thing the minister indicated in his comments was a 

change in the trust claims because currently the limitation 

period for the trust claims is one year. And the minister’s 

suggesting that the trustee would be discharged from their 

obligations one year after the contract is complete or 

abandoned, and this is at odds with the two-year limitation 

period that we find in The Limitations Act. So it looks like this 

is just a general recommendation to bring those two time 

periods more into sync, and certainly that’s not something I 

think that there would be a lot of concern about, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

This kind of housekeeping-type legislation, I think . . . well not 

to say it’s not important. It’s very important to the land 

surveyors of Saskatchewan to be able to have the ability to 

access this kind of legal remedy. It’s important but it is not the 

one issue I think that the government still needs to look at when 

it comes to issues land surveyors face, and that’s the issue of 

accretion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And I know in my previous career I worked a lot on files where 

the issue of accretion is something that’s a major concern to the 

land surveyors here in Saskatchewan. And we’re the only 

jurisdiction in Canada where the Ministry of Agriculture 

actually has a claim on accreted land. And when I talk about 

accretion, what the legal term refers to is when you have a piece 



4134 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

of property that’s along a water’s edge and the water recedes, so 

the actual piece of land becomes larger. And in Saskatchewan, 

the Ministry of Agriculture very carefully claims those areas 

that are dried up or exposed by the evaporation of the water, 

and that’s completely at odds with the common law and the rest 

of Canada and on federal lands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this has raised a number of issues over time. And I think it’s 

a little more thorny of an issue, and perhaps that’s why the 

ministry isn’t looking at it at this point in time. But it’s certainly 

something I think that has been an issue, a live issue, for 

surveyors for a number of years, and we would certainly 

recommend that this be something that the ministry looks into. 

 

And you know, it’s not as easy I guess. It’s not so much 

low-hanging fruit as this amendment to The Builders’ Lien Act 

would be. It’s a much more thorny issue. But it certainly is one 

where we are out of sync with the rest of the country and where 

the common law of accretion still applies. 

 

And we know the government has avoided having litigation on 

this matter over many years now and often settled the disputes 

or find other ways to make the dispute go away. And what I’m 

told by the land surveyors is that . . . You know, land surveyors 

and landowners are practical people. And there were a number 

of issues even with, you know, road access on oil well sites, and 

where access is near a water body, it actually is an issue in 

terms of accretion. But landowners are practical people and so 

are oil companies, so they’ve often found ways to resolve the 

issue without resorting to the courts. 

 

And I think this is an issue that probably will end up in the 

court at some point unless the ministry is proactive and takes 

some measures to rectify the sort of inequity or the oddity of the 

position that’s being taken by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. So I think that’s probably a topic for a different 

day. But certainly with the comments that I heard last night 

from the land surveyors, it’s much more of a live issue I think 

than this particular issue that’s being addressed in the 

amendments to The Builders’ Lien Act. 

 

So I think at this time, Mr. Speaker, that is probably the extent 

of the comments that I would make on this bill, Bill 102, The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act. We certainly support I think in 

principle the propositions that are being put forth, but we’ll 

want to take some time — and I know my other colleagues will 

want to have an opportunity to comment on this as well — take 

some time to make sure that it’s properly canvassed and that we 

understand if there are any complications or issues that arise 

from this that are not immediately apparent. 

 

So I will wrap up my comments at this point, and I would like 

to move adjournment of the debate on Bill No. 102, The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 103 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to join the debate today on Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013. This is a pretty 

interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, again tying the 

question of the issuing of hunting or angling licences to the 

question of whether or not someone is keeping up with their 

maintenance orders. 

 

And again this builds on other work that has been done in terms 

of the issuing of licences to drive vehicles, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of providing greater force and greater leverage to ensure 

those maintenance orders are being kept up with. 

 

So referring to the minister’s second reading speech and what 

the member from Saskatoon Northwest had to say in the debate 

launching this legislation into the House, wherein since 1986, 

the maintenance enforcement office has been responsible for 

recording and enforcing registered support orders; the office 

continuing to have one of the highest collection rates in Canada; 

where in 2012-13 fiscal, over 91 per cent of payments were 

collected, resulting in a record-setting amount of over $39 

million in collections. Close the quote. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, those payments, we’d do well to 

remember the human side of what is represented in those 

numbers. Each of these are court-ordered maintenance 

payments. This is income whereby families are able to support 

the raising of children and the maintaining of households. And 

again in the unfortunate events surrounding the dissolution of a 

marriage, making certain that there’s fair treatment in place for 

families that have gone through this need for dissolution.  

 

And again I know that this is not something entered into lightly 

by the court system or by the judiciary in terms of these 

maintenance payments being ordered. Again this can make the 

difference between a household living in some basic measure of 

decency, affording resources for children and their proper 

rearing, and paying the bills and putting food on the table, Mr. 

Speaker. This is what I think of when I entertain the question of 

maintenance orders.  

 

And again that 91 per cent of ordered payments that had been 

collected in 2012-13, that’s a good return rate. And we’re glad 

to see the priority that that kind of return rate would indicate, 

and again the $39 million in collections that that represents, Mr. 

Speaker. The vital difference I’m sure that it’s made for those 

households where that’s income that they are counting on, and 

income that arises from, like I say, the legal dissolution of 

marriages, be they common law or otherwise, and the way the 

children are incorporated into those judgments, and making sure 

that the income is there in an equitable and indeed a 

court-ordered, judicious manner for those payments, and the 

difference that that will make or not for the children attached to 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4135 

these relationships. 

 

Again returning to the minister’s second reading speech: 

 

. . . the MEO [maintenance enforcement office] regularly 

reviews and suggests updates to the legislation to ensure 

that it’s offering the public the best possible service in the 

enforcement of support orders. One critical purpose of the 

Act is that it provides the MEO several enforcement 

mechanisms to help ensure that support payments are 

complied with. Currently the director may place 

garnishments on wages or other income, suspend driver’s 

licences, apply for the denial of federal licences such as 

passports, and place garnishments with the federal 

government in order to intercept funds such as GST 

[goods and services tax] refunds and income tax refunds. 

The director may also attach and collapse pension 

entitlements and RRSPs [registered retirement savings 

plan]. Ultimately the director may apply for the seizure of 

a payor’s property. 

 

Again with each of these measures, Mr. Speaker, it would be 

good to know in a more precise manner, of the $39 million that 

was collected in the previous fiscal year, what portion of those 

funds arose or were collected as a result of the director invoking 

different of the means described here in the legislation or in the 

minister’s second reading speech? And what is the estimate that 

attaches to again expanding this approach of the directors being 

able to invoke these different sanctions around hunting and 

angling licences? Is there a projected amount that is thought 

available to be recovered? 

 

How will this increase the recovery rate, again which is 

admirable at over 91 per cent and again the difference that that 

return rate makes for families, Mr. Speaker, and for the kids 

that are on the other side of these enforcement orders and 

support orders? It would be good to know what precisely each 

of these different mechanisms has brought to the table. Is there 

a greater frequency of one or the other? And then in turn, Mr. 

Speaker, how this relates to other jurisdictions. 

 

So far as I know, I’m not sure if other jurisdictions have taken a 

similar approach as regards hunting and fishing licences and 

what the experience of those jurisdictions has been. But again 

the basic principle here being that with these other instruments 

that have been brought to bear, it’s helped to arrive at a 91 per 

cent enforcement success rate on support orders. And again if 

. . . It’s not good enough to take things on faith, Mr. Speaker. 

We’d like to have that demonstrated and substantiated, so we’ll 

be looking for greater detail on that. 

 

Returning to the question of the . . . or to the introduction of this 

piece of legislation in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, with the 

minister’s second reading speech: 

 

The amendments before the Assembly today will provide 

a further enforcement tool, Mr. Speaker, as they will 

permit the director of the MEO to direct the Minister of 

the Environment to prohibit a hunting or angling licence 

from being issued to a payor who is in arrears on support 

payments by at least three months. Restricting the ability 

of an individual to secure a hunting or angling licence is 

an enforcement tool that will complement the MEO’s 

existing enforcement tools. 

 

. . . the intention is that this new tool will only be utilized 

when other enforcement actions aimed at the financial 

resources of the payor prove unsuccessful. Accordingly, 

these amendments require the MEO to take all reasonable 

steps to enforce the order prior to restricting the payor’s 

ability to secure a hunting or an angling licence. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be interested to see how this is 

enacted operationally. What sort of plans are there for that 

co-operation between the Ministry of the Environment and the 

Ministry of Justice and the maintenance enforcement office? 

We’ll be interested to see how this squares with the sharing of 

information under the freedom of information and privacy 

provisions of this legislature and of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ll be interested to see how this squares with the fact that it 

is not too long ago that the Government of Saskatchewan 

contracted with a vendor to provide online licensing for hunters 

and fishers. And I know the different problems that we’ve heard 

about that approach to hunting and fishing licences from 

different vendors throughout the province that have been doing 

this for many, many years, Mr. Speaker, and the new sort of 

wrinkles that have arisen courtesy of this government’s 

contracting that service with a Tennessee provider. We’ll be 

interested to see how that impacts the ability to execute 

something along this line. We’ll be interested to see how that 

affects different sort of privacy provisions that are there for 

information and how all this squares, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again it goes back to, what is the precedent for this? What 

is the immediate sort of impetus? The principle’s there with 

other sort of sanctions being brought to bear, be it with driver’s 

licences or other measures, and having that as the trigger to 

provide greater sort of suasion on the payment of outstanding 

maintenance orders. But we’ll be again looking to see if there’s 

a precedent this is building on from another jurisdiction, other 

provincial or territorial jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 

there are jurisdictions that come to mind in terms of both having 

similar approaches on the maintenance of enforcement orders 

and the great incidence of hunting and fishing in those 

jurisdictions. So we’ll be looking for a greater indication on that 

front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Finally referring to the minister’s second reading speech, it 

closes out stating, “the director,” again this is at the 

maintenance enforcement office: 

 

. . . the director will need to provide the payor with at least 

30 days notice of his or her intention to restrict the payor’s 

ability to secure a hunting or angling licence. Mr. Speaker, 

these amendments provide the MEO with an additional 

enforcement tool and confirm the government’s 

commitment to the timely payment of support for children 

and families. 

 

Again how that 30-day notice is enforced, what sort of 

protocols are there around the ensuring of information and the 

protection of privacy where warranted, and how this will be 



4136 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2013 

conducted between different government departments, Mr. 

Speaker. Again there are some assumptions you can make about 

past practice and how this is related to the matter of driver’s 

licences, to use one example, and maintenance enforcement. 

But to say it again, it’s not enough to take these things on faith. 

We’d like to have this committed to explicitly by the 

government as to how this will proceed. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, there’s other questions that we’ll have 

about this piece of legislation, Bill No. 103. But for the time 

being, I will take my place and adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 104 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, 

pleased to rise in debate in consideration of Bill No. 104, An 

Act to make a consequential amendment resulting from the 

enactment of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2013. Again, Mr. Speaker, this is a pretty . . . 

Given the consequential amendment nature of this particular 

piece of legislation, the main sort of legislation is Bill No. 103 

and this following in the train of that. As such, the meat of this 

particular consequential amendment concerns the subsection, or 

the new section 27.1 wherein the following section is added 

after section 27 of The Fisheries Act (Saskatchewan), 1994: 

 

“Prohibition against obtaining licence — maintenance 

enforcement 

27.1 The minister shall prohibit a person from applying 

for or obtaining a licence if the Director of Maintenance 

Enforcement has directed the minister to suspend the 

person’s ability to secure a licence pursuant to 

subsection 43.04(2) of The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Act, 1997”. 

 

Again consequential amendments are just that, Mr. Speaker. 

The main sort of trigger for this particular piece of legislation is 

Bill No. 103 and is attendant to the changes brought forward in 

that piece of legislation. So again, with the idea being that we 

want to improve upon that 91 per cent enforcement of 

maintenance orders, that we want to improve on that $39 

million that is collected in that process, Mr. Speaker, and the 

difference that those dollars represent as income for children 

and families and the way that court-ordered maintenance 

provisions are enforced or not in this province, again we think 

this is worth consideration and can build upon the good 

experience or the productive experience I would say, Mr. 

Speaker, as regards the practice already experienced to date 

with driver’s licences and other measures being brought to bear. 

 

I don’t think I need to say much more than that at this time on 

this question, Mr. Speaker. So with that I would move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 104, An Act to make a consequential 

amendment resulting from the enactment of The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member that Bill . . . 

adjournment of Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 105 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 105 — The 

Informal Public Appeals Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and enter into the debate on Bill No. 105, An 

Act respecting Informal Public Appeals. This is a very timely 

Act. I think it’s an important one, and of course it’s one that 

we’ll have some questions on. But I think that, you know, as the 

minister talked about in his opening remarks, about this is the 

kind of thing that is done to assist a bereaved family with future 

education costs or spontaneous appeals made to the public, for 

example after a fire or flood. And it doesn’t address 

professional fundraising by established charitable organizations. 

 

And I assume that those organizations, if it’s professional, 

would have some method or some system when they have 

specific causes. And we’re seeing that today unfortunately, with 

the tragedy, the disaster that happened in Philippines, and 

organizations are stepping up to fill a real need to help the 

people in the Philippines in that disaster. 

 

But we see this more locally at home, whether it’s a flood that’s 

affected a community or a small group of people, and it’s pretty 

specific. And you know, Saskatchewan citizens are well known 

for stepping up to the plate and helping. And their helping, 

that’s just what we’re known for, and helping our neighbours 

get through those tough times and whether it’s a sudden loss of 

a loved one or setting up an educational fund, that type of thing. 

So it is quite timely that this is the case with this Bill No. 105. 

And we recognize that sometimes there are gaps because . . . 

especially when it comes to a trustee. What happens when the 

need is met? What happens if the fundraising drive is extremely 

successful and there’s excess funds? What happens in that case? 

 

So it’s interesting to know what the government will be doing, 

how they designed to address this, who will be charged with 

this. So we haven’t had as much time as we would like to hear 

from professional fundraisers, people maybe in the know of 

this. We will be interested to know: who did they consult with? 



November 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4137 

Clearly this is a problem that has been identified. We think that 

this is an important, a very important issue. 

 

So I think that we will have questions in committee on this, but 

I do want to say that we look forward to having those 

conversations. For example, this Act defines what a public 

appeal is and limits the scope to sporadic or informal appeals, 

confirms that funds raised through public appeal are held in 

trust. And often that’s an important issue people want to know. 

So what happens if I do give $100 or a couple of hundred 

dollars? What happens to that money? And establish a default 

scheme where what happens if there’s too much money raised 

or not enough. What will happen in that case? 

 

You know, it talks about establishing a mechanism for disposal 

of surplus funds and an ability to provide funds when or where 

needed. They will create a power for the courts to direct the 

application of surplus funds, set out the powers and duties of 

trustees, investment of funds, further public appeals, and the 

transfer of funds to another body. But it . . . Provide for 

regulatory authority, user-friendly forms, and that type of thing. 

 

So it’ll be interesting to see how, when we get into committee, 

how the government envisions this process. Will it be done 

through the Public Trustee, public guardians? Is it yet another 

board or authority that’s set up? So these are some of the 

questions we have. But I am glad to see that it’s being tackled, 

because as Saskatchewan grows and we see that sometimes we 

can have traumatic, tragic situations happen. And as I said, we 

are a province that steps up to the plate and we’ll do what is 

needed to be done. But more and more it’s important that we 

don’t have people taking advantage of the situation, and 

unfortunately we have heard of stories of that where, you know, 

things have gone astray. And we definitely don’t want to see 

that kind of thing. 

 

And when these kind of things happen, sometimes judgment is 

not always at its best and systems aren’t always set up and 

things aren’t always taken into account. And we need to make 

sure, we need to make sure that they are. 

 

So questions. Who have they consulted? Who haven’t they 

consulted with? Why not? We want to make sure the system is 

transparent. They have alluded to it, that there will be some 

access to some information. They’re talking about forums, but 

we have questions about that. Is that the very best way? 

 

We know often these things happen in small communities, and 

those small communities can be in large cities. But if it’s an 

ethnic community or a neighbourhood community, that’s 

always difficult to ask those difficult questions. But you know, 

we need to be able to do that. 

 

And so this bill, the informal public appeals, will go a long way 

we hope to fill the gap of regulations around this, and that 

people caught in tragic circumstances won’t be held in some 

odd ways. Because you know, I know in small communities 

there can be a lot of questions. So what happened to the money? 

Where’d the money go? That there can be accounting for it and 

then therefore people can be, as you know Saskatchewan people 

are known for, we are known for being generous people. And 

this will just support that, and be sure to answer a lot of the 

questions that might come about because of that. 

So as the minister said in his speech, he says: 

 

This bill is careful not to create hurdles for those with 

good intentions. Individuals who choose not to use the 

forms to establish a public appeal can proceed without 

them. The bill will still protect these people, but to a lesser 

extent. 

 

So it sounds like there will be two, still kind of, you can still do 

the informal public appeal if it’s . . . And now this will be the 

interesting question. Will there be an amount? Will there have 

to be some accounting for this? We’re not sure. So it sounds 

like you can do a small appeal, a small informal appeal, but it 

would be important to have some, still some accountability. 

 

And when he goes on to say rather than hurdles, Mr. Speaker, 

this bill seeks to remove traps that have evolved . . . so the 

well-meaning trustees can commence an appeal that are not 

made victims of their own good intentions. And isn’t that the 

case, Mr. Speaker? Often we’re made victims of our own good 

intentions. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I know many people want to 

speak to this because it does speak to our good intentions. So, 

Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I would like to move 

adjournment of Bill No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 104, the enforcement of maintenance orders 

consequential amendment . . . Excuse me. On Bill 105, The 

Informal Public Appeals Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being the hour of 5 o’clock, this House 

stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4107 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4107 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4107, 4108 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4107 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4107 

  Docherty ........................................................................................................................................................................ 4107, 4108 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4108 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4108 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4108 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4108 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4109 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4109 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4109 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Child Day and the Child and Family Agenda 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4109 

 International Transgender Day of Remembrance 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4110 

 Moose Jaw Festival of Trees 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4110 

 Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4110 

 Grey Cup Festival 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4111 

 National Diabetes Awareness Month 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4111 

 Opposition Support for Trade Agreement 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4111 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Combatting Bullying 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4112 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4112 

 Amendments to The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4112 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4113 

 Revenue Sharing With Municipalities 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4113 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4113 

 Recommendations on Long-Term Care 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4114 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4114 

 Support for Teachers 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4115 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4115 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4116 

 Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4117 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4117 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4117 

 Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4119 



 

 Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4121 

 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4125 

 Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4125 

 Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4127 

 Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4129 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4131 

 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4132 

 Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4134 

 Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4136 

 Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4136 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


