




















































Hansard: March 25, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 38A  MONDAY, MARCH 25, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2863 

 March 25, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Cypress 

Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you a very 

special guest and to extend our welcome to His Excellency 

Leslie Gatan, the ambassador of the Philippines to Canada, to 

the province of Saskatchewan and to our Legislative Building 

this afternoon. 

 

I’d also like to take a moment and welcome Ms. Junever 

Mahilum-West, Philippine consul general located in Toronto; 

and Mr. Eric Tamayo, the minister and consul for economic 

affairs who has joined His Excellency today. Also with them 

are two people who probably don’t need an introduction but 

who do such good work on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. Norma Morrow is the senior protocol officer 

and Renata Bereziuk is the international officer with 

Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

While in the province, Ambassador Gatan will meet with 

representatives from the government, the business community, 

and the Filipino community. Mr. Speaker, our province has a 

strong economic relationship with the Philippines, particularly 

in the areas of potash and agricultural exports, but it is our 

province’s close bond with their people that has become the 

defining aspect of our relationship. Today Saskatchewan 

welcomes more immigrants from the Philippines than any other 

country in the world. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the last three years 

over 9,600 men, women, and children from the Philippines 

have come to call Saskatchewan home. 

 

I’m very happy to say that the Filipino community in this 

province is one that is strong, is vibrant and growing. Mr. 

Speaker, these families have arrived in Saskatchewan and have 

brought with them their expertise, their ideas, their skills, and 

their way of life, and in doing so are now helping our province 

overcome a severe labour shortage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government looks forward to continuing to 

strengthen the social, the economic, and cultural ties between 

our two jurisdictions in the months and years ahead. I would 

ask all members of this House to join me in welcoming 

Ambassador Gatan and his delegation to Saskatchewan’s 

legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the member opposite in welcoming Ambassador Gatan and the 

delegation from the embassy. It’s wonderful to have you here 

today. And it’s true that the country of the Philippines has made 

a huge contribution to Saskatchewan over the decades and 

especially in the recent years, Mr. Speaker, with the number of 

individuals working in health care, working in the trades, 

working in business. And they’ve made a huge contribution to 

our province. 

 

And I know from my interaction with many constituents who 

are Filipino, some of the hardest working people I’ve ever met 

with the hugest hearts as well, and I know that’s true for the 

culture of the country as well. So I want to join with the 

government in welcoming the ambassador here today and wish 

him all the best in the discussions that will be taking place. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a formal 

introduction to make, but just before I do, I want to add my 

words of welcome to the Leader of the Opposition and the 

member for Cypress Hills to His Excellency Ambassador Gatan 

from the Philippines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the good pleasure of attending the 

Philippines Christmas party in Swift Current, which over the 

last number of years — that’s my hometown — has turned out 

to be the best Christmas party in our community. And we too 

are blessed, as the Leader of the Opposition has referenced, to 

have a very strong and dynamic Filipino community in Swift 

Current and in the southwest corner of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, it’s a pleasure to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, three 

very distinguished members of the Saskatchewan Business 

Council. Mr. Speaker, members will know that this council is 

formed by a number of representative business groups that try 

to provide counsel to government and opposition parties with 

respect to policy. 

 

And joining us today, Mr. Speaker, is the regional 

vice-president with the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 

Independent Businesses], no stranger to the House, Marilyn 

Braun-Pollon has joined us. Her organization, her regional 

representation is 5,000 women and men in business, small 

businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, Dwayne Marling has joined us 

as well. He’s the regional vice-president of the Canadian 

Restaurant and Foodservices Association. I knew he was going 

to be here, Mr. Speaker, because I read it on Twitter. I’m sure, 

much to the disappointment of the member for Riversdale, I 

was looking on my iPad this morning, and I noted that he was 

coming here today to the House. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important to note that they represent 2,000 restaurateurs in the 

province. 



2864 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, Greg Trew is a representative with the 

North Saskatoon Business Association, a dynamic business 

group in our province and in the City of Bridges representing 

800 businesses, Mr. Speaker. We thank these individuals for the 

work they do to ensure that we are building a business 

environment that welcomes new investment and frankly makes 

it possible for wealth creators to do just that, to create jobs for 

Saskatchewan families. I’d ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these individuals to the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 

I’d like to join with the Premier and welcome the business 

leaders that have joined us here today. Ms. Marilyn 

Braun-Pollon, thank you so much for the work you do and the 

advocacy you’ve provided. We always appreciate the meetings 

that we have. Mr. Marling, thank you for being here today. As 

well Mr. Trew, we always look forward to open discussions and 

your advocacy, and you sharing the interests of your members 

with us as an opposition here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you to all of your members for the role they play in 

building out a strong economy in our province and the 

important role that fulfills to all Saskatchewan people. So I join 

with the Premier in welcoming these business leaders here 

today. Thank you. 

 

And maybe while on my feet, I also noticed that we have two 

internationally acclaimed artists that have joined us here today. 

This would be Mr. Rod and Denyse, and Mrs. Denyse Simair 

from just outside of Prince Albert. And they’re, as I say, 

internationally acclaimed crystalline porcelain artists. And in 

fact had the chance to get to know the two of them a few years 

back; really enjoyed the discussion, learned a little bit more 

about their art. And in fact I believe they’re headed over to 

Spain very shortly to share their product with the world. So I 

ask all members to join with me in welcoming Mr. and Mrs. 

Simair here today as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I am 

pleased to introduce a group of students sitting in your gallery 

today. They’re second-year business marketing students from 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] Palliser in Moose Jaw. In attendance today are 

Dustin Rushinko, Jess Chenard, Manny Schellenberg, Aly Bell, 

Josh Zimmer, Matthew Dagert, Courtney Senkow, Rene 

Hellings, Zach Eberle, Emily Weekes, Sarah Rotheisler, Dillon 

Wallin, and Megan Trenowth. With them are Chantelle 

Flanagan-Moore, facility member who worked with the 

students on the project; and Morai Forer, program head, 

business division of SIAST. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students developed a campaign that sold 

lunches to raise money for local schoolchildren. Through this 

campaign they were able to raise $10,000. My colleague from 

Moose Jaw will have more to say in a member’s statement, so I 

would like to ask all members to help me welcome them to 

their legislature today. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the member opposite in welcoming the group of 

business students from Palliser SIAST Campus, coming from 

all over the province, I understand. Great work on the 

fundraiser. Keep that up, and the Finance minister will be 

dogging your every step, I’m sure. But it’s good to see you here 

today in your Legislative Assembly, and please keep up that 

great work. So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 

opposition, welcome to the students from SIAST Palliser to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, it is my pleasure to introduce three registered dietitians 

seated in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, these accomplished women 

work hard for dietitians and as dietitians. We have Roseann 

Nasser, a research dietitian who has served in so many roles I 

won’t start mentioning them; Lana Moore, registrar for the 

Saskatchewan Dietitians Association; and Tammy Ives, 

regional executive director for Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and 

Northwest Ontario for Dietitians of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of this Assembly to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, 20 grade 12 students from the Langenburg High 

School, accompanied by their teachers, Fallon Prince and 

Shawna Kentel. 

 

I might also add, Mr. Speaker — and thanks to the Finance 

minister on budget day — that I realized the grade 12 students 

may not be able to take advantage of this, but I know their 

teachers hopefully will, a new K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 

12] school in Langenburg. Much appreciated out there. So I’d 

ask all members to welcome them here to their legislature 

today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to present a petition on cellphone coverage, Mr. Speaker. And 

the petition reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, 

and the neighbouring communities of Michel Village and 

St. George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known 

as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch 

Narrows First Nation and the adjoining community of 

Turnor Lake, including the neighbouring communities in 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2865 

 

each of those areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Dillon, and the number, I have almost 200 

signatures on this particular petition, Mr. Speaker. And the 

most amazing thing about this petition is we’re getting support 

from all throughout the province. And again, as I mentioned at 

the outset of this particular petition, it is signed by people 

primarily from Dillon. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know since the Act was introduced in December, literally 

hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been carried 

out in the interest of due diligence. We know there is no labour 

relations crisis to fix and no necessity to rush this omnibus bill 

through that will likely govern workplace relationships for 

decades to come. If the bill does become law in this province, 

working people, particularly young workers, immigrant 

workers, and other vulnerable workers will suffer from a hasty 

watering down of our current labour standards which set the 

mandatory minimums for all Saskatchewan workers. I would 

like to read the prayer. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May, and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

New Transition House in Melfort 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to rise in 

the House today to recognize that our government’s budget 

provides support for the victims of domestic violence through 

the opening of the first new transition house in Saskatchewan 

since 1989 to be located in Melfort. 

 

The Angel’s Lighthouse will provide a 16-space residential 

crisis service for women and their accompanying children 

fleeing interpersonal violence and abuse and will provide crisis 

services for 23 communities in the northeast region of our 

province. 

 

Our government is providing $150,000 for project development 

costs, start-up costs, staffing, training, and preparations for 

full-service operations. Capital costs will be shared by the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, the federal government, 

and the local community, with Sask Housing putting in 

$500,000. 

 

This transition house will be operated by North East Outreach 

Services, which provide services throughout northeastern 

Saskatchewan including Tisdale and Nipawin and as far as the 

Manitoba border. The organization’s services includes 

awareness programs, referrals to other agencies, and a 24-hour 

crisis support line taking calls from numerous communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 

recognizing this important project in Melfort which will greatly 

assist women and children fleeing interpersonal violence and 

abuse. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Breaking the Silence Conference 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 

about an event I attended over the weekend, the 16th annual 

Breaking the Silence conference. Organized out of the College 

of Education at the University of Saskatchewan, Breaking the 

Silence is Canada’s longest running anti-homophobia 

conference and tackles a wide range of issues including the 

lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, two-spirited, queer, 

questioning, and intersex community. This year’s theme was 

Removing Homophobia from the Locker Room and Beyond, 

tackling homophobia, transphobia, and inclusiveness in sports. 

 

The keynote speaker at the conference was Calgary Stampeder 

running back Jon Cornish. Jon Cornish’s mother came out just 

after he completed college, and he has been a strong ally ever 

since. In 2012 Jon Cornish was named CFL’s [Canadian 

Football League] most outstanding Canadian and was runner-up 

for the most outstanding player. He also, notably, came forward 

in support of his mother, an Anglican priest who is happily 

married to another woman. 

 

Speaking of his personal experience, Cornish said, and I quote: 

 

Football locker rooms have been allowed to sort of stay 

the way they’ve been for a long time. And there’s a lot of 

change happening of late, and I think locker rooms will 

slowly but surely accommodate that change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join with me in 

congratulating the organizers of Breaking the Silence 

Conference and thank Jon Cornish and his family for 

courageously speaking out in support of inclusive communities 

and locker rooms. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Supporting Habitat for Humanity 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

pleased to rise in the House today and talk about a key 

ceremony for Habitat for Humanity that the Minister of Social 

Services and I were able to attend earlier this morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, owning a home is a dream that many of us share. 

It represents security, a sense of belonging, and a place where 



2866 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

we can become proud, connected members of a community. 

However, some families need help to achieve this dream. That 

is where Habitat for Humanity steps in, by mobilizing 

volunteers and partners to build affordable homes for 

low-income families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we share Habitat’s vision and are proud to 

contribute $50,000 towards each Habitat for Humanity home. 

In fact, since 2009 our government has dedicated a total of 4.5 

million in funding for Habitat for Humanity affiliates and 

chapters in Regina, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, Yorkton, Prince 

Albert, Lloydminster, Nipawin, Humboldt. Together we’ve 

built 90 homes across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not stopping there. With the 2013-14 

budget, our government committed an additional 2 million to 

help Habitat build 40 more homes for Saskatchewan. Each 

Habitat partner family has to do their share of work by 

contributing at least 500 hours to build their home or other 

Habitat homes. But all this hard work is worthwhile once you 

can say to each family, welcome home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is grateful to have such a strong 

relationship with Habitat for Humanity. Their whole family is 

fantastic to work with. And we are looking forward to many 

more builds together, which will provide homes for families in 

the communities across our province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Northern Trappers Convention 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of 

participating in the opening ceremonies at the annual Northern 

Trappers convention held in Prince Albert. It was very 

gratifying to see the level of support from First Nations and 

Métis organizations such as FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations], Meadow Lake Tribal Council, Prince Albert 

Grand Council, and Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. Financial 

support for the conference was also provided by Cameco, 

Areva, and Northern Lights Casino. 

 

Dr. Rose Roberts provided a presentation based on her research 

conducted for the Prince Albert Grand Council. Her 

presentation demonstrated that the chronic diseases common in 

northern communities can be greatly reduced by including 

activities and diets that are part of the traditional lifestyle of 

living off the land, including trapping. The two day convention 

had many other highlights, Mr. Speaker, including stories from 

our elders and youth, skinning technique demonstrations, 

trapping industry display booth, fur sales and marketing 

discussions. There were also discussions on current legislation 

and regulations which impact the fur industry. 

 

During the convention, a memorandum of understanding was 

signed by representatives from the Prince Albert Grand 

Council, Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, and the Northern 

Saskatchewan Trappers Association Co-operative. The 

understanding is that the organizations will collaborate on 

issues of common concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government needs to take a more active role 

in supporting traditional economies such as trapping. They are 

such an important part of the cultural lifestyle of our northern 

residents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Students Fundraise for Hunger in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask this 

Assembly to join me in congratulating a group of SIAST 

Palliser campus students that are in your gallery today. As part 

of their business marketing program, these students were 

challenged to use an innovative approach to learn and practise 

the fundamental skills of retail management. 

 

They decided to make a difference by creating a product to earn 

funds for a charitable cause. They developed a project called 

Happy Christmas to All, and to All A Good Lunch and sold 

Christmas lunch packages to raise money for the local 

schoolchildren. These lunch packages were bought by Moose 

Jaw businesses and SIAST faculty, staff, and students. They 

also presented the idea to Moose Jaw businesses, including 

Blue Whale Financial and Babich Farms who together ended up 

donating $1,800 into the fundraising project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through their campaign these students raised 

$10,000. This money will provide lunches for 300 students in 

Moose Jaw for six weeks. The money raised was presented to 

Hunger in Moose Jaw which serves students in the Moose Jaw 

community through the lunch programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 

me in commending these students for developing this genius 

program, raising money for the less fortunate in our 

community. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Recognizing and Thanking Highway Workers 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This winter has been 

one of endless snowstorms resulting in record snowfall levels 

and creating the worst driving conditions our province has seen 

in many years. Mr. Speaker, this is why I am pleased to rise in 

this Assembly today to offer my most sincere appreciation to 

our province’s phenomenal highway workers. 

 

Their dedication and hard work has been vital in ensuring our 

safety as we travel across Saskatchewan highways this winter. 

Last weekend marked one of the worst storms this season, with 

wicked 70-kilometre per hour winds ripping across the Prairies, 

piling up large drifts on several highways throughout the 

province, and resulting in many road closures. 

 

And as they have done so diligently throughout the winter, our 

highway employees worked around the clock, with equipment 

operators putting forth their best efforts to clear blocked roads, 

and the hotline staff consistently providing updates on highway 

conditions and working tirelessly to respond to the extremely 

high volume of calls and online inquiries. The hotline has 

received 520,000 calls since opening in November and has had 

3.1 million hits to its website as of last Friday. 

 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2867 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing and thanking our highway employees for their 

endless work for this winter season. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Position on Uranium Development  

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, last week the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] Finance critic went out and bought a new 

pair of tap shoes. Apparently he gave them to the NDP leader 

who is now using them to tap dance around the position on 

uranium development. 

 

In last week’s budget, our government introduced a new 

uranium royalty structure that will attract new investment in 

uranium mines and more jobs for First Nations people in the 

North. 

 

On Thursday the NDP leader was asked three times whether he 

supports these changes. He wouldn’t say. He said something 

about the triple bottom line again, but he wouldn’t take a 

position on whether he supports these changes and the new 

opportunities they will create in the North. 

 

But the northern leaders know where they stand. The mayor of 

Pinehouse gives this budget a thumbs up, particularly the 

changes to the uranium royalty structure. The CEO [chief 

executive officer] of Athabasca Basin authority says, these 

changes will lead to new mines and expansions. Dave 

McIlmoyl runs Northern Resource Trucking which is 70 per 

cent Aboriginal owned. He said the changes are the boost his 

industry needs. “It means more jobs, more training, more 

infrastructure for the North, and that’s what the North needs.” 

 

More jobs, more training, more infrastructure in the North — 

it’s what the North needs. Everyone seems to understand that 

except the Leader of the NDP. Where does he stand? Does he 

support or oppose uranium development and the new 

opportunities it will create for First Nations people and the 

others in the North? Mr. Speaker, I think we’re about to find 

out. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for Health Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday in 

question period we looked at how the Sask Party government 

shortchanges education in the province and how it’s not in the 

best interests of our kids. The Premier deflected those 

questions, Mr. Speaker, and refused to admit that this budget 

does not do enough for students in the classroom. 

 

Among the groups critical of the budget, Mr. Speaker, have 

been school boards because what they’ve seen are difficult 

decisions about cuts being downloaded and offloaded to them 

by the Sask Party government. This is not unlike the situation 

with health regions here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who 

are being asked to find $54 million in so-called efficiencies in 

their already tight budgets. The Saskatoon Health Region has 

admitted that they will be looking for changes to the clinical 

services, and clinical services directly affect patients. 

 

My question to the Premier: how can he justify forcing health 

regions to cut $54 million when they are already in such dire 

straits? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for the question. You know, what is prescribed in the 

budget in terms of encouragement for our regions to find 

further efficiencies is nothing new. Our government has been 

working with regions through the processes known as lean and 

other efficiencies to find savings for the region, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the case of the management of the blood inventory, we’ve 

applied lean techniques to that — saved $10 million. In the case 

of the design of the new children’s hospital that this side of the 

House is going to get done, Mr. Speaker, we’ve saved millions 

of dollars. The same is true in Moose Jaw. The same is true in 

terms of absence management within the workforce in health 

care. These things are delivering results. 

 

And when they do, Mr. Speaker, what are we able to do? Well 

we’re able to add another $10 million to the surgical wait times 

initiative, something the Leader of the Opposition opposes. 

That reduces wait times for surgeries, Mr. Speaker. It means we 

can pilot new home care initiatives in the budget. It means we 

can invest more with the Cancer Agency, Mr. Speaker. You bet 

we’re asking the regions to find efficiencies. We’re going to put 

the patient first. We’re going to use those efficiencies to shorten 

wait times and improve health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when the health region is talking 

about looking at clinical services, that has a direct effect on 

patient care. Mr. Speaker, many of the things that have occurred 

already have found savings, Mr. Speaker, in the budget. But 

now the directive to find other efficiencies has patients worried 

that clinical services will in fact be, will be affected. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have to take note of where the two 

largest health regions, Saskatoon and Regina, are at right now 

with respect to their budgets. Saskatoon has a $24 million 

deficit going into the new year, and Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region has a $25 million deficit. 

 

To the Premier: given that significant cuts have already 

occurred and given that health regions are starting the year in 

the red, why is he stubbornly insisting that health regions must 

now find $54 million? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in this budget there is an 

increase of $131.8 million to RHAs, to regional health 

authorities in the province. Mr. Speaker, additionally I could 

point out to the hon. member that over the last five years, this 

government has increased funding to the RHAs by 46 per cent. 



2868 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

All the while we have been encouraging efficiencies. All the 

while we’ve been using lean to find those savings within the 

Health ministry so that we can apply those savings to the front 

line so that we can do things like the surgical wait times 

initiative. 

 

In this budget, with the additional $10 million that we’re 

putting towards the surgical wait times initiative, we’re now at 

$70 million total year in and year out to reduce wait times. 

We’re using private clinics, something the Leader of the 

Opposition said he would not do. That approach is getting 

better results — shorter wait times for Saskatchewan people. 

He needs to be able to stand up in his place and say, does he 

support the surgical wait time initiative in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a quote from the CEO of 

the Saskatoon Health Region from March 21st in The 

StarPhoenix: “She admits lean solutions won’t be enough, and 

says the region will now embark on a process to review all of 

its clinical services to ‘see what changes, if any, are made.’” 

Mr. Speaker, this issue of finding additional cuts in the health 

region totalling $54 million has patients, has families, has 

health care providers worried. 

 

Even the Cancer Agency, Mr. Speaker, is a victim of the Sask 

Party government’s stubborn insistence on more health care 

cuts. Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan want the best 

possible health care when it comes to cancer treatment, as they 

ought to. Yet the Sask Party government is specifically 

including the Cancer Agency in its demand for $54 million in 

so-called efficiencies in health care. My question to the 

Premier: what specific cuts does he suggest that the Cancer 

Agency make in order to live within the government’s budget? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, since this party took over the 

government of Saskatchewan, the Cancer Agency has received 

90 per cent more funding, Mr. Speaker. In this particular budget 

they received 12 million more dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting the hon. member is saying there are 

no more efficiencies to be gained in the health care system 

because in his leadership campaign, in the policy development 

that he offered to the NDP, he said one of the points in health 

care is what? More efficiency be built into the public health 

care system. He says our focus needs to be on establishing a 

more efficient system that is centred around the patients, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When he was running for the leadership, that’s what he said. 

When he’s confronted with the record of this side of the House, 

which is precisely that, he’s suddenly against it, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve seen it on Keystone. We’ve seen it on uranium. He 

should find one position at least, and stick to it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the health care system should 

obviously be efficient, and we should be more efficient. But the 

concern is, Mr. Speaker, health regions have been embarked on 

that process. And by the CEO’s own admission of the 

Saskatoon Health Region, she says that they will now have to 

look at clinical care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s why families are worried, Mr. Speaker, because it’s our 

loved ones that need health care, the best possible health care. 

That’s why providers of health care, health care workers, Mr. 

Speaker, are concerned because they know that this will have 

an effect on their patients. It can have an effect on morale in the 

workplace and on job safety if the Sask Party stubbornly plows 

ahead, Mr. Speaker, with the decision to find $54 million of 

cuts within the health regions and the Cancer Agency. 

 

My question to the Premier: he’s the one; it’s his budget 

directing these additional $54 million of cuts within health care, 

so he must have some ideas for the health region on where 

these cuts ought to occur. What specific cuts would he like to 

see in the health regions, Mr. Speaker, and can he guarantee 

that patient care will not be compromised? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when the member who just 

asked the question was running for the NDP leadership, he said 

there were efficiencies to be gained. That’s what he said. It’s in 

his policy document. He said there were efficiencies to be 

gained in the interest of better serving the patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re asking the health regions to do, on top 

of receiving more funding, Mr. Speaker, we’re asking them on 

a $3 billion budget to continue to find $50 million worth of 

efficiencies, as they’ve been able to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again that member, when he was running for the 

leadership just a few weeks ago, said there are absolutely 

efficiencies to be had and the money should be directed to the 

patient. Mr. Speaker, in light of his line of questioning today, 

the question for him is, what’s changed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Last week’s budget charted a dramatic 

shifting course towards privatization in our province. The Sask 

Party government wants to use a more costly approach of P3 

[public-private partnership ] privatization for new schools and 

hospitals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government already went down 

this path a few years ago when they spent $1 million on its P3 

secretariat. The old failed P3 secretariat spent $1 million to 

come to the conclusion that P3 privatization was not a good 

approach for our province, yet it seems now they’re going to 

double down on that very approach, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to building new schools and 

hospitals, why is the Sask Party repackaging and pushing 

forward with a more costly plan, a plan that even they had ruled 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2869 

 

out just a few years ago after spending $1 million? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, SaskBuilds has been working in the province for the 

last 20 or 25 weeks, Mr. Speaker. Not a long life cycle but 

absolutely it’s part of SaskBuilds’s mandate to look into the 

possibility of P3s in the province, Mr. Speaker, to make up for 

the infrastructure deficit certainly left by the NDP. 

 

We know that P3s are operating right now in Ontario, Quebec, 

Alberta, British Columbia, and New Brunswick, Mr. Speaker. 

There are many different designs of P3s. There is a P3 that 

could be a design, build. There could be one that’s design, 

build, maintain. There’s one that could design, build, and 

operate. We want to look at the best options, Mr. Speaker, and 

the best examples from many of these provinces that have seen 

real efficiencies, Mr. Speaker, real efficiencies to the 

infrastructure pressures they’ve had. Mr. Speaker, it’s not an 

ideology thing for us, Mr. Speaker, like it is them. It’s getting 

the best value for our Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it is a matter of ideology. 

And it’s that very stubborn approach that we see of that 

government, that ideological approach, that pursuit — to only 

listen to proponents but to not listen to the evidence, Mr. 

Speaker — that is the concern. 

 

The private sector financing schemes, P3, are much more costly 

to taxpayers. The government should be focused with the 

challenges and opportunities on getting the best bang for our 

dollar, best value for our dollar. And simply, P3 privatization 

schemes are more costly. In a report in Alberta Construction 

Magazine, it’s pointed out that P3s push smaller companies out 

of the tendering process. The head of a well-established paving 

company had this to say, “When you make it difficult for small 

contractors, you remove competition which benefits taxpayers.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, why would the Sask Party push forward with P3 

privatized schools and hospitals, a short-sighted, wasteful, more 

costly scheme, instead of the most affordable, effective plan 

over the long run for Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, those questions really 

are quite bizarre coming from the opposition. We really don’t 

know where they stand. Like obviously they’re dead set against 

P3s because in NDP world, P3s are more costly. That’s what 

the member said, and I think he’s going to have to stand by 

those words. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, last week the federal government 

released the report on public-private partnerships. The NDP 

federally released their own report, and I want to quote directly 

from the NDP’s report: the P3 model can enable greater value 

for money for some infrastructure projects, Mr. Speaker, where 

it provides quality, value-added benefits and ensures maximum 

transparency and integrity in this process, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

where the federal government is, Mr. Speaker. We have no idea 

how the NDP ever land on any of their positions here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I always like how they put 

all the effort into all the spin, Mr. Speaker. I wish they’d spend 

more time by getting value for dollar on Saskatchewan people. 

This is a government that’s paying for this budget with credit, 

complete with high interest. It’s a short-sighted approach of buy 

now and pay much more later, Mr. Speaker, for the 

infrastructure that our growing province needs. It’s about 

kicking responsibility down the road. 

 

And when it comes to the North Battleford hospital, it’s a 

broken promise. The province committed to a public hospital 

with public dollars, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier told the 

Battlefords Daily News the planning funding was there and the 

$100 million of public capital would follow. Mr. Speaker, why 

did that government break its promise to the people of North 

Battleford, and why won’t they come clean with the full cost of 

their plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the people of 

North Battleford would be very interested that the NDP would 

not entertain a P3 project. Mr. Speaker, they’ll have the longest, 

the oldest hospital in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The 

provincial hospital would never be built under the NDP. They 

talked about it for many, many years but they did absolutely 

nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s really interesting that the NDP not only 

talked about P3s before, but they were acting on P3s, Mr. 

Speaker, under CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]. They sent a delegation out two or three times to 

Partnerships BC under the NDP, NDP officials, to look at the 

benefits. In fact I’ve got a letter here, Mr. Speaker. Let me 

quote from the letter. This is what they wanted to learn from 

Partnerships BC. And this is Partnerships BC saying about the 

Saskatchewan officials, “They are interested in the possible 

application of P3 models for schools, hospitals, and utility 

corps [Mr. Speaker, such as Power and SaskTel].” It’s 

hypocritical for the opposition to say we should never do it 

when they did the very same thing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, under New Democrats, 

our hospitals, our schools, our highways were public. The shift, 

to be clear, is under that Premier and that minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Study after study has concluded with a negative view of P3s, 

the privatized schemes — that they’re fraught with more risk, 

that they’re more costly, that they forfeit control of assets that 

are invaluable to the public. Even the IMF, the International 



2870 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

Monetary Fund, has concerns with these private schemes as it 

improperly excludes debt and the full cost of liability from the 

government’s balance sheet. 

 

Now we know this government already reports its finances 

improperly, using two sets of books instead of one set of books, 

something that the auditor has called misleading and wrong. 

But now it seems this government wants to set up a third set of 

books, a tricky set of books, to hide the P3 debt that they’re 

adding, Mr. Speaker, through this costly scheme. Mr. Speaker, 

why is the government choosing costly budgetary tricks instead 

of transparency and the best plan to build the infrastructure 

Saskatchewan needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we are 

going to look at P3s, absolutely, for the infrastructure deficit. I 

can understand why the opposition is a little reluctant around 

P3s, Mr. Speaker. In fact I can remember sitting on those 

benches for eight long years, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were 

on this side and they talked about, they touted a P3, Mr. 

Speaker, back in those days. They had a private partner, Mr. 

Speaker, and the government was investing in potatoes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you what happens in a P3 under the 

NDP — $30 million lost for the taxpayer with an investment of 

the private partner of $153, Mr. Speaker. No wonder they’re so 

scared about P3s. We would never enter into a P3 like those 

members opposite did. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d just like to remind the members to put 

their comments and questions through the Chair, please. I 

recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, for over a year we’ve been 

asking questions about the IPAC [International Performance 

Assessment Centre for geologic storage of CO2] affair of this 

government. Over the course of the last month, as more 

troubling information has been exposed, we’ve asked more 

questions. But it’s been like pulling teeth to get answers. 

 

Last week the minister and Premier once again refused to 

support our call to the Provincial Auditor to investigate the 

audit, the whole file, to get the straight answers for the public. 

On Friday a further story broke that the Provincial Auditor is 

indeed looking at some of the files, but it seems she’s doing so 

on her own doing, along with the university. Can the minister 

confirm when she learned of the auditor’s investigation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — On budget day, the president of the 

university, the University of Regina, and I had a brief 

conversation. She was very concerned of the damage that this 

whole topic and the fact that the opposition keeps raising this 

without any additional information is quite damaging to the 

university. She suggested that perhaps that they would take the 

position of getting the Provincial Auditor to look into it. I don’t 

think it’s been formally announced that they’re going to do so. 

 

But as the member opposite knows, there was a forensic audit 

done, and the forensic audit identified that the issues that 

happened, happened while under management of the University 

of Regina because members of the University of Regina did not 

follow their processes. So I encouraged the president of the 

university to do whatever she needs to do in order to keep the 

good reputation of that institution. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, if anyone’s putting 

reputations at risk, it’s a government that’s denying 

accountability and answers on provincial dollars that are 

involved in files with very valid questions. And to pretend 

somehow that an audit’s been done with the full scope of the 

review that we’ve requested is something that the minister 

should clearly know isn’t the case. 

 

It’s a culture of secrecy that we see on this file, and we have 

millions of taxpayers’ dollars that are involved in the IPAC 

affair. And Saskatchewan people deserve to know how much 

taxpayers’ money has been wasted in the handshake deals, 

conflicts of interests from IPAC to CVI [Climate Ventures 

Inc.], or any other deal. We’ve called for the Provincial Auditor 

to be brought in at the Public Accounts Committee. Those 

motions have twice been denied by that government. We’ve 

continued to make that call, and that government’s continued to 

fail to support those calls. The auditor’s now investigating part 

of the file. We need to make sure we support her to do a full 

investigation. 

 

Will the Premier commit today that he and his members will 

not hold up any further motions at the Public Accounts 

Committee to ensure a full forensic audit and investigation with 

access to all files by the Provincial Auditor into the IPAC affair 

and all related conflicts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

well knows — he’s read the report, or I would hope that he’s 

read it — Meyers Norris and Penny did a forensic audit of the 

relationship between IPAC while under management of the U 

of R [University of Regina]. That’s when the problems were 

identified. Going forward, once IPAC was incorporated, it has 

had clean audits and those audits are done by KPMG. Mr. 

Speaker, the member knows that as well. He likes to spin this 

tale of someone personally benefiting; however, the forensic 

audit did not. In fact it specifically said no one at the U of R 

personally benefited from the contract. 

 

He will not identify who it is he is accusing. He has been asked 

to provide information, but he hasn’t done that as well. He just 

keeps spinning a tale and a smoke and . . . I don’t understand, 

Mr. Speaker, what more we can do. He has a forensic audit. He 

has the evaluation of the assets. He has the KPMG clean audits 

that are going forward, Mr. Speaker. What the university needs 

to do, we encourage them to do. 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2871 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 

minister highlights as a course for accountability all these 

reports that leaked information that has come to light through 

being exposed through investigation, and none of her own 

doing to make sure that accountability and answer was in place. 

In fact that’s the same very minister who once claimed there 

was value for money, value for money that’s been described as 

waste by the new CEO of IPAC. That’s how she put it. 

 

The minister once said, in fact she referenced a contract, and 

she did so 52 times in two committee meetings when there was 

no contract in place, Mr. Speaker, something we learned later. 

That minister has also pointed fingers. We see that here today. 

Even though she had three of seven Sask Party government 

board members from the get-go, who I would hope would’ve 

briefed the minister long ago, and when it came time to 

investigate . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member please get to the question. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And when the Sask Party, when it came 

around time to investigate, they denied the motions being put 

forward, limiting the scope of accountability. Why won’t the 

Sask Party government come clean and reveal all the deals and 

all the truth in its IPAC affair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have to say the member 

opposite just doesn’t end making stuff up as it serves his 

purpose because I have extensively read what was said in 

committee, and I didn’t say what he said that I said. What I did 

say was, IPAC, the organization, has the assets. The assets have 

some value. They are doing what they were supposed to be 

doing. They were not sold at a garage sale. They were not 

garbage. It does have a value. However, a premium price was 

paid. We acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker. So it has a value. It 

wasn’t flushed. There were three funding partners — the 

province of Saskatchewan, the federal government, and Royal 

Dutch Shell. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the forensic audit report it repeatedly says, 

repeatedly says that this was under the management of the U of 

R while they had control of the funds. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Potential Spring Flooding 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve made it clear 

that as the opposition we will support decisions by the 

government that make sense and speak out on those that do not. 

When it comes to spring flood preparation, we’re pleased to see 

the minister’s preparations with the Water Security Agency and 

his counterparts in the United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we support assisting communities with preparing 

for what could be a disastrous spring flood. But given the work 

the agency has done assessing the snowpack and the potential 

for flooding, we question why the government has not budgeted 

properly for provincial disaster assistance. The budget contains 

198 million for crop insurance and 60 million for wildfires — 

things that just make sense to prepare for — but they’ve 

allocated very little for emergency disaster assistance. 

 

To the minister: why are the true costs of flood damage relief 

left out of last week’s budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re very concerned about the potential for spring flooding. 

Over the last three years, through the Water Security Agency, 

over $25 million has been spent for flood mitigation projects, 

over 500 projects in total. Mr. Speaker, there’s also been 

consultations held with municipalities all around the province 

on this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, specifically to the member’s opposite question, 

I’m sure she was listening intently to an outstanding budget 

speech from the Minister of Finance. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

quote. In part, he said, dollars under . . . This is under the 

Growth And Financial Security Fund, Mr. Speaker. It says, “. . . 

will not be allocated to any specific projects until the impact of 

the potential spring melt . . . is known. This money will be 

available to cover flooding costs if necessary.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s been the intent all along, Mr. Speaker. The 

budgeting process that we followed for flooding, because you 

never know when a disaster is going to hit, Mr. Speaker, is not 

inconsistent with what the members opposite did when they 

were in government, Mr. Speaker. There will be dollars 

available and the people of this province can rest assured that 

this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 2011 

the province faced unparalleled flooding in communities around 

the province. People’s whole way of life was turned upside 

down from the damage. We know how much work people and 

their neighbours went through to pump basements and clean up 

the mess. In 2011 the costs were significant. 

 

By third quarter of last year’s books, the province reported 

$360 million spent on flood damage. And surely the Sask Party 

government has five-year averages for what the costs of flood 

relief will be. Surely they could spell out what they’re planning 

to do for people so that if and when the spring melt brings 

flooding, people know the government will support the cleanup 

efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why does the Sask Party’s flooding strategy not 

include a full upfront costing for the people to know that the 

government’s support will be there for them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 



2872 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

I said in the previous question, the process for budgeting for 

PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] is not unlike the 

process followed by the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, if the 

member opposite wants to talk about PDAP and about what we 

have done, not only has this government entertained over 500 

permanent projects for flood mitigation in the last three years, 

Mr. Speaker, over $25 million; we’ve also made a great deal of 

improvements to the whole program compared to the members 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased the advance payment from 40 per 

cent to 60 per cent under this government. We’ve increased the 

deductible . . . or, sorry, we’ve lowered the deductible for 

personal claimants. Under the members opposite it was 20 per 

cent; under this government, 5 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the list of 

improvements goes on and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be money available, as explained in the 

budget speech. And, Mr. Speaker, the important thing to 

remember, unlike the members opposite, the people of this 

province can count on them to be there to assist them in the 

event of any natural disaster. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Please state your point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. In the Minister for Crown 

Investments Corporation’s previous comments, she indicated 

that the member, the Deputy Opposition Leader, was making 

stuff up, and that is not parliamentary language, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

submit that this is a case of facts under dispute between 

members, and it should be found accordingly. 

 

The Speaker: — I did not hear the comments myself. I will 

review the transcripts to see what was said and bring back a 

decision. I recognize the Minister of Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I do remember what was 

said. I probably did say that he, in his preamble, made stuff up. 

I withdraw and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to thank the member for that and 

therefore there will be no decision to be made. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 88 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 88, 

The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act, be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved that Bill 

No. 88, The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment 

Act, 2013 be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I request leave to deal with all stages 

of the bill immediately, and at the conclusion of proceedings on 

Bill No. 88, the Assembly resume in its present place on the 

order paper. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to carry on all processes on the movement of this bill and 

to revert back to presenting reports by standing and special 

committee and routine proceedings. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader 

. . . I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 88 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of the medical care insurance 

amendment Act, 2013. These amendments were necessary 

following the federal government amendments to the Canada 

Health Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the Canada Health Act 

indicate that as of April 1st, 2013 the province will begin to 

provide basic health coverage to Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police regular members. Currently the federal government 

provides this coverage. Before permitting the coverage, 

Saskatchewan must establish the statutory authority to do so by 

amending The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after this change, RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] regular members will no longer need to fill out 

paper forms when obtaining physician or hospital services. 

They will receive the same basic health coverage and 

experience the same health services as all Saskatchewan 

residents. The federal government and the Government of 

Saskatchewan are working together to ensure a 

customer-focused approach to achieve efficient, quality care for 

patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the change will also result in less financial 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2873 

 

reporting and fewer payment processes required between the 

provincial government and the federal government. In addition 

it helps health service providers to eliminate different billing 

systems for RCMP regular members. About 1,500 RCMP 

regular members will benefit from this change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, overall this change means removing paperwork 

for RCMP regular members when obtaining basic health 

services and more streamlined and simplified administration 

and billing processes. This, Mr. Speaker, is another example of 

how we are putting the patient first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act, 2013. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 88, The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 

make a few remarks about this piece of legislation. And I would 

like to thank the minister for an earlier conversation we had 

about this piece of legislation as an important piece of 

legislation that affects the medical care of RCMP officers here 

in the province. 

 

It’s important, Mr. Speaker, of course to have the necessary 

care provided for RCMP officers, recognizing the huge 

contribution that they make to the safety of all people here in 

the province. It’s my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 

change with respect to the legislation that was brought down by 

the federal government and will mean increased expenses for 

the province with respect to payment of medical care for RCMP 

officers. 

 

So while in no way, Mr. Speaker, would the opposition be 

looking at preventing or slowing down the care for medical for 

RCMP officers here in Saskatchewan, I do want to go on the 

record, Mr. Speaker, and state some concerns about the 

unilateral nature of the decision by the federal government, the 

decision being rolled up into an omnibus bill. And also, Mr. 

Speaker, this occurred without the proper discussion with the 

province but that it will mean additional dollars that the 

province will have to spend in this case. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I recognize the situation that the provincial 

ministry has been put in by the federal Conservatives. I think it 

should have been done in a different way with respect to 

information provided to the province. And it’s also important, 

Mr. Speaker, to recognize that, as I understand it, this is an 

increased expense for the provincial ministry. But that being 

said, Mr. Speaker, we’re not interested in holding up this piece 

of legislation. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 88, The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

committed? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I designate that Bill No. 88, The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be committed to the 

Committee of the Whole and the said bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole immediately. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to Committee of 

the Whole. I do now leave the Chair for the House to go in to 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 

Bill No. 88 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: — The item of business before the committee is 

Bill No. 88, The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 

Clause 1, short title. Is clause 1 agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[Clause 1 agreed to.] 

 

Clause 2 

 

The Chair: — Seeing no member wishing to ask any questions 

of the minister, we’ll proceed to . . . I recognize the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do have one question 

for the minister. What is the expected or predicted expense that 

this would mean for the provincial ministry? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Committee Chair. 

Based on roughly 1,500 members that will be added to the 

provincial system, based on what that expense would cost us, if 

that was just 1,500 citizens coming to the province, we estimate 

about between $750,000 and a million dollars a year. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I thank the minister for the response. We’re 

usually talking in committee room 8, not in the Chamber on 

issues such as this. One other question. When did the ministry 

become aware that this legislation was required in order to be 

compliant with the federal legislation? 



2874 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you to the 

member for the question. The information was contained in the 

budget bill of last year. There have been a number of 

discussions between the federal government and the provincial 

government over the course of last summer into early last fall. 

And so we’ve known about this for approximately a year. 

 

The Chair: — Seeing no other members wishing to ask 

questions of the minister, clause 2, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Clause 2 agreed to.] 

 

[Clauses 3 to 5 inclusive agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 

consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 

follows: Bill No. 88, The Saskatchewan Medical Care 

Insurance Act. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 

report the bill without amendment. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 

No. 88 without amendment. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 

committee rise, report progress, and ask for a leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 

leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker and Chair of 

committees. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 

report Bill No. 88, The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 

Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a third time? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 88 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 88, The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? Mr. 

Chair of Committees . . . I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Assembly will now refer to routine 

proceedings, presenting reports by standing and special 

committees. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table 

the answers to questions 213 through 227. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Deputy Whip has tabled 

answers to questions 213 to 227 inclusive. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2875 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to be able to resume this 

address in support of this balanced budget. 

 

To reiterate some of the initial points that I was making, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to just put on the record a quote from Steve 

McLellan, the CEO of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce, who said, regarding the budget that was tabled last 

week, “We are overall very, very pleased, quite frankly. We are 

still one of the only provinces in the country that have a 

balanced budget, and we can’t forget about the significance of 

that.”  

 

The importance of having a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, 

reflects and reinforces that Saskatchewan, for the first time in 

its history, has achieved an AAA credit rating, while other 

jurisdictions across North America and around the world 

continue to struggle with some of the outcomes from the global 

financial crisis of a few years ago. What we see, Mr. Speaker, 

in this budget is a continued focus on prudent, practical steps 

and initiatives embedded within the document to ensure that we 

continue on this path of sustained growth. 

 

If I may, Mr. Speaker, what I’d like to do is just highlight a few 

aspects of my initial comments and then I’ll continue with the 

points I was putting forward. I think what we can say, Mr. 

Speaker, and we can see from a variety of indicators, that 

Saskatchewan’s growth continues to have significant 

momentum, whether we’re talking about our population, now at 

more than 1.089 million, Mr. Speaker, the highest in the history 

of the province, whether we think about the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country at 3.8 per cent or any number 

of other indicators that have been captured very ably in their 

both provocative and contemplative work, The Big Shift: The 

Seismic Change In Canadian Politics, Business, and Culture 

and What It Means for Our Future by Darrell Bricker and John 

Ibbitson. They say this of the province of Saskatchewan: “The 

province has reversed years of population decline and is 

growing again, robustly.” 

 

They continue by saying . . . That’s on page 95. On page 96 

they say, and I quote, “Saskatchewan used to share with 

Manitoba a sense that it was in the midst of a long period of 

decline . . .” Page 96, Mr. Speaker, they go on to say, 

“Although both provinces are doing better, Saskatchewan is 

doing much better . . .” 

 

As I have said previously, there are a number of explanations. 

Some would put an emphasis on the continued exploration and 

the breadth of our natural resources. And we know how 

significant those resources are to our capacity today, but also to 

the very bright future of our province. Others will speak about, 

and put an emphasis on, the evolution of our global markets, 

especially in Asia. 

 

And you could see today from His Excellency, the ambassador 

from the Philippines who was here joining us in this Assembly, 

that we continue to build those relationships, both commercial 

and trade relationships but also, importantly, people-to-people 

relationships. So whether we’re talking about China, India, 

Indonesia, Bangladesh, the Philippines, or others, just to name a 

few, we know the significance of the evolution of these 

markets. 

Others would put an emphasis, and rightfully so, on the 

character and quality of Saskatchewan people, that is, the track 

record of adding value to and sharing opportunities with people 

here at home and around the world, that it reflects our very best 

futures, that is, our sense of community of which there can be 

absolutely no doubt. To these and other explanations for the 

growth that’s under way, Mr. Speaker, I would add, and I 

certainly wouldn’t be alone in saying that we also know there’s 

a significant role for public policy, that is, government and 

governance matters, that the state can facilitate or inhibit 

growth, and it can help to shape the results, the benefits, if you 

will, and where those benefits flow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see from Dr. Greg Poelzer, Sr. in a recent 

article in the respected journal of Policy Options, he offers a 

characterization of the nature of Saskatchewan’s contemporary 

growth. And this is quite simply, “Although more supportive of 

the private enterprise than the New Democratic Party, the 

Saskatchewan Party is guided by a strong attachment to 

community and socially responsible development.” And I think 

that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, and we see that 

commitment reflected within this balanced budget. 

 

The significance of this orientation, that is, being very closely 

connected to grassroots communities right across the province, 

was established very well, Mr. Speaker, in initiatives leading up 

to the budget. We can think about, over the course of the last 

year or so, a number of initiatives to ensure that we were 

connecting with and hearing from, listening to and consulting 

with people right across the province. Those acts of 

consultation occurring across the province, being led by 

members of this caucus and the Premier, helped to produce the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth, vision 2020 and beyond. And 

we understand the foundation that this provided for those at the 

treasury board, those at the cabinet table, and those within 

caucus. It provided a very solid foundation for the deliberations 

in behind the budget-making process. 

 

In fact Dr. Michael Atkinson, the executive director and 

professor at the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public 

Policy, a school of public policy shared jointly between the 

University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina, 

highlights the connection between the 2020 document and our 

budget. That is to say, in a recent StarPhoenix article he notes 

that “. . . the government’s plan for growth, which was released 

in the fall, is likely [to be and I quote] a “blueprint” for any 

budget initiatives and that the budget will be “completely 

consistent” with the growth plan.”  

 

Mr. Speaker, this is profoundly important because within the 

Plan for Growth: Vision 2020 and Beyond, we see that a key 

public policy question is addressed — the question being, what 

is the purpose of our prosperity? To which the document 

quotes, “The purpose of growth is to secure a better quality of 

life for all Saskatchewan people.” Mr. Speaker, this is 

profoundly important again because it helps to define and 

characterize the type of budget that we see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll continue to highlight some of the features 

where I think important investments have been made that are 

helping to assist with not simply the growth agenda of the 

province but also ensuring that the benefits of the growth are 

being shared with people right across the province. 



2876 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

[14:45] 

 

Importantly the foundational piece for the budget and for the 

growth document was, and I quote, “Ensuring fiscal 

responsibility through balanced budgets, lower debt and 

smaller, more effective government.” This essentially serves as 

a fulcrum upon which our document that is our 2020 and 

Beyond document as well as the budget rests. And that’s the 

significance of when we hear third parties like Mr. Steve 

McLellan, the CEO, expressing that indeed it is a balanced 

budget. He has confidence in this balanced budget, and that 

provides us an opportunity to then look at the other investments 

that are being made within the budget. 

 

I’ve highlighted a number of areas, and we know the budget is 

significant. But when we think about — and it was a point that 

was raised today during question period — when we think 

about the $11.9 million increase, $11.9 million increase to the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency for now a total that would be 

more than $150 million, we know the significance of those 

dollars for Saskatchewan families. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

significant support for work that is absolutely vital, and we 

know that touches so many people’s lives. 

 

We also see, Mr. Speaker — and in fact it was highlighted in 

The Star Phoenix today and I would like to reiterate — the 

$800,000 increase in operating support for women’s shelters 

across the province, including a new transition house in 

Melfort. And, Mr. Speaker, if I could, I’d like to quote a little 

bit from today’s StarPhoenix. The article is entitled “Melfort 

women’s shelter receives funding.” And the article’s written by 

Charlene Tebbutt from The StarPhoenix, and I’ll just highlight 

just a few quotes. 

 

What caught my attention was a commentary being offered by 

Sergeant Darren Wouters from the RCMP. And the staff 

sergeant offered this: he said and I quote, “I think it’s a pretty 

important service to have in the community.” Mr. Speaker, you 

can tell there is a degree of understatement here. But what’s 

important within the story is that we learn that the RCMP 

routinely, and I quote, “. . . routinely deal with domestic 

violence situations in the northeast area.” And we see with a, 

again, degree of understatement the RCMP weighing in on the 

significance of this kind of investment. 

 

And to Louise Schweitzer, the executive director for North East 

Outreach and Support Services, we offer our congratulations, 

and our appreciation to the ministers of Social Services and to 

Justice that worked with their officials and other grassroots 

individuals as well as importantly the local MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly]. And we know how important his 

voice was in this. He’s highlighted here within The StarPhoenix 

on this initiative that will obviously benefit that region but also 

has benefits accruing to other transition houses right across the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to continue to highlight some of the other 

areas that have seen significant investments. If I could, I’d like 

to highlight the new dollars. And I’ll quote here another article 

out of The StarPhoenix, and it was covered by The 

Leader-Post, that is, Creative Saskatchewan’s $6.5 million, 

with a $5 million increase from what it received in February for 

transition and start-up costs. And the funding is divided among 

music, film, digital media, visual arts, crafts, publishing, and 

the performing arts. And we can think about the work that the 

minister has done here to engage stakeholders, a broad range of 

stakeholders right across the province in this endeavour. 

 

A question that has certainly come up that has emerged out of 

that article from last week relates to the response from the 

official opposition. And there are some questions about the 

opposition’s response, I think it’s fair to say. And I want to 

quote this. Regarding the new funds — the quote is from the 

critic from the NDP — it “. . . is not going to stimulate film 

production here in Saskatchewan . . . [then there are ellipses] It 

does nothing for the economy, and that’s the bottom line,” she 

said.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an opportunity during these deliberations, 

during this budget debate, for us to actually get some 

clarification from the members opposite, most specifically from 

the critic, to get a better sense of what she meant with this, I 

would say, conclusion. And it’s an unfortunate conclusion 

because it’s one thing potentially to offer criticism or 

commentary, maybe even scepticism on those dollars, and 

that’s part of a healthy discussion. But essentially to draw a 

conclusion and to, I would say, really kind of close the door on 

the artists and those that will be contributing to our creative 

industries, to close the door and just simply say, “. . . It does 

nothing for the economy, and that’s the bottom line,” Mr. 

Speaker, what I can say is that’s a far different approach than 

the members opposite have used. 

 

The members opposite have used in their analysis on issues 

regarding Keystone and I anticipate on uranium, they’ve used a 

triple bottom line. They’ve said they’re going to take a kind of a 

holistic approach. But on this we don’t see that same spirit of 

inquiry, of investigation, of curiosity. No, we just simply have 

here a comment: “. . . It does nothing for the economy, and 

that’s the bottom line.” That seems to be a far different kind of 

analysis than what we’ve seen the Leader of the Official 

Opposition talking about as well as others. 

 

And so I hope there is an opportunity for some clarification 

because we’re actually very optimistic here on this side of the 

aisle about the benefits that will accrue not simply to the 

provincial economy but in fact to the arts community, to our 

creative industries, and to individual artists in their endeavours 

as a result of this kind of enhanced support and investment. So I 

hope there’s an opportunity for us to hear more clearly about 

why the critic, the NDP critic drew such a stark conclusion, and 

maybe it’s an opportunity for her to offer a more detailed 

explanation on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to this kind of new investment which 

is significant for our arts community, we have a number of 

other investments relating directly to the quality of life across 

the province, and I’ll continue to highlight those. 

 

One of the areas that I wanted to reiterate because there is 

certainly, within Saskatoon Greystone — and again it’s always 

a privilege to be able to stand up and speak on behalf of the 

people of Saskatoon Greystone — we see a $100,000 

investment to provide access to online talking books for people 

with perceptual disabilities. This is very, very significant, Mr. 

Speaker. This is meant to reach directly to those individuals that 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2877 

 

may need some additional support. Certainly it’s an important 

step, and we want to receive the feedback about the difference 

that these dollars make in helping to promote opportunities to 

access these talking books. 

 

I’d also like to highlight a couple of other areas that have 

continued to be significant for us. I touched on this point briefly 

last week, and that is we see overall $184.8 million or a $10.8 

million increase in targeted funding from government ministries 

for initiatives that help First Nations and Métis people, 

including a $3 million fund directed specifically at initiatives to 

address the future recommendations of the joint task force on 

improving education and employment outcomes. That’s 

significant. 

 

As that work is being wrapped up, and we anticipate in the 

coming weeks that we’ll begin to see what that final report and 

recommendations will look like, what we’ve done is anticipate 

that and actually begin to budget for it. I think that’s profoundly 

important, both symbolically sending a message but also and 

most importantly, most significantly, substantively. That is, that 

we truly do want to hear from the task force that, based on its 

consultations with grassroots, ways that we can help make a 

difference on educational outcomes and employment outcomes. 

Really that’s just another way of talking about . . . We’re 

looking to find ways, through this task force on education and 

employment, we’re looking to find ways to ensure that there’s 

greater student success and that there’s greater success in the 

transition from learning to earning. And we know how 

important that is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to highlight the investments that are 

being made in the Sylvia Fedoruk Canadian Centre for Nuclear 

Innovation at the University of Saskatchewan. Again, that’s 

vitally important for our province when we think about the 

importance of nuclear medicine. We know that as a province 

we’re moving forward with the PET/CT [positron emission 

tomography/computed tomography]. It’s going to help in the 

treatment and diagnosis for people right across the province, 

and we’ve certainly seen a number of community organizations 

and activities supporting that endeavour. Not too long ago at the 

restaurant Manos in the heart of Saskatoon Greystone, there 

was actually a fundraiser there as part a Greek dining night. 

That was important. 

 

We also see continued investment in the cyclotron which is 

connected to the Canadian Light Source synchrotron. And the 

significance of that is that in partnership with the federal 

government, in partnership with our post-secondary educational 

institutions, in partnership with the private sector, we as a 

province continue to invest in helping to explore new 

opportunities for medical isotopes to be produced in new and 

innovative ways. And again, that speaks directly to helping to 

ensure that we’re helping to enhance our diagnostic capacity 

and our treatment for individuals in need of this type of medical 

science. This is an important investment. 

 

It also speaks to this government’s commitment to adding value 

to our uranium, and we know how important that is. When we 

think about nuclear medicine, Saskatchewan used to be a 

leader. And for reasons of ideology, indifference, and inertia — 

after years of leadership under Dr. Harold Johns and Sylvia 

Fedoruk and others — we saw that the province let that drift 

away, let it slip away. So technology developed in 

Saskatchewan that has helped to save millions of lives around 

the world wasn’t available, wasn’t accessible here. We’re 

attempting to address that, making sure that there’s greater 

capacity for health care and health services here within the 

province.  

 

We also want to make sure that that’s just one piece of adding 

value to our uranium. And again, as the Premier highlighted 

today in question period, we certainly want to continue to hear 

from members opposite, including the new leader of the NDP, 

where they are on value added regarding our uranium and the 

cycle that we know takes place. We want to add value to that, 

and certainly we’ve seen a whole series of investments that 

continue to move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to speak about the investment which is 

$3 million to be allocated towards the first year of our 

government’s seven-year commitment regarding the Global 

Institute for Food Security. What we know, Mr. Speaker, is that 

Saskatchewan has a profound and important track record. So 

when we look over the course of the last 100 years, we can see 

a number of government initiatives that have made a very, very 

significant difference to the people of this province, to the 

people of our country, and people around the world. 

 

I would argue that one of the most significant decisions in the 

history of Saskatchewan, while it was undertaken by the 

premiership of Walter Scott, and that was (a) the establishment 

of the University of Saskatchewan as one of the initial acts and 

areas of priorities for that first government. But within that, it 

was to ensure that for the first time in Canadian history, a 

College of Agriculture — now called the College of Agriculture 

and Bioresources — that a College of Agriculture was 

embedded within a Canadian university. That was one of the 

most significant steps that could have been taken, and this 

province and our country continue to benefit and reap the 

benefit of having a research-intensive College of Agriculture 

embedded within the structure of a post-secondary, in this case, 

Canadian university. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The significance of that track record has allowed us to see over 

the course of many decades leadership played in a number of 

fields in Canadian and international agriculture. It has allowed 

for, in recent years, us to begin to see the diversification and 

development of crops, and that being lead, not exclusively but 

certainly being lead, by the Crop Development Centre under the 

leadership of Colleen Christensen and others. 

 

When we think about the rise and role of pulse crops for 

example and the significance in trade terms of what that does 

for Saskatchewan’s economy and Canada’s economy, that’s 

why the significance of the Global Institute for Food Security 

really resonates for people right across the province — 

obviously within the university, obviously within the College of 

Agriculture and Bioresources, but also within the private sector 

where we saw very, very significant partnerships come 

together, and also for producers. Because we know, with a 

growing global population, we know that we’re going to have 

to make very significant steps, in fact leaps forward regarding 

food production. And not simply the production of food but 



2878 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

also then its transportation, its storage, its distribution. And this 

is an attempt through these investments to have Saskatchewan 

continuing to play that leadership role that we have so ably 

played as a province over the course of 100 years and beyond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to continue to highlight a few other 

aspects of this budget. When we think about the economy, I 

want to talk about the dollars that are being added — $1.5 

million to increase the capacity of the Saskatchewan 

Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission. Now that 

total number will be over $21 million to purchase an additional 

300 training seats, and we know that those seats are also then 

complemented by new dollars that will enhance the 

apprenticeship training allowance to meet the demand to 

support new and more apprentices entering our system. And we 

know how important that is when we think about the 11,000 or 

so jobs that are open and available today and the tens of 

thousands of more jobs that will be opening up along the way. 

 

In addition to the new funds, the $184.8 million in funding for 

First Nations and Métis people that . . . more than $10 million 

additional in this budget. We also see that dollars are being 

increased to support newcomers for our settlement support 

programming. We see this as being complementary, that is, 

investing in post-secondary and skills training initiatives right 

here within the province of Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan 

young people first and foremost. Then we see that we want to 

make sure that we’re attracting back our expats and then 

inviting newcomers from across the country and around the 

world. So we see that the investments here in Saskatchewan 

with a special focus and emphasis on First Nations and Métis 

learners, then attracting back our expats . . . 

 

And we’re hearing many, many stories. I just heard one this 

weekend where a resident of Greystone received a letter. It was 

rather an interesting letter. He was wondering of its content. It 

was from a different country. It was handwritten. And he 

opened the letter and the letter came from an expat. And the 

letter said, if you’re interested in selling your house, I’m 

interested in buying it back because that was the house that I 

grew up in. And my friend said, that’s a very interesting idea. 

And he wrote back and said, thanks very much, we’ll be in 

touch. And the individual got back to him and said, I don’t 

think you understood me. He said, I live outside the country 

now, and I want to purchase back that house that was our 

family’s house. And my friend said well, you know, this, again 

it’s interesting, we appreciate the offer. 

 

Well it wasn’t more than a week, that house has essentially now 

been sold. The individual is coming back from another country. 

He was absolutely focused on making sure that they purchased 

back the family house where he was raised. He wants to make 

sure his family can share in that. And by all accounts it seems 

that that kind of priority was reflected on the significance of 

having his family not simply back in Saskatchewan but back in 

the neighbourhood, the very neighbourhood where he was 

raised. 

 

And so those are the kind of stories that are heartening, that 

help to reflect not simply statistics about growth or discussion 

of budget that is so important, but it actually allows us to make 

sense, family by family, community by community, 

neighbourhood by neighbourhood, block by block, of the 

transformation that is under way within our province. A 

transformation as I’ve quoted, Mr. Speaker, that really makes 

sense when we begin to think about Bricker and Ibbitson’s 

commentary from their recent book. And when we think about 

the significance of those quotes — that is, Saskatchewan 

growing robustly — here’s a story that actually allows us to see 

what that means. And those quotes, again I’ll just make sure 

that I highlight those from the book The Big Shift: “The 

province [that is Saskatchewan] has reversed years of 

population decline and is growing again, robustly.” And we see 

from this one anecdote the significance of that. 

 

I would also like to highlight a couple of other features, and this 

one especially given the city of Saskatoon and the growth that’s 

under way. We see new dollars and in fact $27 million, an 11.4 

increase for municipal revenue sharing. And that is now $264.4 

million, a $27 million increase. That’s an 11.4 per cent increase 

for municipal revenue sharing which is part of $362 million 

overall for direct provincial support to municipalities, an 

increase of $19.6 million from the 2012-13 budget. This is 

significant for our cities and for our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of areas that we could continue 

to . . . that we could continue with, but I know that some of my 

colleagues would like to enter into and contribute to, with far 

greater eloquence than myself, this debate and discussion. 

 

But I would like to reiterate how honoured I am here, to be here 

on behalf of people of Saskatoon Greystone, to speak directly to 

this balanced budget — the only balanced budget within the 

country, a balanced budget that helps to reflect and reinforce 

why Saskatchewan has a AAA credit rating, a balanced budget 

that makes investments in health care, in entities like our 

Cancer Agency. We know how significant that agency is for 

families right across the province. 

 

It’s a budget that makes investments in transition houses, 

including a new transition house, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

profoundly important. It’s helping some of the most vulnerable 

within our communities, and we think that’s one of the 

measures of a sound budget. It’s not the only measure, but it’s 

one that makes a difference in people’s lives. 

 

We see investments in post-secondary education, in skills 

training, new investments for First Nations and Métis people, 

especially those that are rolling up their sleeves and seeking to 

get the skills to join the Saskatchewan economy in meaningful 

ways that allow them to maximize their potential. 

 

We also see investment for increased settlement services for 

newcomers, newcomers that are helping to contribute to the 

record population growth that’s under way within the province. 

And we know that population growth in and of itself is 

profoundly important. In fact Tony Blair said in his recent 

memoir, Tony Blair said specifically, there’s a pretty simple 

indicator for jurisdictions. That is, are people moving in or are 

people moving out? We know that hundreds of thousands of 

people left Saskatchewan between 1970 and 2007. We know 

that. But we also know that record population growth is now 

occurring and that people are voting with their feet. That is, 

there is a sense of optimism. And whether those are newcomers 

from across the country or around the world, or those expats 

that are returning to Saskatchewan, they’re doing so in adding 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2879 

 

to that sense of optimism that really was one of the foundational 

pieces for the creation of this province. 

 

I’ll conclude with a story if I can, Mr. Speaker, and that is a 

story of the introduction between, the introduction between . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Some of my colleagues are offering 

kind of their own option on what the story should include, but 

this story’s an important one. It’s the story of the meeting 

between our first premier, Premier Walter Scott, and the first 

president to the University of Saskatchewan, Walter Murray. 

 

And as Walter Murray got off the train and he was greeted by 

our premier, obviously looking around . . . And he was coming 

from the Atlantic coast, from the East Coast, well established, 

the post-secondary institutions were there and easily recognized 

and contributing already to their local communities and well 

beyond. And in that initial discussion, he looked around, Walter 

Murray did, and said essentially, why should I stay? Because he 

didn’t see structures. He didn’t see a university that he was 

about to take over. They were going to have to build it. 

 

And to summarize our former lieutenant governor, Dr. Gordon 

Barnhart, who did the research and found the quote, but to 

paraphrase, Walter Scott said simply this. He said, because this 

is a big land for big people with big ideas. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that sentiment, that sentiment has been captured by our Premier 

today and certainly been captured by our Minister of Finance, 

because we know that people are coming to Saskatchewan in 

record numbers because it remains a big land for big people 

with big ideas. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that it’s people across the province 

that are helping to foster and facilitate the growth that this 

budget, the only balanced budget in the country, helps to ensure 

that we sustain the growth and share the benefits of that growth 

with people across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to offer seconding of the motion of 

this balanced budget, the only balanced budget in the country. 

Thank you for the opportunity to join this debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When my 48 

colleagues and I were elected to govern this province, the 

people told us loud and clear, keep fiscal prudence top of mind. 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, we have a balanced growth budget. 

That is why we have controlled spending. That is why some 

things have to wait. That is why we have increased taxes on 

cigarettes and alcohol. That is why we are increasing spending 

in education, post-secondary education, and health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to participate in this debate and I 

support the budget, the balanced growth budget our government 

delivered last week. It is through the creativity and genius, hard 

work and determination of our people that our government is 

able to continuously deliver balanced budgets. People, quality 

of life, and balance are recurrent themes of our government, 

and are evident in this 2013 balanced growth budget. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Let’s take a look at what others are saying. Murray Mandryk 

says: “I like this budget. It has a sense of heart and decency 

. . .” Alan Thomarat, CEO of Saskatchewan Home Builders’ 

Association, says: “We are very pleased with the budget. It 

does stay the course. It is balanced. It stays on track. We want 

to continue the momentum we see in Saskatchewan.” 

 

I will give you one more quote, Mr. Speaker, from Mr. Steve 

McLellan from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. He’s 

their CEO: 

 

Yes, we are overall very pleased, quite frankly. We are 

still one of the only provinces in the country that have a 

balanced budget and we can’t forget about the 

significance of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our sixth consecutive balanced budget focuses on 

investments to quality of life, investments to infrastructure, and 

investments to a growing economy. These investments will 

help us to achieve our goals to grow our province to 1.2 million 

people by 2020, double our exports, and to continue to invest in 

programs and services important to Saskatchewan families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is no secret that the people of Saskatchewan 

elected 49 MLAs to govern our province. All 49 of the MLAs 

on this side of the House have brought the voices, the ideas of 

their constituents to the table where real decisions are made. It 

is the people of Saskatchewan that told us to govern with fiscal 

prudence and make Saskatchewan a business-friendly place to 

be. Our government takes to heart what people tell us. We 

listen, we hear, and we implement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look around and speak to the 1,089,807 

people in our province, we hear that many of them are business 

owners. These business owners and businesses create jobs, jobs 

that provide an income, an income that pays the bills, an 

income that supports our families, and an income that 

contributes to a better quality of life for our children and our 

children’s children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I highlight some of the items in this 

budget, I will take a few minutes to thank my family, my MLA 

team, my executive, and my supporters. My husband Al keeps 

the home fires burning while I’m in Regina and often has to 

listen to me as I develop my speeches. There is no amount of 

money that can be paid for the value he provides when he gives 

me feedback with a critical, but supportive ear. So I will give 

one very big thank you. 

 

Thank you as well to my Prince Albert Northcote team of 

Sharon, Brent, and Donna. They keep my MLA office running 

smoothly and help me keep a visual and written record of how 

our government is helping the people of Prince Albert 

Northcote, Prince Albert, and indeed Saskatchewan. 

 

Another big thank you to my executive and supporters at large. 

They keep their ear to the ground and continue to share the 

voice of our community with me. Mr. Speaker, this balanced 

growth budget balances the books and balances the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people. I also thank all my brothers, my sisters, 

my brothers-in-law, my sisters-in-law, my whole family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our balanced growth budget controls spending and 



2880 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

continues to make investments to ensure a better quality of life 

for all Saskatchewan people. It also delivers on commitments 

we made in the plan for growth and keeps fiscal prudence at its 

core. Our plan for growth set a goal of 1.2 million people by 

2020, and we are right on target. Right now we have 1,089,807 

people calling Saskatchewan home — 21,690 of those people 

were new to Saskatchewan in 2012. Contrast this to the 

out-migration when the NDP were in power. 

 

Improving quality of life is important to my constituents. It is 

important to our government. That is why we are increasing 

benefits under the seniors’ income plan and the Saskatchewan 

assured income for disabilities, or SAID, programs. More is 

being done to fight the scourge of domestic violence. Families 

and especially women will see the increased funding for 

women’s shelters right across the province. In Prince Albert we 

will see an extra $100,000 of support. Mr. Speaker, in Prince 

Albert we will see more than $1 million slated for the YWCA 

[Young Women’s Christian Association] to create new spaces 

for young and expectant mothers and for independent living and 

peer home spaces for youth transitioning to adulthood. 

 

Continuing on this same theme of increased quality of life, our 

government is making good on our 2011 election campaign 

promise to support the community mobilization partnership 

with an increase of $700,000. This innovative program, that 

will start right in my constituency of Prince Albert Northcote 

and our city of Prince Albert, is the first of its kind in Canada. It 

is being adopted throughout our province and indeed our 

nation. 

 

This community mobilization partnership, a result of innovation 

and new ideas, is leveraging the strong sense of community 

Prince Albert and our province has. In Prince Albert we call it 

the Hub. This multi-layered, multi-partnered strategy is 

improving the quality of life in our province by building safer 

and healthier environments. It is getting at the root causes of 

crime and helping to prevent so many young people from going 

down that dangerous path. It is helping our youth to be part of a 

thriving, safe community we all so much want. 

 

Our government set a goal and we are achieving it. We want 

surgical wait times reduced. For example, over the past three 

years in Prince Albert, we have seen a reduction in the number 

of people waiting longer than six months for surgery. Under the 

NDP this wait-list had more than 500 people on it. Now it is 

down to 60. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education is important to our government. For 

example, Mr. Larry Rosia, SIAST president says, and I quote, 

“We’re getting more money which is great news for us. For us, 

it’s all about creating jobs. The economy wants our graduates, 

so we have to go back and use that money to create as many 

graduates as we can for this booming economy.” 

 

Mr. Rosia goes to on say, and I quote, “The new budget and the 

announcement fits very well with the province’s growth plan. 

SIAST supports that growth plan, particularly its focus on 

students and Aboriginal people, both which resonate with 

SIAST.” I’d like to add that SIAST, our northern . . . one of the 

four campuses of SIAST is located right in my constituency of 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our balanced growth budget goes on to provide a 

graduate retention program, the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship, the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 

savings, which all help to improve the quality of life for 

families. There is funding for 300 additional apprenticeship 

training seats. Our balanced growth budget is providing a $1.5 

million increase for work readiness, employment development 

to accelerate essential skills training, and increase employment 

opportunities for First Nations and Métis people. This boosts 

annual funding to nearly $25 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the little over 500 days since I’ve been elected, 

I’ve had many opportunities to see and hear how much our First 

Nations and Métis people appreciate our emphasis on 

post-secondary education and skills training. One prime 

example is my friend Trudy. Trudy is a young First Nations 

woman of Dene ancestry. She is contributing to her future and 

that of her children through business and human resources 

training at SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies]. I might add, Mr. Speaker, that SIIT is also 

located in my constituency of Prince Albert Northcote. Our 

government wants to eliminate the wait-list for adult basic 

education. Mr. Speaker, we are increasing spending for this by 

$1.5 million. 

 

People continue to be a focus of this government. Our Social 

Services minister says it so well, and I quote: 

 

Our children are the future of this great province. We 

need to do everything we can to ensure that they reach 

their full potential. Our economic strength is helping us 

achieve meaningful change and better outcomes for the 

most vulnerable members of our society through 

initiatives like the children and youth agenda. That is why 

growth is so important — so we can improve the quality 

of life for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now have 12 new pre-K [pre-kindergarten] 

programs in Prince Albert since 2007, and all of them continue 

to receive funding. With a growing population, child care 

spaces are needed. Prince Albert has a total of 272 new child 

care spaces since 2007. There are a further 20 child care spaces 

in development. 

 

A new item within this year’s budget will immediately benefit 

the medically fragile children of Prince Albert. $180,000 in 

provincial funding for the newly opened Hope’s Home will 

provide 44 child care spaces and assist with renovations; 11 of 

these spaces are for medically high-needs children. Contrast 

this, Mr. Speaker, with the NDP record. There were no child 

care spaces for medically fragile children when they were in 

power. 

 

Housing is another commitment we made to improve quality of 

life for families in this province. I will refer once again to a 

quote made by Dennis Coutts, CEO, Habitat for Humanity. He 

says, and I quote: “We are the envy of the country. I applaud 

the Government of Saskatchewan for keeping their commitment 

for more housing to help low-income, hard-working 

Saskatchewan people.” 

 

The hard-working people of this province is why we are 

continuing our $344 million commitment for 12,600 new 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2881 

 

housing units across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, investing in infrastructure is important to the 

people of this province. It is important to our government. A 

growing population needs infrastructure. This balanced growth 

budget is the first step towards the $2.5 billion we committed to 

investing towards infrastructure in the next three years. 

 

For example, there is $281 million for highways. Some of that 

money will be used to complete the twinning of Highway 11 

between Saskatoon and Prince Albert. I for one, Mr. Speaker, 

hope that mother nature bestows some good highway building 

weather upon us this summer. Another example of 

infrastructure spending is Pineview Terrace Lodge long-term 

care facility. We should see that completed in 2013. 

 

Housing is another commitment we made to investment in 

infrastructure. As the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation says so well, “Our plan is working.” The 

minister goes on to say, “Housing starts, including rentals, are 

up, vacancy rates are improving and response to our programs 

from our housing partners is going strong.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the CMHC [Canada Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation] housing outlook indicates that Saskatchewan has 

nine starts per 1,000 people compared to a national average of 

six starts per 1,000 people. So, Mr. Speaker, we see other 

organizations outside of our government highlighting the good 

work that we are doing. 

 

We are continuing our $344 million commitment for the 

housing units. In Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, we have 132 

households that have been helped to achieve home ownership. I 

join my colleague from Prince Albert Carlton in congratulating 

these families who now have a place of their own to call home. 

 

[15:30] 

 

We continue to hear that people want new rental units in Prince 

Albert. We have 372 new rental units completed or in progress 

since 2007. Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s compare that, compare our 

record to that of the NDP. To be fair, I will use the following 

statistics from the NDP’s, or to compare to the NDP’s last five 

years of being in power. Housing starts are now up 66 per cent. 

Rental starts are 342 per cent higher than the last five years of 

NDP being in power. Which record, Mr. Speaker, which record 

does the people of Saskatchewan want as we move forward? 

 

Mr. Speaker, supporting a growing economy so that we can 

continue to invest in our people is important. Our Saskatchewan 

Party government has reduced debt. Since 2007 we paid the 

provincial debt down by $3 billion. This is generating a $600 

million savings in interest. Mr. Speaker, our balanced growth 

budget sees record revenue sharing for municipalities. 

Municipalities now receive $264 million in this budget. 

 

Let’s compare that again to the last year of NDP rule. Prince 

Albert got $2.99 million in the 2007 budget. Contrast this to the 

149 per cent increase under the governance of the 

Saskatchewan Party. What does that mean? That means that 

Prince Albert receives $7.47 million in this budget. Mr. 

Speaker, the $7.47 million that Prince Albert receives is 

unconditional funding. It is up to the mayor and councillors of 

our city to decide how they will spend these funds to provide 

for the needs and services of our citizens. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, our government introduced a new 

uranium royalty structure that will attract new investment in 

uranium mines and more jobs for First Nations people in the 

North. I will once again go to some quotes. The CEO of 

Athabasca Basin authority says these changes will lead to new 

mines and expansions. For example, the changes announced by 

the . . . This is a quote by Tim Gitzel, CEO of Cameco. He says, 

and I quote, “The changes announcement by the provincial 

government will give us added confidence to continue the large 

investment we are making to sustain and grow productions 

from our Saskatchewan operations.” 

 

Mr. Jarret Adams of Areva says, “It is a royalty system that 

encourages us to invest more in this province.” Dave McIlmoyl 

who runs the Northern Resource Trucking, which is 70 per cent 

Aboriginal-owned, says the changes are the boost his industry 

needs. I quote, “It means more jobs, more training, more 

infrastructure in the North and that’s what the North needs.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and on, but I won’t. Since 

the budget is fiscally prudent, I feel it is important to be 

verbosely prudent as well. Thus I will close with the following. 

Saskatchewan is the place to be. It’s the envy of the nation. We 

have a strong and growing economy. We have a balanced 

budget. Saskatchewan remains at the top or close to it according 

to nationwide economic indicators. Saskatchewan is the best 

place to live, to work, to raise a family. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a privilege to join in this debate on the budget. And first 

things first. I want to say that I support our balanced growth 

budget. This is a great budget for all of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, and it shows prudence, it shows the 

agility of the Saskatchewan Party to be able to move this 

province forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first things first. I want to thank the people of 

Carrot River Valley for the privilege. And also I am humbled to 

represent them because they are very good people coming from 

northeastern Saskatchewan where, as Carrot River Valley is 

well-known for its agricultural . . . [inaudible] . . . and to be 

able to do a good job in the agriculture. And not only that — we 

can grow huge carrots, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And speaking of an agricultural community reminds me of back 

when the NDP was in power and how they basically forgot 

about agriculture in Saskatchewan, how they ran down rural 

Saskatchewan, how they wouldn’t do anything for rural 

Saskatchewan, how they closed 52 hospitals in rural 

Saskatchewan, neglected the roads, neglected the farmers, 

neglected everything. 

 

The fact is I remember, Mr. Speaker, shortly after I was elected, 

my seatmate, who was minister of Agriculture at that time, was 

taking questions from the Ag critic on the other side — not that 

they had any because they didn’t have anybody from rural 



2882 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

Saskatchewan — and was complaining about what the 

Saskatchewan Party was doing for rural Saskatchewan. And I 

can still remember this. And he picked up a file folder and he 

said, here’s everything the NDP did for rural Saskatchewan. We 

opened it up and it was empty which, Mr. Speaker, is basically 

the way it was back in those days. 

 

Now you take a look, take a look at Carrot River Valley now 

and see what is going on, see how things are moving forward. 

Mr. Speaker, we have a new school that’s going to be built in 

Hudson Bay. You know the NDP, they didn’t care about 

schools in rural Saskatchewan. They didn’t care about rural 

Saskatchewan at all. We have a new Cumberland community 

college building over in Nipawin. Moving it forward. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the one thing we did — and I brought it up 

before how they closed 52 hospitals in rural Saskatchewan — 

this government has a Rural Health minister, my good friend 

and colleague from Biggar. Now, Mr. Speaker, he actually 

came out and he went to all of our hospitals in rural 

Saskatchewan. And he went around there talking to them 

because, I’ll tell you what, now there’s a minister that cares. A 

far sight different than the NDP when all they did is send a 

minister out there to close the hospitals. Oh excuse me, they 

didn’t send a minister out there; they sent somebody else out 

there to close up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s people like these and it’s a government like 

this that will help and benefit rural Saskatchewan. And I give 

our Health minister credit and our Rural Health minister credit 

for moving up on so many of the things that they have come 

forward with. 

 

You know, a good example in this budget, another $10 million 

to shorten the surgical wait times so by 2014 nobody is waiting 

more than three months, Mr. Speaker. These are initiatives not 

just good for urban Saskatchewan, but great for rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Another thing put forward in this is the rural physician 

incentive program. Mr. Speaker, $120,000 for physicians to go 

out into rural Saskatchewan who will serve communities of 

under 10,000 people. They do that for five years, it’s $120,000 

into their pocket. 

 

The recruiting of the nurses, a recruiting of the physicians that 

we’ve done since this government has taken power has just 

made a tremendous difference for all of Saskatchewan, but 

especially rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also it continued support for our STARS [Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society] helicopter fleet. So now in rural 

Saskatchewan when something does happen, we have the 

ability to be able to go out there and pick those people up and 

get them in for medical treatment. Mr. Speaker, these are great 

things. And that’s just on the health end, just on the health end 

alone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the roads that the NDP sat 

there and neglected for years, having the worst highways in all 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, an overall budget of $576 

billion. This year alone, we have beaten our $2.2 billion 

promise that we made when we first started up. Mr. Speaker, 

this government, this government is not just a bump in the road, 

such as the NDP like to claim. We’re actually going to make it 

smooth and transitional, just like the roads in Saskatchewan are 

coming to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are also other things that are coming up in or 

around the Carrot River Valley. Now the transition house, the 

first one built since 1989, is right next door to us, in my good 

friend from Melfort, his constituency. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

great thing — first built since 1989, and it’s in rural 

Saskatchewan to top it all off. Mr. Speaker, we had the first 

Habitat for Humanity home built in Nipawin, first rural Habitat 

home built in rural Saskatchewan last year. 

 

We just keep on talking about how many things and where the 

NDP actually left . . . One other thing I’d like to bring up, Mr. 

Speaker, is the revenue sharing. Now we all know that for years 

the NDP sat there on revenue sharing, and they said, you know, 

they weren’t going to do anything on it to speak of. You know, 

it was always just, okay, well we’ll get you to apply for a grant 

— an ad hoc system. 

 

Since 2007 the town of Tisdale — and I’ve got them all here, 

but I’d kind of like to read them out — the town of Tisdale 

went up 133 per cent since 2007, Mr. Speaker. Carrot River. 

Carrot River, the revenue sharing increased from $98,696 in 

’07-08 to 2013-14 it’s 225,199 — 128 per cent increase. 

Nipawin . . . It’s going to, it would take a long time to read out 

all these numbers, but I’m just going to go through the various 

different amounts. 

 

Nipawin. Nipawin went up 130 per cent from 414,000 to 953. 

Hudson Bay went from 169 to 337,000 — 100 per cent 

increase. The RM [rural municipality] of Moose Range went 

from 245,000 to 424,000 in that same period of time. The RM 

of Arborfield went from 116,000 to 244,000 — 110 per cent 

increase. The RM of Nipawin increased from 216 to $384,000. 

The RM of Hudson Bay, 262,000 to 321. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the RM of Connaught went from 131,000 to 

290,000. And Tisdale, Mr. Speaker, Tisdale, Mr. Speaker, went 

from 130,000 to 257,000. 

 

This is a government that is committed to helping with the 

infrastructure problems that the NDP neglected for years in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have so many things we can talk about here. 

And when you sit back and you look at what the NDP actually 

had in their policy, remember we are operating on a balanced 

budget. It is a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP they had their little book here, their policy. They 

called it policy 11. Now I take it, it was, the figures were put 

together by Mr. Lingenfelter and the member from Regina 

Rosemont, who is now the Deputy Opposition Leader. And you 

would have thought that that member, listening to his leader, 

Mr. Lingenfelter at that time, I guess he was maybe, you know, 

drinking the same Kool-Aid. They actually wanted to have a $5 

billion expense account. 

 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2883 

 

Now quite often that member from over there says this 

government is working on a credit card. Mr. Speaker, nothing 

could be further from the truth. We have a balanced budget on 

both sides of the books. And, Mr. Speaker, for him to say that 

we were going to operate on a credit card, I don’t know what he 

was going to operate on. They were planning on spending $5 

billion of money that the province didn’t have. They were going 

to run it right into the ground, Mr. Speaker. For all we know, 

they were going to buy up the potash mines and start doing that 

themselves or maybe go back into another potato factory. They 

seemed to be doing real well at that. 

 

And to top it all off, Mr. Speaker, as if that isn’t bad enough, 

this whole thing was signed by the current leader, by the current 

Leader of the Opposition. It’s his policy, his policy all the way 

through. Let’s run this government, let’s run Saskatchewan 

back in the hole. Chase everybody back out again because 

that’s what they were doing before. You know, when they sat 

back and bragged and bragged in 2004 about slowing the 

out-migration, Mr. Speaker, take a look at what we’ve done. 

 

Now we can have the members chirping from the other side, 

talking about their various different things. But the whole catch 

is they were running this province into the ground. 

Saskatchewan was a have-not province, and now Saskatchewan 

is a have province. And they’re just kind of a little bit bitter — I 

would almost say a little bit jealous — that now the province is 

moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been many, many, many things that 

have been done over our term in government. And some of the 

other things that we’ve accomplished is helping out on the 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker, where the NDP kept on shutting 

down all the long-term care beds within this province. There’s 

13 of them moving ahead in this province at this time, and one 

of the reasons being, it is being a different . . . a change in the 

formula. This government implemented a 20/80 formula. So in 

other words, the government’s going to pay 80 per cent. This 

made it far nicer to have long-term care beds coming up within 

our different communities. And the amazing thing is a bunch of 

these are in rural Saskatchewan where again the NDP 

completely forgot about them. 

 

Now there happens to be a new one going up in Tisdale, which 

is in the Carrot River Valley constituency. Now the thing that 

this government’s done is they’ve increased the dialysis 

capacity in Tisdale. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we can go on and on and on about 

this, but let’s talk about, let’s talk about the North because I am 

very close to the North, Mr. Speaker. And some of the things 

that were said . . . Now the member from Athabasca who 

actually represents that area up there, he said on Thursday, he 

said: 

 

The Saskatchewan Party, in their archaic thinking, look at 

the North as a place they can simply take out all the 

resources and not put anything back. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that action is going to create problems for the 

Saskatchewan Party sooner than later. 

 

And I know that the mining companies are getting angry 

with this government. [Go figure on that one.] And I 

know that the mining companies are telling these guys, do 

something. Because what happens if this government 

doesn’t start doing anything, Mr. Speaker? The peace in 

the valley that’s created over the years under a smart 

growth [is] thinking . . . [that it’s] going to be gone, Mr. 

Speaker. People in the North are going to get angrier and 

angrier and angrier. And some of that anger’s going to 

spill over to the corporate sector. And is that good for the 

provincial economy, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely not. It’s 

not good. 

 

Now that was a quote from the member from Athabasca on 

Thursday. Now let’s just see what was said by Tim Gitzel, CEO 

of Cameco, and this was in a press release on March the 20th: 

 

“While the long-term fundamentals remain positive, 

uranium mining is addressing some short-term 

uncertainty,” said Tim Gitzel, president and CEO of 

Cameco. “The changes announced by the provincial 

government will give us added confidence to continue the 

large investment we are making to sustain and grow 

production from our Saskatchewan operations.” 

 

You know, I kind of wonder when you listen — there’s two 

northern members — when you listen to what they sit there and 

rant and rave about, how, what are they doing? Like I mean, it’s 

almost as if, it’s almost as if they listened to Lewis Carroll and 

they’re taking on the role of the mad hatter in Alice in 

Wonderland. Like I mean, it’s a bit of a, truthfully it’s a bit of a 

joke. 

 

Here we are, we are helping out, and we need those people in 

the North. We need them working. We want to see our 

Aboriginal people working of which the mines are big 

employers of, but we want to see people working all across 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what this budget does. 

This budget makes it so people all across Saskatchewan are 

working. And as I’ve said before and I’ve said it many a time, 

my children didn’t leave Saskatchewan when they finished off 

university. No sir, my children are both working in this 

province. They didn’t have to go running to Alberta or BC 

[British Columbia] or, heaven forbid, Eastern Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province has grown. This province has grown 

by 80 . . . What is it? 80-some thousand people . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Eighty-nine thousand. Eighty-nine thousand 

people in the last year since we’ve been in government, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what this province wanted to see. They want to 

see a government that is a prudent government, that can manage 

this province properly, have a balanced growth. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to see this province up to 1.2 million people by 

2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that is moving this province 

forward. And it is budgets like this that make this province 

move forward, along with all my colleagues on this side of the 

House and the Premier. And I think it’s going to be a long, long 

time before the NDP are ever going to see this side of the 

House again. And I really hope they never do because we want 

to move Saskatchewan forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 



2884 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise today to speak in support of our budget that 

we’ve put forward, but first what I’d like to do is I want to 

thank the people that helped me get here. First and foremost, I 

need to speak about my wife, Marjorie. As we all know here, 

without the support of our spouses and significant others, we 

wouldn’t be able to do the job for the people of Saskatchewan 

that we’re able to do. 

 

We were at an event two weekends ago with the member from 

Moose Jaw North, and it was one of the first times since elected 

publicly that somebody actually stood up and they thanked the 

member and myself, and then they took about 10 minutes 

thanking our spouses and our families for allowing us the time 

to do the best job that we can do for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And it was nice to see for a change that people 

out there actually recognize the effort that our families put in 

for us. 

 

When I was elected two years ago or a year and a half ago, my 

wife was there on just about every doorstep. My kids were there 

with me. My family was such a support. We went forward, and 

without their support I wouldn’t be standing here today. 

 

So with this balanced budget that we’ve put forward, it’s great, 

especially for my kids — my kids that are going to university, 

working in this province, staying in this province and they 

don’t have to leave. You know, back when I was a kid, all my 

friends on the bus out to Alberta, on the bus down east. 

Wherever it was, it wasn’t staying in Saskatchewan. Now our 

kids, all our kids get to stay in this province. 

 

My son has just moved back to the city of Regina, and he was 

actually getting from employers here in the city, he was getting 

job offer after job offer after job offer. And he’s 20 years old. 

The fact that our economy is growing that quick that a kid 

that’s 20 years old is being offered job after job after job, that 

he gets to pick and choose, shows you the quality of 

employment opportunities that a budget like this allows us to 

put . . . 

 

I also want to thank my mom and dad, because without my 

parents’ support I wouldn’t be able to be here today. I wouldn’t 

be able to stand up and speak to the people of Saskatchewan 

about how great our province is and about our balanced growth 

going forward. 

 

So on to the budget. The theme of our budget we talked about is 

balanced growth, and our balanced growth means controlled 

spending and continuing to make investments to all aspects of 

life here in the province. 

 

And I’m going to bring it home to Moose Jaw a little bit here. 

So let’s talk about the biggest thing going in Moose Jaw right 

now is the Moose Jaw hospital, the new hospital. This budget 

has put $50 million towards the construction of this brand new 

hospital in Moose Jaw, state-of-the-art hospital. 

 

The funding will be used to cover our project contingency fund 

for the IPD team. The IPD stands for integrated project 

delivery. This project requires the project owners and 

consultants to work with a team through the design, from the 

start to the commissioning, to increase value, maximize 

efficiency, and reduce waste on a project. Some of the funding 

of course will be used for the lean consulting, and the region 

will continue to undertake a series of initiatives focused on the 

patient experience throughout 2013 and ’14 in order to improve 

the improvements that we talk about. 

 

So let’s just talk about one of those improvements that this 

balanced budget’s able to do. Today it was announced that the 

hemodialysis unit in Moose Jaw Union Hospital has doubled its 

capacity, doubled its capacity starting today. So what that’s 

done, it’s allowed 17 patients, 17 patients who’ve been 

travelling back and forth from Moose Jaw to Regina and, you 

know, these are people that are taking dialysis. So they’re 

driving here and they’re spending eight hours on the dialysis 

machine and driving home. So these people get to stay at home 

and do it now. This unit will now be open six days a week, and 

that’s up from three days a week. 

 

[16:00] 

 

I want to quote one of the patients that they’ve interviewed on 

this. This is one of our Moose Jaw residents, Hardy Doerksen, 

and what he said is: 

 

I’m so excited about this. I can’t even find the words. My 

daughter drives me to Regina twice a week for my 

dialysis, and this will be so much more convenient for all 

of us. 

 

So on top of providing this service for our Moose Jaw people in 

our hospital, it gets them to spend more family time. They’re 

doing it right in our city. And I know I had constituents come to 

my office and go, why aren’t we doing this? Why aren’t we 

doing this? And you know what? We get to do that. So we get 

to do this within a balanced budget while moving the province 

forward. Our dialysis treatments, they get to extend the life and 

improve the quality of life from people suffering from kidney 

failure. So this is very important. 

 

Now we’ve also in this budget, since we’re talking about 

Moose Jaw, we’ve set aside $5 million for the transition of our 

people that live out in Valley View. Now this has been ongoing 

for the last year that we made an announcement that we’re 

going to close Valley View. And what we’ve done in that year 

is we’ve gone . . . our Valley View transition team has met with 

the families and people that live out in Valley View and have 

started to put together a plan, and put together a plan that will 

be turned in in the next little while here to the Minister of 

Social Services. And what this $5 million does is it allows us to 

continue planning and start planning for new homes for these 

people in our city of Moose Jaw. 

 

So we’re doing this within a balanced budget and we’re going 

to do it right the first time. We’re going to take the time to do it 

right. So instead of in 2002 just saying we’re not going to take 

any more patients out at Valley View or people that live in 

Valley View and create a backlog for these people for a place to 

live across the province . . . some of the most, the people that 

need our help the most, there was a backlog of over 400 people. 

We’re shrinking that backlog. On top of that, we’re taking 

forward a plan for the rest of the people in the province. So 

we’re able to do that again within a balanced budget and 

continue moving the process forward. 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2885 

 

This budget is our sixth consecutive balanced budget. I don’t 

think there’s too many other jurisdictions in Canada right now 

that they’ve had two consecutive balanced budgets, let alone six 

consecutive balanced budgets. We’ve been able to do that since 

we came into government — six consecutive balanced budgets. 

Since 2007, we’ve reduced our provincial debt by $3 billion. 

And what that means is . . . Everybody goes, okay, $3 billion. 

That’s a lot of money. What does that really mean? Well we 

saved $600 million in interest savings for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Prudent fiscal management is the key, is the key 

if we’re to achieve our growth plan for a population of 1.2 

million people by 2020. 

 

So we’ve talked about the growth in the people moving into the 

province. We’ve had 80,000 people over the last . . . how many 

years? Four years? Four years? Just 80,000 people just over the 

last four years. Almost 90,000. So that’s taking the city of P.A. 

[Prince Albert], the city of Moose Jaw, and probably Yorkton 

maybe fitting in one of our smaller cities. So if the people of 

Saskatchewan think about that, you’re adding three or four of 

our major population centres into this province in the last five 

years. And we’re providing for the infrastructure for this. We’re 

providing homes for these people to live in. We’re doing it all 

within a balanced budget. 

 

I want to quote what Discover Moose Jaw said on Saturday. 

Their headline on their website was the Moose Jaw mayor is 

pleased with the budget announcement. Now we all know who 

the Moose Jaw mayor is. The Moose Jaw mayor is the former 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, former member Deb 

Higgins. Fine lady, doing a good job as mayor of Moose Jaw 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, she said. She was deputy 

leader of the opposition in the last term, and she was pleased 

with the budget announcement. 

 

Now what she was talking about was the revenue sharing. Our 

revenue sharing in Moose Jaw since 2007-2008 budget was 

$2.8 million; 2013-2014, it’s $7,076,565. That’s an increase of 

151 per cent. That’s 1 per cent . . . that’s their portion of the 1 

per cent of the PST [provincial sales tax]. Last year they got 

$6,310,203. They got an increase in one year of $766,362. So 

that’s based on the PST, which shows that our province is 

growing. We have increased sales. The more people that live 

here, the more stuff they actually need to live. They get to go 

out and buy groceries and gas and all those things, and they pay 

the PST on that, and we split that up. And the former deputy 

leader of the opposition is pleased with our budget 

announcement. 

 

The opposition talks about listening to the people of 

Saskatchewan. They like to listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan. You have to do a little bit more than listen to the 

people of Saskatchewan. You actually have to implement some 

of the things they said. So I’m just going to quote some people 

and some of the things that were said about the budget. 

 

There were a couple of the things that we . . . and this is a 

quote. “There were a couple of things in the budget that we 

were encouraged by. They sounded positive. One of them of 

course was the increased funding to women’s shelters and 

attempting to do some work around curbing violence to women 

so we’re supportive to that.” And that was Larry Hubich, SFL 

[Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] president. And I like 

quoting the president of the SFL, especially when he’s so 

positive on our budget. 

 

I’d actually like to promote . . . to quote the member from 

Regina Rosemont. And this is what he said. There’s a program, 

First Link, to support Alzheimer’s patients and families and 

that’s a good step. He even likes our budget. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Wonder if he’ll vote for us? 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Oh that’s a good question. We’ll know in a 

little bit here. One of the members that sits in the press gallery 

every day, Ms. Stefani Langenberger . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Langenegger. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Langenegger, Langenegger. I want to quote 

her: “The government would tell you they’ve done a lot more in 

the last five or six years than the NDP did in 16 years.” And 

that’s true too. This government has added thousands of 

daycare spaces. 

 

You know, we listen to the people of Saskatchewan. We keep 

moving forward and that’s what we need to do as a 

government. We need to continue listening to the people of 

Saskatchewan. So this is what Larry Rosia has said; he’s the 

president of SIAST: “When we look at the forecast for the next 

five years out there, there’s a huge demand for graduates. So I 

think that some of the investment is just an indication of what 

the province is saying and what industry is saying.” So when 

the president of SIAST is going, the province is listening to the 

people of Saskatchewan, to the industry of Saskatchewan, I’m 

pretty sure we’re on the right track. 

 

Here’s another quote from the president of SIAST: “We’re 

getting more money which is good news for us. For us it’s all 

about creating jobs. The economy wants our graduates, so we 

have to go back and use that money to create as many graduates 

as we can for this booming economy.” This economy is not a 

myth. It is a boom. All you have to do is look at our job 

numbers growing year after year, month after month. 

 

So let’s take a look at the financial sector and say what they’re 

saying about our province, whether or not this balanced budget 

is real. 

 

Saskatchewan’s relatively stronger fiscal position means 

that social programs will likely see proportionately larger 

investments than in some provinces still in the red. 

Saskatchewan will also enjoy a fiscal benefit in the form 

of declining debt charges [and I actually covered that] — 

a dividend linked to both earlier debt paydowns and an 

extremely low interest rate environment . . . 

 

And that’s a quote from the CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of 

Commerce]. 

 

We want to talk about balanced growth. That’s what we need 

for this province — growth not for the sake of growth but 

growth for the betterment of the people of this province. We 

heard about it. The Premier sent us out last summer. I went out, 

and I talked to people, and we talked. And when I talked about 

it, there were some very, very key, base things that they brought 



2886 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

forward. And it was we need to keep growing the infrastructure. 

We need to make sure we do that to keep this province doing it. 

However we have to do it within a balanced budget. It is so 

important that we maintain that balanced budget, that we don’t 

go further into debt growing this province. 

 

I’ve got to take my glasses off here to read the small print. 

Quality of life. We had a $131.8 million increase for the 

regional health authorities’ base for operating, fundings for 

health care, staff, drugs, medical supplies, and other operating 

costs. Again we’re doing all of this within the balanced budget. 

We need to listen to the people of Saskatchewan — keep 

growing this province, keep growing it within a balanced 

budget. 

 

Along the lines of our labour force development because this is 

key to keep this economy firing on all cylinders, we have to 

make sure that we have the people in place to keep our job 

positions full. Actually having a low unemployment rate is 

great, but having all these jobs taking time to fill, it actually 

takes a . . . It’s not best. 

 

So what we’re able to do is we’ve put $448 million to support 

the base operating of our Saskatchewan universities, federated 

and affiliated colleges, which is actually an increase of $9.2 

million. We put 149.6 million operating funding for 

Saskatchewan technical institutes and 27.6 million in operating 

funding for regional colleges. 

 

To help our students . . . Because you can put all this money 

into universities, colleges, or technical institutes, but if the 

support for students isn’t there, we’re not going to be able to fill 

those schools. So we put $117.4 million in student supports, 

which is an increase of almost 20 million — 19.6 million or 20 

per cent — which includes 63.9 million in refundable and 

non-refundable tax credits for the graduation retention program. 

And remember when I was talking earlier about our kids 

staying home and working? This is even more incentive. On top 

of the economy firing on all cylinders, our kids actually get tax 

incentives to stay home and work after they graduate from 

university and our colleges. 

 

We’ve got 7.5 million for the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship. We’ve got $6.5 million to establish the 

Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings. That 

would have been great when my kids were little, when the 

opposition was in power, if we had something like that that 

allowed me to save more money for my kids’ education when 

my kids were little. But now they’re grown. They’re going to 

school. They’re in apprenticeship programs. They’re working, 

and they’re in university. 

 

Well better late than never, but it took us to implement it. 

Instead of talking about . . . You know, the opposition talks and 

talks and talks. We’re going to do this. We were going to do 

that. This is what you should do. We actually go out and do 

what we say we’re going to do. We implement the programs. 

 

[16:15] 

 

One of the reasons that I had so much fun knocking on doors in 

Moose Jaw is I had the platform from ’07 and I was able to go 

through the platform in ’07 and go, we did what we said we 

were going to do, check mark after check mark after check 

mark — over 100 promises made, over 100 promises kept. So if 

you’re going to base what a government’s going to do, you take 

a look at what they’ve done in the past, and chances are that’s 

what they’re going to continue doing to the future . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Exactly. Like my friend from 

Yorkton said, best indicator of future behaviour is past 

behaviour. So we’re going to continue on this path to 2020. We 

want to grow this province to 1.2 million people by the year 

2020. We’ve got a good start on that now. We’ve got a 

population growth that we haven’t seen in almost 100 years. 

There’s a reason for that. There’s lots of reasons for that. 

 

And I think one of the major reasons for that is this government 

has a positive attitude. We’re going to take this province 

forward. We’re going to help move it forward. We’re going to 

get out of the way. We’re going to continue doing that, rather 

than the negative nine and everything we do is bad, everything 

we say we bad, every economic indicator out there that 

everybody talks about the province is wrong. The negative nine, 

I think, might have the wrong attitude. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak in support of the 

budget, and thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I found 

that speech very interesting. It reminded me of one of those 

fact-finder, fact-truth detectors that they have on CNN [Cable 

News Network] during the leadership or the presidential 

debates. And that thing would be just spinning out of control 

after listening to that speech and the previous ones. I just have 

to say it was very entertaining. I don’t know how much was 

solid in there, but what the heck. It’s always entertaining to hear 

folks speak regardless if the truth does happen to get in the way 

a little bit every once in a while. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say one thing before I start. And 

I want to just comment on the member I think was from 

Turtleford, the member’s statement today about the highway 

workers and how I totally agree with that. And I think our 

highway workers and the good job they’ve done over the course 

of this winter and this spring, and we know it’s not over yet. 

But the hat’s off to those guys, hat’s off to those guys, the guys 

working the plows, working the phones. 

 

And I’ve got to tell you, I feel like I just check that hotline all 

the time even if I’m not driving for a couple of days. I feel I’m 

in that habit. But I’ve got to tell you, it’s been the worst winter. 

In fact I was just making a list of the five blizzards we’ve had 

this winter where I know I’ve been affected. I know the first 

one was . . . Actually it was interesting. It was the SFL 

convention, but I think the folks opposite were having a 

convention in Saskatoon and many had a hard time getting up 

to that convention. There was one around Remembrance Day 

weekend. There was one in January. In fact actually the first 

day again coming back to the legislature there was a blizzard, 

and people had a hard time getting in on that Sunday. So clearly 

those folks have just worked just amazingly — and good 

member’s statement. 

 

But we’re here to talk about the budget, and clearly our role in 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2887 

 

the opposition is to provide scrutiny and to make sure that it’s 

as transparent and as accountable as possible. And I know the 

member just prior to me talked about the checklist, and I do 

have a couple of spots where those checks didn’t actually land 

on the paper. And we’ll maybe talk about that, but we do have 

some concerns. 

 

And I know one of them talked about listening, and often it 

seems to me that this government has a habit of selective 

listening, not fully listening. I know he quoted the president of 

the SFL, and I would agree with the president of the SFL. And I 

know on this side, we’ve all said that we appreciate the 

increased funding to transition housing. But I know, I know if 

you looked at the whole quote, I would think there was 

probably more, there was probably more to that quote than that 

member added. And I think he probably should check the 

record. And I know these folks are very good at selective 

listening, cutting and pasting, and I’ve been a victim of that as 

well from that side where they thought that was very 

interesting, that little piece that I said. And I have to say that 

they need to do a better job, a better job, a much better job of 

that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll speak for a bit here, but I do want to make 

sure that if there’s any confusion, yes I will be voting against 

this budget. This budget has serious fatal flaws in it. While 

containing some good pieces, there are fatal flaws in it, and I 

will highlight those. And I will be speaking in favour of the 

amendment, and that is: 

 

That all the words “That the Assembly” be deleted and the 

following be added: 

 

disagrees with the government for tabling a credit card 

budget that pushes costs on future generations, hurts 

health care, fails students and schools, rolls back the 

clock on environment progress, denies transparency, and 

relies on short-sighted privatization schemes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that covers it really well. And I’ll 

highlight what I mean by some of those areas of concern 

because I think this government has really produced a credit 

card budget. I know these folks obsess on the balanced budget 

and probably, in the next week or two, we’ll probably see 

billboards go up and advertising go up even though just a few 

short weeks ago, a few short weeks ago, they spent over 

$90,000 telling people, be ready for a tight budget, that this will 

be a very tight budget. There’s not much money to go around. 

And they spent $90,000 doing that, and they also fixed up the 

Premier’s office, putting in a hardwood floor of some $22,000. 

 

So we have some concerns about the mixed messages, the 

inconsistency of this government when it really counts and 

really delivering for the people of Saskatchewan, the middle 

class of this province, the people who have worked hard. The 

people have worked hard to get this province to where it is. 

They’re not feeling like this budget really delivers for them. 

And so I’ll speak about those kind of things. And I think that’s 

very, very important, you know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from my riding in Saskatoon Centre, it’s 

obviously probably the most urban riding in the province. I 

think it covers about 3 square miles. It’s essentially between 

20th Street and 29th Street. Yes it’s very. . . nine blocks wide 

and about 27 blocks long. And it’s something I can walk in the 

morning. And I know that not many can say that. 

 

But I can tell you that when you start to talk about going up the 

stairs in the apartment blocks, the miles start to add on, you 

know. But the whole wide range of people who live in that 

riding, those who are in the most vulnerable situation, 

low-income workers, those who are on the SAID program, 

those who are recent immigrants, new Canadians that have 

moved to the province because they are thinking this is the 

place where there will be opportunity . . . And we sure hope 

there are. We think there is. 

 

But there’s problems. There’s difficulties with the kind of 

things that they have come to expect. And so, Mr. Speaker, on 

one end of the continuum we have that situation. We have a 

strong, strong middle class out in Mount Royal, Caswell, parts 

of Riversdale, Westmount, in those areas and downtown. We 

also have a lot of seniors who live downtown and throughout 

the riding actually. 

 

So they’re watching this very closely, to what happens to them 

and what are the concerns that they find and what are they 

looking for when it comes to a provincial government and what 

a provincial government should be doing for them. 

 

And so I can speak from a point of real diversity in my 

community. And of course downtown as well, along Spadina, I 

can tell you that in the condos there, there are some people who 

enjoy very well-paying jobs and are there. And we sure 

appreciate the fact that they’re there and they’re contributing to 

the economy. And they do very much add to the value of our 

economy through their expertise and what they can offer in the 

workplace. 

 

But it is a wide range of people who live in my riding. It’s not a 

homogeneous type of situation at all. In fact it’s so diverse. And 

sometimes I feel, when you’re walking down 20th Street or 

walking down Spadina, you can be in two different worlds, but 

it’s one riding. And I appreciate that; it keeps me grounded. But 

it’s a challenge that I think this province has, and it reflects that 

challenge very much. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I have three high schools in my riding 

and numerous elementary schools, and clearly they’re feeling 

some of the challenges as well. And I know for example Mount 

Royal is a wonderful example of the kind of changes that we 

foresaw that would need the help in this province when we 

were in government because it really became a SIAST west, a 

module of SIAST being able to deliver skills training to 

students right in, very close to their homes. And it’s worked out 

to be a very, very good model. So we’re really, really proud of 

that. 

 

And of course we are also home to Station 20 West, the new 

community hub on 20th Street that just opened last fall. And the 

kind of work that’s happening out of there, it’s so exciting to 

support community people, both in the services they need and 

to make sure that they get those services — whether it be health 

care, help with their children, nutrition, all those kind of things. 

So it’s very, very important. 

 



2888 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

So the kind of issues that this government’s putting forward are 

very relevant to the folks in my riding. And so when we take a 

look at a budget like this, they want to make sure it’s the very 

best that it can possibly be, that it’s transparent, that it meets the 

needs of our citizens. And that’s why we have a real problem 

with some of the things in it. 

 

As we said, some of the things like the Linkin, that’s very solid. 

We had called for that, that’s important. 

 

The transition house support, very important. That’s very good. 

My only caveat with that would be that somehow we have to 

address the issue of somehow a strategy that stops the type of 

domestic abuse that leads to that. And I would like to see the 

government take a stronger role in that. 

 

But we see a credit card budget in front of us. And we worry 

about that because what we’re really doing is, as we’ve 

described, kicking the can down the road for our young people, 

for the next generation to pay for the bills. And this just isn’t 

on. We know this government obsesses about the idea, the 

concept of balanced budgets, and we should all strive for that. 

But when a budget’s delivered, it is the budget. We see several 

examples of where already the Premier and the government’s 

signalling that they have flexibility, and that this really isn’t 

quite what it seems to be. 

 

We heard on the Thursday morning last week where the 

Premier was speculating about changes or increases to 

education funding to meet the needs of our crowded classrooms 

because they did it last year. Just seems to be a habit of what 

they do mid-year, and that shouldn’t happen. That shouldn’t 

happen. This is about good planning. This is about good 

planning. 

 

And we know this government is not above asking the Crowns 

to deliver more funds through a dividend, special dividends, 

that when the going gets tough they will rely on them. And that 

puts our Crowns in a very difficult situation. So that’s why we 

have a problem with them calling this a balanced budget when 

we already start to see holes in the budget, the holes in the 

budget. 

 

And we’ve talked about flooding today. Where is that? We see 

the crop insurance start thinking along the lines of what the 

problems they can anticipate in the fall but not so much with 

flooding. We know this is going to be a big problem. I think we 

can probably say definitively that this is going to be a problem. 

Every day that it keeps cool like the days we’ve had in the last 

several weeks means that we’re going to probably have 

significant flooding. And for this government to deny that, I 

think, is really problematic, but they’ve kept to their balanced 

budget concept. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So we have a real problem with this. And I’ve not heard any of 

the previous members acknowledge the fact that in their budget 

documents they’ve talked about increasing the debt — 

increasing the debt by $850 million. They’re strangely silent on 

that. Who’s going to pay for that?  

 

And then they have this idea, this P3 idea. And we have a lot of 

legitimate questions about that because clearly that’s pushing 

debt further down the road. We need to know a lot more about 

that. And I think when you spend the kind of money that 

they’re talking about on P3s when they’ve already spent $1 

million just a few short years ago deciding not to go down that 

road. All of a sudden now there are deciding to go down that 

road. We have some real, real concerns. 

 

So we think they’re ill-prepared for this. And it’s going to let 

our kids down because they end up having to pay for it, and we 

have some strong questions about it. Now, Mr. Speaker, I was 

very concerned when I heard the amount of money that was 

raised when it came to education support. Clearly, clearly that 

is an area that when we have people come to our province, they 

look at our education system. And we believe that it’s second to 

none, that it’s an excellent system. All systems can improve. 

And I think that when we talk to people in the schools and our 

school systems, they say, yes we can do better. We can do 

better. But we think it’s second to none. We think we’ve 

produced some outstanding students in our province. 

 

Unfortunately though, we see challenges though that we have to 

do better. And we have do particularly better around the 

Aboriginal graduation rates. That’s something that we can do, 

that we need to do. And we see that commitment just not in this 

budget. We don’t see the commitment to the Aboriginal 

students in our communities, and that’s left just out there with a 

big question mark and not very much support, not very much 

support at all. And we’re also seeing real challenges where we 

have a government that’s willing to intervene where they’ve not 

gone before but where they’re willing to intervene. 

 

And the number of minutes . . . We’ve seen the minister go that 

he wants specific minutes for subjects per day in our 

classrooms. He’s willing to go that far. He’s willing to say, 

when does the school year start? Right after Labour Day. But 

he’s not willing to say what a maximum number of kids in a 

classroom should be. He’s not willing to have that conversation 

at all. And we find that strange. We find that really passing the 

buck, if you will. We think that there should be a discussion 

about that because we’ve seen and we’ve heard stories about 

classrooms are crowded and that we need better supports. And 

we need to figure out how to do this. And they’ve made a 

commitment that we understand it’s up to 40 portables that 

they’re willing to provide. 

 

Now by their own numbers, Mr. Speaker, they talk about 4,500 

new students in our schools. I think it was 2,300 this year, 

1,200 the year before. That’s great. Good to see the increases 

— 4,500 new students, 40 classrooms. It sounds like we do 

have a class size here. It sounds like the math on that is about 

115 kids that they’re willing to put into a classroom. We just 

don’t think that’s . . . That doesn’t make any sense. That 

doesn’t make any sense at all. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when they put out these kind of numbers, 

we have a lot of questions. And I can understand why other 

people would have questions about that. Now they love to read, 

and they will get up and they will read other quotes. And this is 

what the Saskatchewan School Boards Association says, and I 

quote: 

 

Today’s provincial budget represents at best “status quo” 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2889 

 

for boards of education in Saskatchewan. 

 

“As a result of the government’s decision to fully fund 

pre-K to 12 education in Saskatchewan, school boards are 

on a fixed income determined by the province and 

individual school boards have little flexibility to respond 

to challenges within school divisions,” said SSBA 

President Janet Foord. 

 

So this is just something, just one quote. And they’re saying 

essentially their hands are tied. They’re seeing their schools’ 

population growing. We all know they’re growing, but their 

hands are tied. They can’t do what needs to be done to improve 

student performance in the schools. They can’t do what needs 

to be done to improve student performance. 

 

So what is this government’s, what’s this government’s 

response? It’s to put in $6 million for standardized testing, $6 

million for standardized testing. Now we all know and we all 

think that you do have to have some assessment. Nobody’s 

against assessment. Everybody wants to know how their kids 

are doing in school. Obviously that’s a fact and we all share 

that. But we also think and we think that people have a sense of 

priorities, and their priorities are supporting students in the 

classroom. Parents want to see that their kids are having the 

best experience, the best learning experience that they possibly 

can have. And if they’re hearing that all this government wants 

to do is support and provide 40 portable classrooms to deal with 

these overcrowded classrooms but yet provide $6 million for 

standardized testing — and of which that I understand 5.9 

million is for computer hardware — it just doesn’t, it just 

doesn’t add up. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, these folks love to talk about past 

behaviour predicts future behaviour. We’ve seen this 

government where they cut 350 educational assistants and then 

the minister would get up and say that they’ve added 19 more. 

But they cut 350, they’ve cut 350. They’ve added 19 more. 

These things just don’t add up. They don’t make sense. 

 

And for most families they’re saying, we want to see our 

schools supported. We want to see our kids do well. That’s 

number one. And they have faith and confidence in their 

teachers, and that’s really what’s really important. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have some real concerns about what’s 

happening with education in this province. And you know, and 

I have to say as well one of the most important contributions to 

this debate about education was made last fall when the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] talked about poverty in 

our communities, about the prices that some families are 

experiencing when it comes to income and nutrition and how 

that’s limiting the ability for their students, for their children to 

perform in school and to learn. And this is really, really a 

problem. And so, Mr. Speaker, we need to talk to the STF. We 

need to talk to the school boards and talk about what really is 

important in our schools. And that’s how we do good planning 

and that’s what we do . . . That’s good listening; that’s not 

selective listening that we hear from the other side. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, and as well, we need to create in our 

schools an environment where we’re attracting the best to be 

our teachers. And I think the signals that this government has 

sent to teachers — whether it’s over standardized testing, the 

last bargaining session they had, all sorts of things, 

overcrowded classrooms, not willing to have authentic 

conversations about what’s important for students in 

Saskatchewan — I think we’re sending mixed messages to our 

teachers. 

 

And that’s a problem because both parents and teachers are 

really worried about the future of our schools, when you see a 

government that is obsessed with standardized testing, can’t 

really articulate what that means. We’re hearing different 

versions of it almost weekly. But we know what’s really 

important is providing resources that the teachers think are 

important in those classrooms, and that’s just not happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a minute to talk about . . . One of 

my other critic roles is around labour, and we have not really 

had a conversation about that. It was not raised at all in the 

budget speech and it was not even in one of their press releases. 

So I am waiting to hear from the minister when he gets up and 

speaks about the implications of Bill 85 in this budget. 

 

You know, last year when this was announced on May 2nd, we 

were all surprised because it wasn’t part of the budget. It wasn’t 

part of the Throne Speech. And you know, Mr. Speaker, when 

the minister was asked about it, he said, well there would not be 

a problem. We could just absorb the costs; we could just absorb 

the costs. And the fact of the matter is they couldn’t absorb the 

costs and we had to have supplementary estimates last fall, last 

November, where . . . Actually it was early December when it 

came to committee, where the minister did acknowledge that in 

fact he was incorrect. He was out by $700,000, and that was up 

to November 28th. That was what the budget line was, or the 

overspent on Bill 85. And I don’t know what happened in the 

other four months, December, January, February, and March. 

He could have hit $1 million on doing the work for that bill. 

 

But the fact of the matter is they were ill-prepared, ill-planned, 

and to start that process. But the minister said not to worry, that 

he was going to make sure everything was all right, and that it 

would work out in the end. 

 

Now we look at this, the new budget, and we have the same, the 

very same concerns. Here you have the biggest rewrite of 

labour laws in this province in 100 years and nothing special for 

it, nothing special for it. This reminds me so much of the 

essential services bill, and the fact that they had said at that time 

it wasn’t going to cost any money, but here we are, five years 

later, mired down in court over this. This has got to be costing 

the government something, if not because they’ve had to make 

some decisions about not do this because we have to still deal 

with the essential services legislation. Those are choices. Those 

are choices. And we have a choice of what to do with Bill 85. 

And you know every day, Mr. Speaker, I get up and I raise a 

petition . . . We’re not saying well . . . We’re saying, delay it. 

We understand the government has the majority, and they will 

have their way. But let’s get it right so we’re not ending up in 

court all the time, that we’re not ending up in court. 

 

I have personally some real problems with the bill. I don’t think 

it’s well-thought-out and of course when the bill comes 

forward, we’ll have that vote. But, Mr. Speaker, I have some 

real concerns that this, this bill when it’s passed — and this 



2890 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

government has said it will pass this spring — what the 

implications of that are and what the implications are for the 

labour bill or labour budget. 

 

So when I look at the estimates here, I see that it’s going up 

about $1 million. It’s going from 17.4 million up to 18.4 

million. And we can talk about where we see the big difference 

is. We see that central management gets 300,000. We see that 

essentially labour standards gets about 50,000 more dollars. I’m 

not sure if that’s just the cost of doing business, if there’s 

anything special in there. Labour Relations Board gets 15,000 

more. The labour relations and mediation — and this is going to 

be a big one when you’re changing around The Trade Union 

Act — it goes up by $13,000, and worker’s advocate goes up by 

12,000. 

 

Now the biggest one goes up and this, this may be good, and 

I’m interested in hearing more about this and I hope the 

minister tells us about this, but occupational health and safety 

goes up about, I would say that’s about $900,000. It goes from 

7.6 million to 8.5. So that’s significant and that may be good. 

I’m curious to know why that’s going up so much. Now people 

might say, well that’s good because we’re having more 

occupational health and safety inspectors. But here’s the catch, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re going up from 147 FTEs [full-time 

equivalent] to 149. So they’re going up two people. That’s not 

$900,000. That’s not 900. So where’s that money going? 

What’s it doing in occupational health and safety? Clearly a 

priority of the government and we share that priority. When it 

comes to safety in our workplaces, it’s got to happen. We don’t 

know what that is. There was no budget announcement. 

Nobody said that they’re doing this, they’re doing that, they’re 

doing what. We don’t know what’s happening to money in 

occupational health and safety. So we’re anxiously awaiting 

that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the implementation of Bill 85 is going to be 

huge. It’s going to be huge. A few weeks ago, we had a labour 

forum at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] at the College 

of Law, actually at the business college there. Myself and the 

minister were there and we had a very good, frank, full 

discussion about Bill 85. One of the points that was made, one 

of the points that was made was implementation. When you do 

this kind of bill, when you do this kind of omnibus bill, you just 

can’t let it go out there with no support. That’s crazy. And 

we’re looking at, you know, the way it’s written now with so 

much ambiguity and we’re not seeing the regulations. It’s going 

to be a real piecemeal implementation. So we have some real, 

real concerns about how that’s going to play out. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And so when I look at Labour Relations and Workplace Safety, 

I have a lot of questions, a lot of questions. And this is going to 

affect a lot of people over the next while. And how are they 

planning to put in place Bill 85 because, as I said and these 

folks like to say it, past behaviour indicates future behaviour? 

And the Minister of Labour was out by $700,000, if not more, 

last year and he’s not said anything about the implementation of 

this bill so I can only gather we’re headed for a deficit when it 

comes to labour relations. And I anxiously await to see what 

happens with that. And so if they were to do the right thing, 

postpone the passing of that bill, make sure it’s done well and 

we’d be all on board more or less, then it would be a better 

situation. 

 

But as I said, it just reminds me of the essential services train 

wreck that we had, that we continue to have six years later 

because they didn’t think that out and they said that would just 

go through, no problem. And here we have Bill 85. It’s destined 

to repeat. So I’m really concerned about that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just also want to say that I do have some 

concerns that the Minister of Finance has raised this issue 

around pooled retirement plans. And we have some interest in 

that. We’ll have more discussion. 

 

I do want to raise my concern though that we couldn’t have 

done more and the Minister of Finance couldn’t have done 

more when he had an opportunity at the national federal 

meetings to advocate for those workers who cannot, for 

whatever reason, establish a good savings practice and they just 

don’t have a future when it comes to retirement. And that’s 

something that we really, really have to talk about. 

 

So I think that in many ways that’s a big picture and we know 

in Saskatchewan only about 25 per cent of us actually have 

RSVPs and that many of us don’t have government or work 

pension plans. And so this is going to be a big problem for 

many, many people. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about housing. And I know that we’re 

anxiously, and I am anxiously awaiting to see the results of all 

the numbers this government continues to roll out. And they’re 

pretty bold and, you know, last year, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 

if you remember the announcement when they were going to 

build 10,000 apartments. We’ve not heard anything about the 

10,000 apartments. 

 

They had this tax credit announcement and we raised concerns 

because first we asked, where did you get the number 10,000 

from? Well they seemed to come out of thin air, 10,000. And in 

fact these were not rental apartments. They were actually, could 

be quite legitimately condos that they were establishing. And so 

we have a problem with that. 

 

But we have a real problem on a couple of fronts. One is that 

they’re selling these 300 affordable homes in Regina and 

Moose Jaw and they’re selling 336 acres of land just outside of 

Regina here. And I know that actually the closing date is March 

31st for the expression of interest on it. And we heard the 

minister talk about a number, 53 million, last week and when I 

looked in the budget, there’s nothing about 53 million. 

 

And it reminds me of a couple of years ago when the minister 

just, within 48 hours of the budget being announced, she had a 

new plan, the five-point plan, that wasn’t reflected in the 

budget. And here we have 53 million and I don’t know whether 

it’s in the budget or not and we don’t know whether these 300 

families, whether there’s 300 empty places that they can go to. 

 

Last Thursday when they made this announcement with 

Deveraux, it sounds very interesting, but they were willing to 

buy these properties. I think they were for $206,000 each. The 

government’s doing sort of a switch, but they’re selling these 

houses for 199, 198,000. So essentially the loss to the 



March 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2891 

 

government is about $8,000 per unit on these 48. Now if this is 

the pattern — and again going back to their past practice 

indicates future practice — here you have a government that’s 

willing to sell their houses for less, and buy high, sell low type 

of mentality. 

 

Somehow the minister came up with a number of saving $2 

million. We come up with a number that it’s costing them $2 

million because if you do 300 times 8,000, that’s actually 2.4 

million. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re not sure of the minister’s math 

on this. And the way she portrayed it as a savings when it was 

actually a cost, that’s a real problem. So I have a real problem 

with that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to take a minute to talk a little bit 

about shelters. And we know, we know for sure, and it is a 

good thing what they’ve done in Melfort. That’s a worthy, 

worthy thing. And we appreciate and the folks in Melfort and 

that area will really be thankful for that. 

 

But we’re hearing stories both in Estevan, North Battleford, and 

in P.A. around shelters. And the thing that’s been happening in 

P.A. has just been tragic where we’ve had four people die this 

winter, frozen to death, and it’s been really tragic. And we think 

this is something the government needs to pay attention to. It’s 

a complex issue. It’s about housing first, how it’s important to 

have people in shelter every night, particularly when you have 

winters like we have. 

 

North Battleford’s talking about it, when they have people, 

workers coming through on the Yellowhead and having to stop 

in North Battleford and no place to stay, no place to stay. 

 

We’re hearing the same story in Estevan, you know. And 

Estevan is quite a unique circumstance because here we have an 

economy that’s firing so strong, but yet housing is a crisis. And 

the vacancy rate, you know, these folks will say vacancy rates 

are going up across the province. Several places it’s not going 

up, and one of them is Estevan where in fact it dropped from 1 

per cent to point six per cent in the fall. So they have some real 

challenges. And I know down there they’ve established a 

shelter — it’s called Warm Welcome, I think is what it is — 

just to meet the needs. And ironically it meets the needs of 

many folks right from those who are dealing with severe mental 

health issues, poverty and that, but also people who have a job 

but just can’t find a place to stay. They need a place to stay so 

they can go to work the next day. 

 

So we have to do more about that, Mr. Speaker. So we want to 

get that on the record, that we would expect more. And we 

would like to see the government step up around the shelters — 

that has to be addressed — and housing first, right across the 

province, right across the province because we think that’s 

very, very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government also would like to . . . This is a 

big deal for people in my riding, and I would often think about 

the stories where I would hear families actually arguing about 

how are they going to make ends meet because of the cost of 

child care. So you may have a space, but the subsidies aren’t 

working. They’re not working, Mr. Speaker, and we need to do 

more to make sure they actually do work. Something’s not 

working here. And you have so many spaces that this 

government has put there — needs to be more — but ironically 

in the budget we see that the actual total amount for subsidies 

has actually gone down. And we can’t understand why that 

would be because we think, from what I’m hearing from our 

constituents, daycare is pretty, pretty expensive. So we have 

some real concerns about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know, and the one issue I do want to say . . . And I 

know the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow talked about 

every promise made in the last 2007 campaign. And I do want 

to bring this one up because I think it’s so hugely important that 

they said and they made a promise that they would reinstate the 

all-party committee about child exploitation through the sex 

trade. They have not done that. That was a major promise in 

2007, and they have promptly forgotten about that. And we see 

too many examples of the fact that this continues to be a 

problem. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, ironically back when it was first done in the 

late 1990s, two issues were not a big deal — and you’ve 

probably heard me talk about this — but two issues were not a 

big deal, and was not part of that report. It was the Internet and 

gangs. And that’s a reality of too many of our communities, and 

we have to do something about that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to sum up, as I said I have too many concerns 

in my areas of critic responsibilities that we need to see more 

done around education. We think the government’s dropping 

the ball big time on education. They’re going down the wrong 

path dealing with standardized testing when we should be 

dealing with overcrowded classrooms. That’s really important, 

especially English as a second language. That kind of support 

has to be there. We have to do more to provide for our schools 

so parents have confidence that their children are learning. 

 

Housing, we’re seeing a shell game here. We’re waiting to see 

what actually happens. This government is very good at 

churning out press releases and new numbers and the amount 

it’s spending, but we’re just seeing too many gaps in the 

housing in our communities — high rents, high rents, or no 

place available. And that’s a problem both for workers, seniors, 

youth, those who are very vulnerable, who need a place to stay. 

 

So we have some problems. And I said too about the labour 

relations, the fact that this minister miscalculated last year on 

his budget by over $700,000. And we seem to be going down 

that path yet again, yet again, and so I have some real concerns 

about that. 

 

So I would agree with my colleagues over here, the critic for 

Finance, when he talks about this being a credit card budget. 

We see debt increasing by $850 million. And we see a 

dangerous plan of P3s that we don’t know what that really 

means. And the minister responsible seems to be caught in an 

ideological loop on this, not giving straight answers. So we 

have some real concerns. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be supporting the amendment but not the 

budget. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 



2892 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2013 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

with great pleasure that I rise in the Assembly today and have 

an opportunity to address our Saskatchewan Party government, 

our budget, our sixth consecutive balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker, and what we believe to be probably one of the only 

balanced budgets within Canada. And we’re pretty happy that 

we’re able to deliver this for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I too have some concerns, but most of them were 

raised by those members over there about how they look at the 

books that were handed in and also how they can talk about 

how they can’t support a budget that builds the first transition 

house for women’s violence in Saskatchewan since 1985, adds 

more seats to transition houses in Regina and Saskatoon to help 

women fleeing domestic abuse, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s 

something where that member said he supported that. And I 

believe that if he really wanted to stand up for the people of 

Saskatoon Centre, he’d be able to support a budget that 

increases support to women within Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of comments made by the members 

opposite that I’m going to get through maybe later on in the 

evening. But first of all, I do have to thank the people of Regina 

Walsh Acres for allowing me to stand in this position today. I 

have some great support out there, Mr. Speaker. And I have a 

great, great support network that starts and finishes with my 

wonderful wife, my wonderful wife of almost four years now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the biggest reasons why I’m going to be supporting 

this budget is because it’s set a solid foundation for our 

province moving forward. And a solid foundation’s very 

important to us because myself and my wife are having our first 

child in May, Mr. Speaker. And we want our children to live in 

Saskatchewan, raise their families in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is a budget that’s going to set that . . . as the 

members opposite say, kick the stone down the path for our 

future generations to be able to live here and not flee the 

province in the hordes that they did in the early ’90s and early 

2000s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, they talk about the working people of 

Saskatchewan, and I’ve had questions from the member from 

Regina Elphinstone about how I can’t support the working 

people of Saskatchewan. And I find it very funny, Mr. Speaker, 

like we support the working people of Saskatchewan more than 

they ever did because more people in this province are working 

than ever before. Mr. Speaker, you support working people by 

allowing them to make more money, keep more of that money 

in their pockets by having lower taxes, Mr. Speaker, and not by 

making more people leave the province so we have to tax the 

people that are here more. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite confused how they can come across 

at us and ask us questions of how we don’t support working 

people. Obviously I don’t believe, like they always say, when 

there’s less people, there’s more for the people that stay. Mr. 

Speaker, I think that’s a fundamental flaw in the idea of a party 

that doesn’t really believe in economic growth, economic 

prosperity, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. this evening. 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2863 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2863 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2863 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2864 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2864 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2864 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2864 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2864 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2864 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2865 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 New Transition House in Melfort 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2865 

 Breaking the Silence Conference 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2865 

 Supporting Habitat for Humanity 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2865 

 Northern Trappers Convention 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2866 

 Students Fundraise for Hunger in Moose Jaw 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2866 

 Recognizing and Thanking Highway Workers 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2866 

 Position on Uranium Development  

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2867 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Health Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2867 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2867 

 Public-Private Partnerships 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2868 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2869 

 IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2870 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2870 

 Potential Spring Flooding 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2871 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2871 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2872 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2872 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2872 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2872 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 88 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act, 2013 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2872 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 88 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act, 2013 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2872 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2873 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 88 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act, 2013 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2873 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2873 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 88 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act, 2013 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2874 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2874 



 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2874 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2879 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2881 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2884 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2886 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2892 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


