




















































Hansard: May 14, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 63A  TUESDAY, MAY 14, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3557 

 May 14, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members, I’d like to take the 

opportunity to welcome four guests that are seated in the 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker. Seated on the floor behind the bar today 

with us is Brian Duck, the Chair of the Saskatchewan division 

board of directors of the MS [Multiple Sclerosis] Society of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, as well seated behind the bar is 

Melissa Northe, Chair of the Regina chapter. And seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Eugene Paquin, the government 

relations Chair of the Saskatchewan division board of directors, 

as well as Paula Moon-Wozney, the director of government 

relations and research support for the MS Society of Canada, 

Saskatchewan division. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals do a tremendous job in 

advocating for people in our province that have been diagnosed 

with multiple sclerosis, Mr. Speaker, in advocating for 

increased treatment options, awareness, as well as research, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know that members will have an opportunity to 

join with them later this evening for an MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] reception. And I’d ask all members to 

join with me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Minister of Health in welcoming the representatives from 

the MS Society. We know the good work that they have done 

over many years, and we look forward to working with them in 

some of the new programs that have been announced. And 

we’re all looking forward to the day where we have a better 

understanding of MS so that we can actually deal with some of 

the very, very specific problems. But we appreciate the good 

work that you do, and we’re very happy to have you as partners 

in our work in this area in Saskatchewan. So thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

introduce a professor from the department of chemistry at the 

University of Saskatchewan, sitting in the Speaker’s gallery 

today. Mr. Ronald Steer is here with his wife, Sheilagh. Earlier 

this year, he was awarded the Canadian Society for Chemistry’s 

John C. Polanyi Award. 

 

I had the opportunity to meet with him earlier today, and he has 

a long career with the University of Saskatchewan. He has been 

a professor at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] for over 

40 years, which is almost as long as, say, the MLA from 

Cannington has held his seat. He’s had a long and distinguished 

career, Mr. Speaker, and it doesn’t look like he’s going to be 

slowing down any time soon. One of my colleagues is going to 

have a little bit more to say in a member’s statement, so I would 

like to ask all members to welcome Mr. Steer and his wife to 

the Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also, while I’m on my feet, would like to 

welcome Eugene Paquin to the Assembly. He’s one of my 

constituents. I’ve met with him on a number of occasions to 

discuss issues relating to MS. 

 

And in any event, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask members to 

welcome Mr. Steer, his wife, and Mr. Paquin to the Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 

like to join with the minister in welcoming Mr. Ronald Steer 

and his wife, Sheilagh, to their Legislative Assembly, and to 

thank him for the great 40 years of teaching at the University of 

Saskatchewan which has, as the minister has recognized, been a 

long and distinguished career. Here’s to 40 years more. 

 

And again, congratulations on the John C. Polanyi, a very 

prestigious award for research in chemistry. And certainly the 

work that Mr. Steer has done around solar energy here in sunny 

Saskatchewan is work that we all look to with great hope and 

encouragement. 

 

So I’d like to join with the minister in welcoming Mr. Ronald 

Steer and his wife, Sheilagh, to their Legislative Assembly. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

just take a moment to welcome Ron and Sheilagh to their 

Legislative Assembly and share with you and the members that 

not only is Ron a fantastic chemist; he’s also a wonderful singer 

and we had a couple of years together with the Saskatoon 

Chamber Singers. And Sheilagh is a wonderful soprano as well. 

But Ron and I had to keep the tenors in line there the one year 

we were together. So I too would like to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce someone seated in your gallery, someone very special 

in my life, my sister Edna who’s the very attractive redhead up 

there. And I would like all members to welcome her to her 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a group of school kids from the Pasquia Hills 



3558 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2013 

Christian School. Give us a wave up there, please. 

 

Now Pasquia Hills Christian School is an area that is east of 

Carrot River. It is run by the Holdeman Mennonites up there, 

and a very good school. There’s 15 children, grade 6, 7, 8, and 

9, and they’re accompanied by their teacher, Danika Negli, and 

chaperones Cornelius and Kathy Driedger and Danny and 

Lenore Reimer. So I would like all members of this Assembly 

to welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members, I’d like to introduce 45 grade 10, 11, and 

12 students seated in the west gallery. If they would give us a 

quick little wave. Mr. Speaker, they’re from the Holy Cross 

High School, and they’re with the English as an additional 

language program. And I had a chance to briefly meet with 

them earlier today, and we’re going to be breaking and having a 

little meeting to answer any questions they might have. 

 

With them is their teacher, Mrs. Wolfe, and their educational 

assistants, Mrs. Bzdel, Mrs. Kohle, and Mrs. Hounjet. To you, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to please welcome this group 

to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s my pleasure to introduce to the 

legislature, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Kim Lowe. Kim is a 

principal with the Provincial Auditor’s office. She acts as a 

liaison with the Clerk’s office for the Public Accounts 

Committee. She is joined today by David Amediku. David is 

from the Ghana National Audit Office and is participating in a 

fellowship program with the Canadian Comprehensive Auditing 

Foundation. He is in Canada learning about Canadian audit 

methodologies and is currently visiting the Provincial Auditor’s 

office to learn about performance auditing in Saskatchewan and 

the role of the Public Accounts Committee. I would ask all 

members to welcome them to the legislature today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased and honoured to present a petition in relation to 

cellphone coverage for northwestern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nations along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

these areas. 

 

And as I mention on a continual basis, Mr. Speaker, the people 

that have signed this petition are from all throughout 

Saskatchewan, and the Regina and Saskatoon area are the ones 

that have signed this petition today in support of northern 

Saskatchewan’s request for cellphone coverage. And I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling for better care of our seniors here in 

the province: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 

quality of seniors’ care in our province, including creating 

more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 

standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 

for home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in 

senior care facilities; and providing more support to help 

seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 

as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise to 

present a petition to the Legislative Assembly. Northern 

Saskatchewan is being targeted by the Nuclear Waste 

Management Organization to become a storage site for millions 

of used irradiated nuclear fuel bundles. These radioactive 

nuclear bundles would be shipped on provincial highways. 

Some provinces have already banned the storage or transport of 

used nuclear bundles. I’d like to present the petition which 

reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly pass legislation to 

permanently ban nuclear waste storage and transportation 

of nuclear waste into, out of, and through Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

First Nations University 35th Annual Pow Wow 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend, 

myself, the member of the Legislative Assembly for Rosemont, 

and thousands of others had the opportunity to attend the First 

Nations University of Canada 35th Annual Pow Wow right here 

in Regina on Treaty 4 territory. I want to thank powwow 

committee chairman, Richard Missens, committee Elder 

Florence Isaac, and all of the committee members who 

marshalled an army of staff and volunteers to put on an amazing 

powwow. 

 

The First Nations University Pow Wow generally signals the 

start of the powwow season here in Saskatchewan, and this 



May 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3559 

year’s event did so in fine style. Powwows are tremendous 

displays of culture and spirituality, and this year’s theme of 35 

years of song, dance, and prayer was well chosen. 

 

Powwows aren’t just a time of celebration, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re a time of commemoration as well, and it was humbling 

to be there for the special to honour the memories of the late 

Isadore Pelletier and the late Velma Goodfeather. These two 

elders devoted their lives to serving the people and to ensuring 

that cultural and spiritual wisdom survived, it was passed along, 

and brought to bear in a good and helping way. As elders for 

the First Nations University of Canada, Isadore Pelletier and 

Velma Goodfeather made a special contribution to the students, 

staff, and community at the university, and their legacy will live 

on for many years to come. And I know that Isadore and Velma 

would have been thrilled to see the many, many children and 

youth that were proudly participating at this year’s powwow. 

 

Thanks to everyone that made the First Nations University of 

Canada 35th Annual Pow Wow a great success. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in First Nations languages.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Multiple 

Sclerosis Society of Canada marks the month of May as MS 

Awareness Month. 

 

MS is a lifelong chronic illness that can occur at any age, but 

usually between the ages of 15 and 40. The MS Society’s 

mission is to be a leader in finding a cure and to enable people 

affected by MS to enhance their quality of life. They’re 

committed to providing services to those impacted by multiple 

sclerosis and work to ensure people with MS and their families 

have the opportunity to participate fully in all aspects of life. 

 

This year once again, people from Saskatchewan are raising 

funds for the MS during the Saskatchewan Blue Cross MS 

walks and MS bike events. These fundraising events are the 

major funders of the MS Society’s client programs and services 

and MS research programs. 

 

Since its inception, the MS Society has raised over $140 million 

for MS research in Canada. The society funds promising areas 

of research and supports the advancement of some of the 

world’s leading MS researchers. During May, the MS Society 

organizes a carnation campaign. They have provided carnations 

for us to wear today to honour all of those living with MS in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Live Theatre in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, last week I attended the play 

Kafka’s Monkey at the Artesian on 13th. Starring Jodie 

Sadowsky and stage managed by Melanie Rogowski, the 

Canadian premiere is an excellent example of the strength and 

diversity of Saskatchewan’s live theatre community. Golden 

Apple Theatre is just one local production company that is 

bringing a wide range of plays and theatre to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this week the Persephone Theatre in Saskatoon is 

presenting the challenging play, The Laramie Project, and next 

week the Broadway musical, The Drowsy Chaperone, will be at 

the Globe Theatre in Regina. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Theatre is an incredible opportunity to challenge our views of 

the world through sharing stories and experiences. It’s an 

opportunity to step outside of our everyday lives and tackle 

large ideas or perhaps just enjoy a good laugh. We are very 

lucky to have such an incredible amateur and professional 

theatre scene across the province. 

 

Our commitment to local theatre extends to ensuring that youth 

are able to attend and learn about theatre in school. Many young 

people in Saskatchewan have their first opportunity to 

experience live theatre through school programs. Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask that members of the House join with me in thanking 

the staff and the volunteers of the theatre companies throughout 

Saskatchewan. We all benefit from their contribution to the arts 

in our province, and we’re all richer for it. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Saskatoon Academic Recognized for Solar 

Energy Research 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to recognize the outstanding work of Dr. Ronald Steer 

who was introduced earlier today by the Minister of Advanced 

Education. Dr. Ronald Steer has been awarded the prestigious 

Canadian Society for Chemistry’s John C. Polanyi Award. Mr. 

Speaker, this award is presented annually to recognize 

excellence by a scientist carrying out research in physical, 

theoretical or computational chemistry or chemical physics. 

 

Dr. Steer is widely recognized as an outstanding researcher in 

photochemistry, photophysics, and molecular fluorescence 

spectroscopy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, his research on the behaviour of organic 

molecules that absorb light is leading to new insights in the 

field of solar energy. The work of Dr. Steer and his team 

consists of turning organic solar cells that are comparatively 

inefficient into more efficient and long-lasting sources of 

electrical energy. In Dr. Steer’s words, these ideas are based on 

his 30-plus years of research in fundamental chemistry and 

physics that tells us there are a number of ways we can improve 

on current organic cells. 

 

This award signifies the high calibre of research being done at 

the University of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, I would like 

to congratulate Dr. Steer for the work he is doing and thank him 

for his contribution to the field of solar energy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 



3560 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2013 

Close Cuts for Cancer Event 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday 

night I had the privilege to take part in a remote Brayden 

Ottenbreit Close Cuts for Cancer event at the SaskTel Sports 

Centre in Saskatoon. 

 

Although the main head-shaving event doesn’t occur until the 

25th of this month in Yorkton, an individual from Saskatoon 

wanted to do something in his own city. Dean Terichow, an 

employee of the Saskatoon Provincial Correctional Centre, had 

grown his hair quite long and mentioned to his colleague, my 

cousin Kelly Harris — his colleague and my cousin Kelly 

Harris — that he would like to shave it, donate it for cancer 

wigs, and maybe raise some funds. She suggested he contact 

my wife, Leone, to see if we could do with some help. 

 

When Dean’s co-workers heard what he was up to, some got on 

board and some gave in to challenges. And in the end, seven 

colleagues and six family members shaved their heads and a 

beard, raising almost $7,500 for cancer research and donating a 

lot of hair for wigs. 

 

Dean and the group didn’t stop there. They also organized a 

steak night at the Pleasure Way Pub in conjunction with the 

event and raised over $3,100 for Ronald McDonald House in 

Saskatoon. 

 

The Saskatoon Provincial Correctional Centre staff who 

participated in the event were Dean Terichow, his son Tyler, 

Dean’s wife’s cousin Kurt Hoffman and Kurt’s son Hunter, 

Collette Gifford and her daughter Kennedy, Kale Eskelson and 

his brother Corbin, Joey Beaudry and his daughter Ryse, and 

Alicia Durkee, Jeff Mansfield, and Terry MacDonald. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to help me recognize the 

Saskatoon provincial correctional workers for what they do 

every day, but also thank them and their family members for 

making life a little more pleasant for those staying at Ronald 

McDonald House, and helping to make cancer history. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

2013 Distinguished Realtor Award 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise in this Assembly today to recognize Phillip Mack of 

Remax Crown Real Estate Regina as the recipient of the 2013 

Distinguished Realtor Award presented by the Association of 

Saskatchewan Realtors. 

 

The purpose of the Distinguished Realtor Award is to recognize 

an active member of the association who has demonstrated 

outstanding leadership and dedication to the real estate industry 

through involvement in provincial association, local boards, and 

the community. 

 

First licensed in 1992, Phillip has set a strong example as a 

volunteer and a leader in the local, provincial, and national 

levels of organized real estate. Phillip has served on numerous 

committees at all three levels of real estate as either a 

chairperson or a member at large. 

 

Phillip’s outstanding record as a leader is matched by his 

exceptional community service as a volunteer. He was a 

founding member of the new chapter of the Optimist Club, 

served as a Kinsmen Telemiracle sub-chair committee, worked 

on committees of Regina Economic Development Authority, 

was a founding member and a president of Regina’s Old 

Warehouse Association, was a member of the mayor’s task 

force on the future of Regina, and currently serves on the 

Regina Arts Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to 

congratulate Phillip on this very prestigious award. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Youth Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Saturday May 4th, I was honoured to attend the 12th annual 

Youth Business Excellence Awards in Tisdale. The YBEX 

[Youth Business Excellence Awards] Awards are hosted by 

Newsask Community Futures in order to recognize the 

accomplishments of young people throughout northeastern 

Saskatchewan and encourage entrepreneurship as a career 

option. Mr. Speaker, this year there were 19 submissions which 

involved 33 youth. Since the YBEX Awards began, over 500 

young people aged 30 and under within the northeast region 

have been involved in this worthwhile program. 

 

The categories were as follows: Business Plan, Operating 

Business Venture, Business Venture 2, Special Achievement, 

Agricultural Business Award, Infosource Award, and the Mike 

Butler Memorial Award. And although there are just too many 

award recipients to mention, I would say, Mr. Speaker, that I 

think Carrot River Valley constituency holds some of most 

innovative youth in Saskatchewan. 

 

It was a great evening, and I was marvelled by the extent of the 

talent we have coming from this corner of the province. I would 

like all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 

the 2013 YBEX Award recipients. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for Long-Term Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I 

attended the CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] 

health care workers’ conference in Prince Albert, and I heard 

repeatedly from front-line workers that the quality of care that 

they want to deliver to residents that they are caring for, to 

seniors, is often compromised because of chronic understaffing. 

When I told the front-line workers that the Sask Party’s big 

solution for solving the problem was to have CEO [chief 

executive officer] tours of facilities, they laughed because they 

couldn’t believe it. 

 



May 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3561 

But that laughter turned to outrage, Mr. Speaker, because these 

workers on the front lines working with seniors don’t want to 

take time away from caring for seniors in order to tour a CEO 

around the building. What they want are real solutions to 

improve the standard and quality of care for seniors here in the 

province. And they can’t understand that, when the economy is 

doing well, why the Sask Party government is struggling to 

provide top quality care to seniors here in Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: when will the Sask Party 

government listen to front-line workers and understand the 

adverse effects that are occurring to seniors here in the province 

because of chronic understaffing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, over the term of this government, both the previous 

term as well as this second term of this government, Mr. 

Speaker, we have provided significant investments into our 

health regions. Over $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, in six years is the 

increase to regional health authorities to make the decisions 

about how to fund long-term care facilities, acute care facilities, 

and other services that they provide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also seen a corresponding increase in health 

providers, in workers, front-line staff, whether that be RNs 

[registered nurse], LPNs [licensed practical nurse], or other 

providers, Mr. Speaker, that are represented by the provider 

unions to deal with the patients and residents, Mr. Speaker, in 

all of those facilities. But, Mr. Speaker, I think that what we’re 

going to see coming up, Mr. Speaker, with the CEOs and the 

senior management who make the decisions on where to put 

those, direct those dollars, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to 

seeing those recommendations over the coming months. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if we listen to the families with 

loved ones in care facilities, if we listen to the front-line 

workers, we learn and we see, Mr. Speaker, that the picture is 

not the rosy one that the minister tries to give in his answer. 

 

What front-line workers in senior care facilities find ironic is 

that the Sask Party government has mandated what they call 

safe staffing levels during a strike, but outside of a strike the 

government won’t even consider a safe staffing mandate, which 

is especially ironic for front-line workers. So they tell me it is 

not uncommon to have less staff working in their unit than the 

government has deemed essential during a strike period. That is 

not a common sense approach. And it’s not the standard of care 

that seniors expect, that families expect when we think of the 

dignity that our grandparents deserve in their golden years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the Deputy Premier: why does he think that it makes sense 

to mandate safe staffing levels in care facilities during a strike 

but allow the number of staff to fall below those levels outside 

of a strike? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, regional 

health authorities and those that administer long-term care 

facilities, both run through the public system, Mr. Speaker, as 

well as our affiliates, are constantly looking at the staffing 

levels as it relates to the level of need for the residents in those 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker. They and this 

government take that issue very seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I find it ironic though, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the 

Opposition who has, over the last number of days has presented 

a petition calling for increased care for seniors in our province, 

Mr. Speaker, has not identified in that petition or in his 

questions what the minimum staffing levels should be in 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker. I think maybe because he 

recognizes that each long-term care facility is unique and, Mr. 

Speaker, the residents of those long-term care facilities, in terms 

of their level of need, are unique, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the recommendations and the 

findings from those who set the budgets, Mr. Speaker, in the 

health authorities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, zero answer from that minister. 

And how could it be acceptable that there are more people 

working doing essential services during a strike period than 

during the day-to-day operations when our seniors need the 

dignity and the care on an ongoing basis? 

 

The issue we’ve heard from too many people, Mr. Speaker, 

about the care for seniors simply is not there that we expect for 

our loved ones. And, Mr. Speaker, the family members we’ve 

spoken to, the front-line workers have brought it back to the 

issue of understaffing. Because frankly, Mr. Speaker, our 

grandparents and our moms and dads deserve better when it 

comes to their care. I think it makes good sense, especially 

when our economy is doing well, to establish clear criteria 

about safe staffing levels. This is something that the Sask Party 

government, who supposedly likes targets, is running from as 

fast as they can. 

 

We can look in child care where targets and levels are in place 

in order to ensure the care of our children. We see, Mr. Speaker, 

one worker is there for every three infants, one worker for every 

five toddlers, one worker for every 10 preschool children, one 

worker for every 15 school age children. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: why does it make sense to 

have safe staffing levels when we’re talking about care for our 

children, but it does not make sense to have safe staffing levels 

when we’re talking about care for our seniors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in my previous 

answers, I’m looking forward to the report out from the CEOs 

and the senior management as they spend some time, Mr. 

Speaker, in long-term care facilities which they operate and/or 

fund through the affiliates, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not at this point going to rule out any options 

that they may bring forward in terms of staffing levels, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ll let that work run its course, Mr. Speaker. But 



3562 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2013 

again, the Leader of the Opposition hasn’t indicated, either 

through his petitions or today in the House, what that standard 

would be across the province, Mr. Speaker, because we know 

that whether we’re dealing with level 3 patients or level 4, Mr. 

Speaker, that each individual resident had specific needs.  

 

And I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, to this point, it would be 

appropriate to treat every single facility across the board the 

same because we know, Mr. Speaker, some facilities were built 

in the 1950s, Mr. Speaker. And thankfully under this 

government there’s 13 facilities being built, Mr. Speaker, to 

replace the long-neglected infrastructure deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

We know that more of that work needs to be done, Mr. Speaker, 

but we’re making a start of that, whereas the members opposite 

left that to us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s suggestion that you 

can’t have safe staffing levels because the level of care for 

seniors differs makes absolutely no sense. We look in the child 

care setting, Mr. Speaker: there’s different ratios, there’s 

different levels required for children because obviously the 

needs for a baby are different than the needs for a school-aged 

child. 

 

Saskatchewan people can’t understand, Mr. Speaker, why you 

cannot have safe staffing levels for level 3 care in the province, 

why you can’t have safe staffing levels for level 4 care here in 

the province. When we hear stories of call buttons being 

unanswered, when we hear stories of seniors being left 

unattended on toilets, when we hear stories of seniors missing 

their baths, when we hear stories of seniors falling through the 

cracks and family members having to pick up the slack, we 

know that there is a problem. And the minister’s answers — 

so-called answers, Mr. Speaker — are providing no recognition 

that there is a problem and that there is a cause for alarm when 

it comes to seniors’ care here in the province. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: why is the Sask Party 

government stubbornly refusing to fix what is the actual 

problem with seniors’ care here in Saskatchewan? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, Mr. 

Speaker, I need to correct the premise of the Leader of the 

Opposition’s question that this government is not concerned 

about some of the cases that we’re hearing that have been raised 

in this legislature and in the media or, Mr. Speaker, to my 

office. Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned, and I’m concerned, about 

each and every case that comes into this office or into this 

building, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’ve followed up on those 

cases either personally, Mr. Speaker, through myself or my 

office or through the ministry or, Mr. Speaker, with the health 

region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just say this, Mr. Speaker: that when we 

have individuals that have either been assessed, perhaps a level 

3 or a level 4 which we typically think of, Mr. Speaker, that 

doesn’t mean that every level 3 or level 4 person is the exact 

same across the province, Mr. Speaker. They may have 

individual health needs based on the assessments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition, 

when they were in government in the mid-1990s and put into 

place some of the assessment tools that we use today, they 

didn’t put in place a standard level of care, Mr. Speaker, a 

standard staffing level, Mr. Speaker. That’s some of the work 

that we’ll be looking at over the next number of months. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Contracts with Government 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This session we’ve 

asked the government about untendered contracts, especially as 

it relates to the IPAC [International Performance Assessment 

Centre for geologic storage of CO2] affair and the players 

involved in that scheme. 

 

When I asked about untendered contracts within Central 

Services, the minister produced three. They’re all with ClimbIT, 

Mr. Speaker, and one is signed by Henry Jaffe. The contracts 

are for setting up a SharePoint website for HR [human 

resources] forms and services. ClimbIT was first a 

subcontractor and was paid $71,000 for this one project. But the 

minister revealed there were several more contracts, each 

costing additional taxpayer dollars, for the same project, Mr. 

Speaker. Furthermore the minister admitted in committee that 

the website, after two years, still isn’t done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why would the Sask Party government sign new 

untendered contracts with ClimbIT even though the original 

work wasn’t complete? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member opposite for the question. As I’ve stated before in 

this House, there was a mistake that was made within the 

ministry in the signing of contracts. It was a subcontract 

through our agency of record to begin with, and the folks in the 

ministry thought that they could continue on with that contract 

for the continuation of the work. 

 

The contracts went year over year, Mr. Speaker, because the 

work was continuing. So if the member’s question is why new 

contracts, it was for the continuation of the work already in 

place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In March 2012, a 

month-long contract worth $47,000 required ClimbIT to 

convert the government’s HR website to a SharePoint site, 

migrate the content, and train the staff. But on April 2nd of last 

year, the government signed up ClimbIT for another untendered 

contract, this time for three months of work worth $37,000 to 

test the system and work with the government to launch it and 

provide post-launch support. 

 



May 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3563 

Mr. Speaker, a third contract worth up to $30,000 ended this 

spring. It was supposed to be for more testing, launch, and 

post-launch support of the new site. But in estimates the 

minister said, “There is still some work to be done before it’s 

fully operational.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, three untendered contracts and thousands of 

taxpayer dollars later, the website still isn’t working, even 

though ClimbIT was paid to provide post-launch transition 

support. Why would the Sask Party government pay ClimbIT 

over $150,000 for a project that remains incomplete? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I had 

stated in committee, the work that was done by ClimbIT was 

asked for by the Public Service Commission for the SharePoint 

services. And there’s no question, from my understanding from 

the folks in Public Service Commission, that it was not 

delivered on, that what we asked them to do they actually did. 

And if the member would go back to Hansard from committee, 

we said very specifically that the remaining things that need to 

be done with the SharePoint service will be completed by ITO 

[Information Technology Office]. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Perhaps it would help if the minister read the 

last two contracts herself and looked at the deliverables. The 

concern of the IPAC affair is that the Sask Party government 

has not properly overseen public dollars going to untendered IT 

[information technology] contracts. And up until the end of 

March of this year, Central Services still had an untendered 

contract in place with ClimbIT, a company central to the IPAC 

affair. 

 

The record shows the government kept paying for more tech 

contracts, even though the government’s own tendering 

processes and requirements of the contracts weren’t being met. 

It would appear there was little oversight by the minster or her 

officials on a project that cost taxpayers more than $150,000, 

even though very little was delivered. The minister’s own 

officials admitted that the ministry staff will now have to take 

over where ClimbIT left off. So taxpayers will be shelling out 

even more money. 

 

To the minister: how is it acceptable that taxpayers are on the 

hook, not once but twice, for a project that still is not complete? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll let the 

members opposite know the system that’s in place. ITO set up a 

master resource arrangement list in 2009. IT companies were 

invited to bid to have their names placed on that list. There is 50 

vendors that have been qualified to be on that list within ITO. 

And when there is a tech project to be done, there’s a call-out to 

those 50 vendors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ClimbIT is one of those who won the right to be on our master 

list. I know that the members opposite are trying to disparage 

that company, which I think is unfortunate in this context, and I 

would encourage the member to go outside and be quite as 

disparaging to this company as she is in the confines of this 

place. 

 

As I said in my answer earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, there 

were procedures that were not met. The transparency and rules 

that were in place in the ministry were not met. We have 

addressed those. The deputy minister has made that very clear 

to all of the deputy ministers within government that the rules 

need to be followed, Mr. Speaker, and we are expecting that to 

be done in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Flood Claims 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the spring melt and 

resulting flooding has impacted many communities. Many have 

declared a state of emergency and many others have asked for 

help, over 50 to date. Thank goodness the flooding hasn’t been 

as bad as it could have been. And the response from 

communities has been outstanding, with neighbours helping 

neighbours, pitching in to fill and throw sandbags, to run 

pumps, and to get people to safety. Despite this, as the flooding 

recedes, many families have taken on real damage. 

 

Two years ago, thousands of people were devastated by 

flooding and looked to government for assistance through 

PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program]. Too many of 

those people are still waiting. Now as new claims arise from 

this year’s flooding damage, families deserve that government’s 

full commitment. Can the minister assure the families impacted 

this year that they’ll be dealt with in a timely manner, and not 

slow-walked and delayed as we’ve seen with the 2011 claims? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, that just simply isn’t the 

case, and him referring to it as slow-walk and delaying claims 

does a disservice to the ministry officials and PDAP who’ve 

worked very hard, Mr. Speaker. In the 2010 claims, 98 per cent 

of them are already complete and from 2011, 85 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know, we’ve been fortunate this year that the potential for 

flooding, it hasn’t materialized, and it hasn’t been as bad as had 

been anticipated. But, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

families who have had damage to their homes, to their 

businesses. Our heart goes out to them. Our rapid response 

people have done a very, very good job of responding, of 

assisting with sandbagging equipment and pumps and HESCO 

[Hercules Engineering Solution Consortium] barriers to keep 

the damage to a minimum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member’s point without his sarcasm is, will 

PDAP respond promptly? Yes, we will, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when families are 

impacted by flooding, they deserve a steadfast commitment 

from their government, not prolonged delays. And I think if the 



3564 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2013 

minister simply reviewed his file, he’d recognize that far too 

many claims remain outstanding. In fact in committee his 

ministry shared that 1,783 claims are outstanding and not yet 

resolved over the past three years — 1,783 claims. That was 

before this year’s flooding damage. 

 

Just as those families impacted this year deserve a timely 

support, support for those families that have been devastated 

two or three years ago simply can’t be delayed any further. Mr. 

Speaker, when will this minister finally deal with the 

outstanding claims and support those families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, there has been and will 

continue to be support for those families. 

 

What the member is neglecting to explain is that there’s 

essentially two types of settlements that happen. When there’s a 

disaster and the PDAP officials go out, after an engineering 

report is done, the person who suffered the damage has two 

options: they can either take the payout and close the claim 

quickly, or they can wait till the work’s been completed. In 

those instances, Mr. Speaker, there’s a 60 per cent advance 

payment. In the vast majority of the outstanding claims that 

member’s talking about, there’s been advance payments made. 

Usually the claim hasn’t been completely closed because the 

work hasn’t been completed or all the required documentation 

isn’t done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again that member is doing a disservice to many, 

many hard-working people in the ministry that work for PDAP 

that are working diligently to get these claims closed as quickly 

as possible. And, Mr. Speaker, back to the people who have 

flooding damage this year, Mr. Speaker, our officials will 

respond promptly and will do everything we can to assist them. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen how that 

government deals with people like Sheila Acton after her home 

and her business were devastated. Sheila’s treatment has been 

unfair and delayed at a time when her world’s been turned 

upside down. And her claim is yet to be resolved. But it’s not 

just people like Sheila Acton that have been delayed and treated 

unfairly, it’s been small businesses, farms, and CBOs 

[community-based organizations]. It’s been municipalities, 

cities, and towns. And it’s been rural municipalities with culvert 

replacements and devastated roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the minister not recognize a need to do better 

for all impacted by flooding and does he recognize the 

unacceptable delayed, unfair processes like that of Sheila 

Acton’s? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, when the member opposite 

raised the Acton case in the legislature a couple of weeks ago, I 

was unaware of the specifics of that case. Within a couple of 

days, there was a meeting arranged with Ms. Acton with our 

officials. I sat in for part of that meeting, committed to her that 

our officials would work with her to attempt to get the situation 

rectified as soon as possible. 

 

In estimates the member opposite questioned me on that 

particular case and suggested that there should be a third 

engineering report done that should be offered to her. That’s 

been completed, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest that probably he 

should do his background research and talk to people before he 

raises questions in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue of rural municipalities, I find that 

somewhat rich, Mr. Speaker. I spent my career before politics 

working for a rural municipality. Rural municipalities in this 

province are very happy with the way PDAP treats them and, 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll take no lessons from that member on how to 

treat municipalities in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Environment 

says, in its new report on the state of the province’s 

environment, “Human activities and the release of greenhouse 

gases, such as carbon dioxide and methane, are causing the 

planet’s climate to change.” The Sask Party says they plan a 

reduction in provincial emissions to about 56 million tonnes by 

2020, only seven years away, but the latest data shows the 

province is far from on track. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

government’s own state of the environment report released this 

spring says, “. . . the province’s emissions continue to increase 

largely because of its resource-based economy.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, rather than reducing emissions, the Sask Party 

government admits these emissions are still increasing. How 

does the Sask Party government intend to meet their own 

targets when emissions continue to go up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much for the question 

to the hon. member. Mr. Speaker, in order to fully answer the 

question, we have to look at it in a historical context. And one 

thing that we know for sure, that the worst period in 

Saskatchewan for environmental concerns regarding 

greenhouse gases was between the years of 1991 and 2007. Mr. 

Speaker, it wasn’t that long ago our population was decreasing, 

our greenhouse gases were increasing by 40 per cent. It was a 

time that we are not proud of in Saskatchewan. 

 

Today, it is very different. We have a growing population. We 

have a thriving economy. We have a government that is looking 

at the control of greenhouse gases. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, carbon capture technology can 

reduce the province’s emissions, but that part of the reduction is 

only 1 million tonnes. That leaves 93 per cent of emissions that 



May 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3565 

they still need to reduce up in the air.  

 

The government’s proposed technology fund, which won’t be in 

place until January 2015, is supposed to solve this, but it only 

deals with regulated emitters. Solve it, Mr. Speaker? Over 

one-third of the province’s emissions come from unregulated 

sectors like transportation and agriculture. The minister says 

he’ll ask the unregulated industries to voluntarily reduce their 

emissions through performance agreements, but these 

performance agreements are no guarantee of reduced emissions. 

How will the minister reduce emissions when these agreements 

are voluntary? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one thing is not 

surprising from the members opposite. Through three hours of 

Premier’s estimates, they don’t ask one question on agriculture 

in this province. But today, they stand and they advocate for a 

tax on the agricultural industry. 

 

You know, the member does have some of her facts correct 

today, when they talk about the regulated industries and the 

good work that we’re going to be doing. Transportation and 

agriculture are unregulated industries. We will be working with 

those industries, Mr. Speaker, but to be sure we won’t be taxing 

them as other jurisdictions are doing. We will be working with 

them through a technology fund to ensure that we can do the 

research here and, at the end of the day, have the technology to 

ensure that we have greenhouse gas reductions, not like the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] did for 16 long years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government needs to show 

resolve, leadership, and courage to tackle climate change and 

our province’s emissions. They need to resolve to put together 

and execute a comprehensive plan to deal with all of the 

province’s emissions rather than just 1 million of the 14 million 

tonnes they need to reduce to meet their own target. They need 

to have leadership to introduce serious targets now rather than 

wait two more years to even get their technology fund up and 

running which is no guarantee of reduced emissions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they need the courage to tackle climate 

change head-on, like so many other jurisdictions and provinces 

are doing, instead of watching the emissions grow. Mr. Speaker, 

the people deserve to know. What is the actual concrete plan to 

reduce the province’s emissions and meet the targets that the 

Sask Party government has put in place? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, and to the member for the question. It is indeed ironic 

that the very day that the Premier of this province is in 

Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania talking to a world-class audience 

about the good work that we’re doing here, they’re preaching 

leadership, Mr. Speaker. They can talk about leadership all they 

want. On this side of the House, we’re seeing dynamic 

leadership, world-class leadership, and they’re seeing it today in 

Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 

Bill No. 95, The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 95, The Operation of Public Registry 

Statutes Act and that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 95 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read 

the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 95, The Operation of Public 

Registry Statutes Act be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 



3566 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2013 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

96, The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Would the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure and the member for Athabasca please leave the 

Chamber if they want to carry on a conversation across the 

room. 

 

The Minister of Justice and Attorney General has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 96, The Operation of Public Registry Statutes 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 and that the bill now be 

read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 96 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of 

Public Registry Statutes Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 96, The Operation of Public 

Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

92, The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 92, The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act and that the bill now be read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 92 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 92, The Pooled Registered 

Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 



May 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3567 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

93, The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole of this bill and that 

this bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 93, The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 and that 

the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 93 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 

2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 93, The Pooled Registered 

Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman for 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report that it has considered certain 

estimates and to present its fourth report. I move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole . . . Okay. The Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee has moved: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 90, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 

2013 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister for 

Government Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 90, The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Government Relations that Bill No. 90, The Planning and 

Development Amendment Act, 2013 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



3568 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2013 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 86, The Regulatory Modernization and 

Accountability Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in the Committee of the 

Whole on this bill and that the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Economy has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 86, The Regulatory Modernization and Accountability Act 

and the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 86 — The Regulatory Modernization and 

Accountability Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved the Minister for the 

Economy that Bill No. 86, The Regulatory Modernization and 

Accountability Act be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am again 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment 

Act, 2012 (No. 2) with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of Whole on this bill and 

that the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

and that the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport that the amendments be now read the first 

and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 



May 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3569 

Culture and Sport that Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 

2012 (No. 2) be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 558 to 575. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

558 to 575. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate work of committees this afternoon, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:29.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3557 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3557 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3557 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3557 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3557 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3557 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3557 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3558 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3558 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3558 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3558 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3558 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 First Nations University 35th Annual Pow Wow 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3558 

 Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3559 

 Live Theatre in Saskatchewan 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3559 

 Saskatoon Academic Recognized for Solar Energy Research 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3559 

 Close Cuts for Cancer Event 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3560 

 2013 Distinguished Realtor Award 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3560 

 Youth Business Excellence Awards 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3560 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Long-Term Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3560 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3561 

 Contracts with Government 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3562 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3562 

 Flood Claims 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3563 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3563 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3564 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3564 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3565 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3567 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 95 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3565 

 Bill No. 96 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3566 

 Bill No. 92 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3566 

 Bill No. 93 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3567 

 Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3567 

 Bill No. 86 — The Regulatory Modernization and Accountability Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3568 



 

 Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3568 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3568 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3569 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


