




















































Hansard: March 20, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 36A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 20, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2819 

 March 20, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, I want to welcome and introduce all of the 

guests who have joined us today in the Assembly for budget 

day, Mr. Speaker. There was an MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] that I can recall who on days like today 

would indicate that the stands were full. He may now be the 

officiant of proceedings for events like today. But we want to 

welcome everybody that’s here, that’s joined us in the galleries. 

 

Represented here today are many municipalities across this 

province, many First Nations across this province, people who 

are on the front lines of social services and health care, those 

who are creating jobs and wealth in the province. They’re all 

represented by the people that I can see, and so they’re here to 

hear from the Minister of Finance a little bit later on in the 

budget. We want to welcome them here, but we also want to 

thank them for the representative job they do, of all of those 

people back in their communities and for the work that they do 

every single day, Mr. Speaker. I would ask all members of the 

House to welcome our guests to their Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

join with the Premier in welcoming the guests who are here in 

the Assembly today. It’s always a good day in the Assembly 

when there are people from the province who are here. And we 

know that the people that are here love Saskatchewan and want 

the very best for the province. And that’s why they’re here 

today, and that’s why they’re involved in the many ways that 

they are involved in the great things that go on here in the 

province. 

 

So I join with the Premier and ask all members to join me in 

welcoming the many guests that we have here in the Assembly 

today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity as well to 

welcome guests to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

I’d also like to remind our guests not to participate in events on 

the floor, and that includes applause. As well, please remain in 

your seats until after the Minister of Finance has presented his 

speech and there has been a reply from the opposition. Thank 

you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in reference to cellphone coverage. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, along with 

the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of St. George’s Hill; and also 

English River First Nations, also known as Patuanak, and 

the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nations 

along with the community of Turnor Lake, including the 

neighbouring communities in each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

all from throughout Saskatchewan, and the people that have 

signed this particular page, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from 

Turnor Lake. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know since the employment Act was introduced in December, 

literally hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been 

carried out in the interests of due diligence. And we know there 

is no labour relation crisis to fix and no necessity to rush 

through this omnibus bill through that will likely govern 

workplace relations for decades to come. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from 

Regina, Saskatoon, Humboldt, and Watson. I do so present. 

Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

News Director Wins Lifetime Achievement Award 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise in this House today to recognize the recent achievement of 

a constituent and friend, Mr. Bob Maloney. Bob Maloney of 

Yorkton was the 2013 recipient of the Radio Television News 

Director Association’s Lifetime Achievement Award presented 

by the Association of Electronic Journalists. This award was 

created in 2002 to recognize individuals who have distinguished 

themselves for outstanding service and continued excellence 

during the course of their career in broadcast journalism. 

 

Bob was honoured with this award after spending nearly 36 

years in broadcasting in Yorkton. He started with CKOS, 

CICC-TV in 1977 as a young reporter and cameraperson. His 



2820 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2013 

responsibilities have extended well beyond the job he was hired 

to do. Over the years, Bob was a news anchor, a news director, 

a master of the commercial voice-over, and an active 

ambassador on behalf of the television station. Later on in his 

career, he assumed the role of station manager. Bob has served 

multiple terms on Yorkton city council, and in the fall of 2012, 

he retired from his broadcasting career after being elected our 

new mayor. 

 

He is recognized for his dedication to his community and his 

selflessness, which is evident in the foundation he has offered to 

countless young broadcasters starting their careers, many of 

which are now seen regularly both provincially and nationally 

after graduating from the unofficial Bob Maloney school of 

broadcasting in Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Mayor Bob Maloney on this prestigious award and thank him 

for his many years of community service. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Creativity in Food Budgeting 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to talk 

about the importance of budgets, family budgets, particularly 

the family grocery budget. 

 

The public health nutritionists of Saskatchewan working group 

recently estimated the cost on average per week for a family of 

four to purchase a nutritious food basket was $205. In northern 

Saskatchewan that same basket of food was $252 per week. The 

average rent for a three bedroom apartment in Regina in April 

of 2012 was almost $1,200 and $974 in Prince Albert. Mr. 

Speaker, a family of four in Regina would need a monthly 

income of $2,011 for food and groceries alone. In the North, 

this same family would need nearly $2,000 per month for food 

and rent. The current assistance rates provide well below what 

families need to balance their budgets. 

 

Dietitians and nutritionists are working with communities, 

trying to find creative solutions to these challenges. They work 

with individuals in helping with meal planning, skills sharing, 

and community kitchens, as well as addressing broader 

systemic challenges through policy work and research. Mr. 

Speaker, I challenge all of us to speak with dietitians and 

nutritionists working in our communities. Listen to the 

experiences they have to share and work with them to finding 

lasting solutions to poverty. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Hall of Fame 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

March 1st, six former Estevan Bruin members were forever 

cemented in the history books of the Saskatchewan Junior 

Hockey League as the newest inductees to the Saskatchewan 

Junior Hockey League Hall of Fame. These inductees included 

Ron Dunville, Bruce Firth, Alan May, Terry Simpson, Ray 

Frehlick, and the late Bill Shinske. 

The six men joined previous Hall of Fame honourees from 

Weyburn, Humboldt, and Yorkton over the last three years. The 

hall now has 15 inductees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each of these gentlemen played an integral role in 

the Estevan Bruins hockey club during their junior hockey 

career. The Bruins have been an important facet to the 

community of Estevan since 1957 when the club played their 

first game. The Bruins have instilled special pride in the citizens 

of Estevan as they have watched the club and its players grow 

into one of the strongest junior hockey teams in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join me in 

congratulating these men, one posthumously, on being inducted 

into the SJHL Hall of Fame and recognizing their remarkable 

achievements during their hockey careers with the Estevan 

Bruins. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Web Series Selected for Festivals 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

congratulate a friend and former Saskatchewan-based actress 

and filmmaker, Amy Matysio. Her web series InSAYSHAble has 

been announced as an official selection for the HollyWeb 

Festival and LA [Los Angeles] Webfest. These prestigious 

festivals showcase the best in web series from across the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some members may remember that Amy Matysio 

recently starred alongside Christian Slater in Stranded, which 

was filmed in Saskatchewan because of the world-class 

Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage. 

 

LA Webfest 2013 will be held March 28th to 31st. The event 

includes all screenings, workshops, panels, and the elaborate 

awards ceremony. HollyWeb is scheduled for April 5th to 7th 

and includes four genre awards with cash prizes. 

 

Amy is the creator, writer, and co-producer of InSAYSHAble. 

This is a Canadian-made series and includes director Jeff 

Beesley, who has worked on other Saskatchewan products like 

Corner Gas and Little Mosque on the Prairie. Toronto actress 

Christina Sicoli co-wrote the show and makes an appearance, 

and the series was produced in association with Regina’s Minds 

Eye Entertainment. 

 

InSAYSHAble is a comedy that follows the life of a 

thirtysomething employed by a temp agency who can’t help but 

get fired from every job she is assigned to. Every episode starts 

with a new workplace. Amy has given her reasons for starting a 

web series as: “Online, the boundaries are limitless. Anyone can 

connect with it; anyone can go online and watch it.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of the House to join me in 

congratulating the incredibly talented Amy on her success. 

We’ll miss her here in Saskatchewan, but we wish her the best 

of luck as she makes her new home in Toronto. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 



March 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2821 

Moose Jaw Salvation Army’s 125th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

congratulate the Moose Jaw Salvation Army on their 125th 

anniversary. This past Saturday evening I had the honour of 

attending the celebration at the Moose Jaw Salvation Army 

church as they reached the incredible milestone of 125 years in 

the Friendly City. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Salvation Army is the oldest one 

in Saskatchewan. In the late 1800s, a young Army officer 

arrived in Moose Jaw and began services, and it has continued 

to this very day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every one of us can look around and see the 

various service and community groups that the Salvation Army 

touches. Their commitment to Moose Jaw is unwavering as 

they instill hope and faith in those that they minister and come 

in contact with. They are strong and compassionate and 

constantly inspiring to those around them to look past the 

busyness of daily life and reach out to those in need. The 

Salvation Army’s stalwart commitment to doing for others is 

humbling, and for that I wish to thank them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

congratulating the Moose Jaw Salvation Army on their 

milestone 125th anniversary, and thanking the staff, the 

volunteers, and to anyone who has ever donated to this 

incredible organization. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

4-H Hall of Fame Inductees 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend I had 

the honour of attending the annual 4-H appreciation banquet in 

Saskatoon. The banquet provided an opportunity to show 

appreciation for 4-H volunteers and to recognize those 

individuals who will be inducted into the 4-H Hall of Fame and 

receive Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Medals. These five 

individuals have worked very hard to increase interest in 4-H 

and to create programs and projects to engage the youth of this 

great province. This year’s Saskatchewan 4-H Hall of Fame 

inductees were Irene Dorrance, Mildred Everest, and Morris 

Kiland. The two individuals who received Queen Elizabeth 

Diamond Jubilee Medals were Bernard Kemick and Vi Protz. 

Mr. Speaker, the efforts of these individuals have helped 

develop the future leaders of Saskatchewan’s agricultural 

industry. 

 

This event also provided me with an excellent opportunity to 

reflect on my own experiences in 4-H. Mr. Speaker, I was a 4-H 

leader for 18 years. So, Mr. Speaker, I have a special 

appreciation for those who have volunteered to work extremely 

hard to make the 4-H program in Saskatchewan so successful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing the hard-working volunteers who have helped 

engage youth in the 4-H program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatchewan Grows 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today and draw attention to new population numbers released 

earlier this morning by Stats Canada. According to these latest 

figures, Saskatchewan’s population grew by over 21,000 people 

in 2012 to an all-time high of 1,089,807. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan continues to grow. Over the last five years, 

Saskatchewan’s population increased by more than 82,000 

people. Saskatchewan’s population grew by the second fastest 

rate among all provinces. Mr. Speaker, this increase in our 

provincial population demonstrates that our government’s 

growth plan is working. 

 

This growth is a stark contrast to the Saskatchewan from 10 

years ago when the NDP [New Democratic Party] used an 

official government news release to praise themselves for a 

“dramatic reduction in our out-migration.” Thankfully, Mr. 

Speaker, those days are behind us. 

 

Later today our government will release a budget that addresses 

both the opportunities and challenges of growth. Our 

government does not seek growth for the sake of growth. We 

seek growth in order to improve the quality of life for all 

Saskatchewan people, and today’s budget will take steps to do 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On behalf of this Assembly, I would like to welcome all of the 

newcomers to our wonderful province and thank them for 

helping to move Saskatchewan forward. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Performance of Government and Opposition 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One thing that 

Saskatchewan people are increasingly realizing about this 

government is its stubborn approach. Once it has made up its 

mind, it stubbornly refuses to change course, even when 

Saskatchewan people overwhelmingly believe that the 

government has made a mistake. 

 

One such example, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier’s decision to put 

politicians ahead of people by changing the legislation to add 

three more MLAs to this Assembly after the next election. To 

the Premier: does he recognize that adding more politicians to 

the Assembly is not a priority for Saskatchewan people? Will 

he admit that it was a mistake to add three more MLAs to the 

Legislative Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we know, the 

electoral boundary map is redrawn after a census, Mr. Speaker. 

And if there’s been significant population growth, there is the 

chance that the number of seats will grow in the Legislative 

Assembly because of the fact that we’re basically a 

representation by population system. And I notice the member 



2822 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2013 

for Athabasca is laughing, Mr. Speaker, even though NDP 

Premier Allan Blakeney did exactly the same thing. This is 

what happens when we have periods of growth in the province. 

 

More to the point, Mr. Speaker, I want to just say this: we have 

made a very basic commitment with respect to additional 

representation in this Chamber, and that is that it would not 

come at a net additional cost to taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

government that has reduced the cost to taxpayers of 

government travel over what happened under members 

opposite; significantly reduced government advertising over 

what happened when members opposite were over here, Mr. 

Speaker. We will make sure that whatever happens in terms of 

changes in this Assembly happen at no additional cost to 

taxpayers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it will absolutely cost millions of 

dollars to have more MLAs in the Assembly, and suggesting 

anything otherwise is simply not believable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What frustrates Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, is that on 

the one hand, they’re willing to spend millions more on more 

politicians, more MLAs; and on the other hand, they force cuts 

at the universities and they force debt onto the universities’ 

books. One example, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier’s decision to 

walk away from the election promise to properly fund the 

Health Sciences Building at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan]. Mr. Speaker, we know this has caused major 

problems financially on campus and is a major prime factor for 

having the financial crunch that we see on campus right now. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he admit that it was wrong to 

force nearly $100 million onto the universities’ books, and will 

he admit that is a central part of the financial problem at the 

University of Saskatchewan right now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — My hon. friend will want to be careful with 

the preambles to his questions, Mr. Speaker. Inside his 

preamble he said there have been cuts to universities. Mr. 

Speaker, the campus that he’s talking about has received nearly 

a 40 per cent increase in its operating funds in the first term of 

this government. It’s received an increase of 200 per cent in 

terms of capital funding on that campus. These are the facts of 

the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, the Leader of the Opposition, 

the NDP raised the Academic Health Sciences Building. Mr. 

Speaker, we will stack our record on that important facility 

against members opposite any day of the week. 

 

What did they do, Mr. Speaker? In 2003 they released a news 

release. They issued a press release saying, we’re going to build 

a new academic health science centre. They had probation 

problems on the campus. This was part of their action, Mr. 

Speaker. What happened in 2004? Nothing. 2005, nothing; 

2006, nothing. It took a change in government for funds to 

actually flow for that academic health science centre to begin 

construction, Mr. Speaker. We will get that job done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier needs to visit 

the campuses here in Saskatchewan and talk to the sessional 

lecturers who are facing layoff at the U of R [University of 

Regina], talk to the staff who have been laid off at the 

University of Saskatchewan, and talk to the students that are 

facing increased tuition under the Sask Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the only example of a stubborn refusal 

to admit a mistake. Another prime example, Mr. Speaker, is the 

Sask Party’s decision to eliminate the film employment tax 

credit. This decision has forced many Saskatchewan families, 

hard-working, taxpaying Saskatchewan families to leave our 

province. Even, Mr. Speaker, when the chamber of commerce 

recognized that this was a short-sighted decision, we have seen 

a refusal from the Sask Party government to admit that it was a 

mistake. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he recognize today that it was 

a mistake to eliminate the film employment tax credit and force 

so many families out of this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, watch the 

preamble wherein the hon. member makes a claim about the U 

of R. The U of R, over the life of this government, has received 

an operating increase, I think, of 31 per cent, while inflation 

over that same time has been 10 per cent. Mr. Speaker, these are 

the facts of the matter. 

 

So are we going to admit that that increased funding to 

post-secondary institutions that are three and fourfold greater 

than inflation are a mistake? No they’re not a mistake. It’s been 

part of the growth agenda for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, later this day we’re going to hear, perhaps, some 

more news on something this government has announced, 

together with creative industries, called Creative Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, it is a holistic approach to those important creative 

industries in the province. Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to 

what the Hon. Minister of Finance has to say on this subject. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if, for example, the creative groups in this 

province like what they hear, I wonder what the NDP will say 

then. I hope that they will stand in their place and recognize this 

is a good idea. The same would go for the Arts Board, not 

knowing obviously what the Minister of Finance is about to say 

about that particular file. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to move forward with arts. We’ve 

increased funding by 30 per cent for that community. There 

may well be more progress to be heard about in just a few more 

minutes. We’ll wait and see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The Sask Party’s stubborn refusal to admit a 

mistake is also evident in the area of employment for First 

Nations and Métis people. If we want a strong future in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, if we want everyone to be doing 

well in Saskatchewan, it means extending opportunity to more 



March 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2823 

and more people. 

 

For months, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the employment 

numbers for First Nations and Métis people, we’ve seen the 

numbers have been stagnant most months or moving in the 

wrong direction. Part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

government decided to eliminate, to cut the Aboriginal 

employment development program. This is seen by 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, as a short-sighted decision. 

And economists like Eric Howe, Mr. Speaker, have highlighted 

how this has played a central role in the poor numbers that 

we’ve seen when it comes to First Nations and Métis 

employment. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he admit, does he recognize 

that it was a mistake to eliminate the Aboriginal employment 

development program? And does he see that as a factor, Mr. 

Speaker, for the poor numbers that we’ve seen when it comes to 

First Nations and Métis employment here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 

a few days ago the latest employment numbers came out for the 

province. Our unemployment rate is 3.8 per cent. That’s 

number one in the country, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen some 

progress with respect to Aboriginal employment in those 

numbers, some increases — not enough, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

why we’ve moved forward on the joint task force with the FSIN 

[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations]. That’s why 

we’ve moved forward in partnership with institutions like the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the program that hon. member refers to, 

notwithstanding what an individual professor may say, if you 

take a look at the investment and the jobs created, was not 

working for Aboriginal people in this province. We will focus 

on education and economic development opportunities. I think 

we’re about to hear more from that as well from the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an area where we are not prepared to go is a 

special deal. I know that’s where that member’s coming from. 

He would like to see this government announce a special 

resource revenue sharing deal for First Nations, Mr. Speaker. 

FSIN called for it today. At least that was his position last 

week. We’re not going there, Mr. Speaker, but we will continue 

to make progress and more about that in a moment as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, businesses, First Nations and 

Métis people, and the broader public understand, Mr. Speaker, 

that the AEDP [Aboriginal employment development program] 

was playing a constructive role, and having its elimination, Mr. 

Speaker, has been detrimental to employment numbers here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker, where we see a stubborn approach, 

has to do with the funding of long-term care facilities here in 

Saskatchewan. There’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that families 

need to have more options and better options when it comes to 

caring for our loved ones, when it comes to caring for our 

grandmas, our grandpas, our moms and dads. We saw, Mr. 

Speaker, with the Sask Party’s project in Saskatoon with 

Amicus, an approach that cost taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, millions 

of dollars more than necessary. Even the auditor, Mr. Speaker, 

said there was no good reason for pursuing that particular 

funding model. Yet the Sask Party stubbornly refuses to admit 

that that was a problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he agree with the auditor, Mr. 

Speaker, around the comments that there was no good reason 

for pursuing that particular funding model? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I think there is some stubbornness not to 

make mistakes on this particular issue but you’re going to find 

it with members opposite. Mr. Speaker, when this party was in 

office in this province for 16 years, they managed to, at the end 

of their term, see 1,600 fewer long-term care beds, closed 1,600 

long-term care beds, closed 52 hospitals, Mr. Speaker, in rural 

Saskatchewan, and refused to hire the proper complement of 

nurses, Mr. Speaker, another area that this side of the House has 

addressed in just five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what has happened since? We’ve had the 

announcement of new long-term care facilities in rural 

Saskatchewan, and yes in urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

and more to come — $800 million in health care capital in our 

first five years of government. That’s triple from the last five 

years of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, adding more MLAs, increasing 

debt on our university campuses, cutting the Aboriginal 

employment development program, refusing the auditor’s 

advice when it comes to funding models, Mr. Speaker, are all 

examples of the Sask Party government’s stubborn refusal to 

correct their mistakes. 

 

Another example, Mr. Speaker, comes to their approach to 

budgeting. The Provincial Auditor has criticized what she has 

referred to as “the creative accounting rules” of the government 

and the fact that the government is still using two sets of books. 

The NDP have long acknowledged that it’s time to adopt the 

generally accepted accounting principles that other provinces 

here in Canada use. But, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party stubbornly 

refuses to accept that. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he agree with the auditor that 

now is the time to have one set of books? Will he agree, Mr. 

Speaker, that it’s time that Saskatchewan has a consistent 

position with the other provinces in the country? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, mindful that I’m sitting right 

beside the Finance minister, I am prepared to announce that this 

government will present the finances of Saskatchewan in terms 

of a summary financial basis. We’re also going to present the 

General Revenue Fund — the operating, the chequing account 

for the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

follow The Financial Administration Act that was passed by the 



2824 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2013 

NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After three 

weeks of session and for the better part of a year, we’ve been 

pushing that government to come clean on its IPAC 

[International Performance Assessment Centre for geologic 

storage of CO2] affair, an affair that includes a conflict of 

interest, misleading statements, and wasted taxpayers’ money. 

 

Despite having three Sask Party appointed directors on the 

board right from inception, the minister has failed to answer 

straight questions. That government never shared any of the 

issues with the public until they were pushed in committee and 

until further information was exposed through the media. Now 

that’s not accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve asked this question before, but the minister 

hasn’t been willing to answer it, and it’s time for her to finally 

come clean. To the minister: how many taxpayers’ dollars have 

been wasted in its IPAC affair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the University of Regina 

was tasked to set up an agency to look into carbon capture and 

sequestration. Under the management of the university, there 

was a contract entered into that was sole sourced and there was 

issues with conflict of interest. All of that has been exposed to 

the member opposite as well as the public. 

 

When that was discovered, there was a Provincial Auditor 

report, there was a forensic audit ordered, and there was an 

independent evaluation of the assets, Mr. Speaker. That member 

has all of that information. 

 

Going forward, once all of the appropriate steps were taken, 

IPAC has done exceptionally good work. The contract up to 

that point was $2.9 million. There were three partners involved 

— the provincial government, the federal government, and 

Royal Dutch Shell. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pretty 

straightforward question once again here today and not an 

answer, Mr. Speaker — no disclosure of how much money’s 

been wasted. And the public has a right to know these things. 

 

They also know where these dollars went. The CEO [chief 

executive officer] of IPAC herself has said that these dollars 

were mostly waste. Some might remember that she suggested 

there’s computers sitting in boxes, that there were inflated 

contracts from handshake deals with conflicts of interest for 

services the minister once claimed were good value for dollar, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

If Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars money has been wasted, 

someone or some people have benefited, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister has the opportunity here today to be straight with 

Saskatchewan people. To the minister: how much was wasted? 

Who’s benefited from those wasted dollars in its IPAC affair? 

And what’s she doing to get those dollars back? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The member opposite again in his 

preamble is saying things that indeed I haven’t said in the past. I 

didn’t say there was value for dollar. What I said was, the 

evaluation of the assets did show that they had value when they 

did the work. They were not thrown in the garbage. It was not 

set up at a garage sale. 

 

However if that member is sincere and this isn’t just nothing 

more than more political spin, then he needs to go out into the 

rotunda; he needs to say who he is accusing here of personal 

gaining because the forensic audit says that there is no one that 

they can identify that personally gained from this contract. So if 

that member has information that he is keeping secret, he needs 

to take it to the appropriate authorities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Technology Company and University 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Pretty interesting from the minister 

who’s responsible for taxpayers’ dollars that have been 

described as being wasted, and now no one is provided an 

answer as to who benefited from it. 

 

But the Minister of Energy and Resources has waded into the 

debacle involving many of the same players here this week. 

Million dollar lawsuits were exposed this week on a major 

project in his portfolio with millions of taxpayers’ dollars on the 

line. And if you can imagine, the minister said he didn’t even 

know about the lawsuits that were filed in November until the 

media exposed them on Monday. And despite that fact and the 

involvement of millions of dollars, if you can imagine, he said it 

wasn’t a concern to him or that government — a full dismissal 

of ministerial responsibility. 

 

With taxpayers’ money, his ministry funded the start-up of CVI 

[Climate Ventures Inc.], the tech company embroiled in the 

IPAC affair. It’s at the heart of the conflicts and waste. 

 

Seeing that it’s yet to be answered, can the minister explain 

why his ministry spent nearly $200,000 of taxpayers’ dollars to 

start up CVI in the first place in 2008, and what’s he doing to 

investigate wrongdoing and wasted money as a result of his 

costly start-up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been through this 

before with the member opposite. We’ve been very clear with 

him in the past, Mr. Speaker. This government, the Ministry of 

Energy and Resources has funded the university in the past. We 

have funded them to do research, Mr. Speaker. As far as the 



March 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2825 

university, we feel they’ve done the research we funded them 

for. 

 

When it comes to the university, Mr. Speaker, and their 

development when they want to commercialize, that is a 

responsibility of the university. The university, Mr. Speaker, 

commercializes much of the research they do across a very 

broad spectrum. They enter into contracts with the private 

sector, Mr. Speaker, to commercialize that research. That is 

something that this government has not been involved with. 

And the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, he knows this. 

 

If he wants to know, Mr. Speaker, the details of the lawsuit, he 

should talk to the parties involved in it — the university and a 

private sector company, Mr. Speaker. The Government of 

Saskatchewan has no part in the lawsuit, Mr. Speaker, and that 

is just the reality of this situation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister maybe didn’t hear the 

question. The question wasn’t about the lawsuit. The question 

was the $200,000 that your ministry invested to start up CVI in 

2008 that’s now at the heart of this entire debacle and waste, 

Mr. Speaker. Three questions — no answers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Government has a responsibility to protect taxpayers and 

manage its partnerships, but clearly a disturbing trend is 

emerging with that government. In its IPAC affair and debacle, 

the government has displayed no accountability, no answers, no 

responsibility and in fact has deflected responsibility and 

pointed fingers at many others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why has a disturbing leak of information exposed 

through scrutiny and investigations become the norm for this 

government of late instead of accountability, transparency, and 

straight answers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — You know, there is one member in this 

House and there’s one party in this House that’s pointing 

fingers with absolutely nothing to back up their accusations. 

Day after day after day, they have no information. We have a 

forensic audit, quite frankly, that clearly says that nobody 

personally gained from the contract with the university and 

CVI. The member opposite chooses to ignore the forensic audit. 

He chooses to ignore all of the facts while he spins day after 

day and makes accusations with nothing to back them up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want him to go out and back up his statements 

because quite frankly we have yet to see any information come 

from that member opposite. It’s unlike the days of the past with 

the NDP, where we actually had memos. We had memos in our 

possession where there was elected members in the NDP Party 

saying that, we’re just going to say there is a partnership 

because the optics look better. Do we all remember SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Performance of Government and Opposition 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, part of that emerging trend 

that we see in this government, in this IPAC affair and the 

debacle, is an unwillingness to admit mistakes, an 

unwillingness to come clean, an unwillingness to take 

responsibility and shed light on the issue, leaving many to 

question what that government has to hide. 

 

We’ve been pushing on this for the better part of a year. We’ve 

brought forward motions in committee to authorize the 

Provincial Auditor to fully investigate this entire affair. That’s 

been denied by that side. We put forward calls, many calls 

recently denied by that side. And simply we believe that 

sunshine is the best disinfectant on an issue like this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier: will he finally do the right 

thing? Will he show some leadership and accountability and 

finally today support the call to the Provincial Auditor to fully 

investigate this entire mess, the IPAC affair and all the related 

conflicts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there have been several audits 

with respect to this particular issue, one by the auditor. The 

auditor he’s referring to is the auditor for the University of 

Regina, you know, and I don’t know why he wants more audits 

because he ignores them anyway. When the forensic audit says 

no one personally gained, he burns 12 questions in question 

period on that same point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the stubbornness to admit mistakes, do 

you know what I’ve yet to hear? I’ve yet to hear how the natural 

governing party went down to nine seats, Mr. Speaker. What 

mistakes do they have to admit to there? Was it their $5 billion 

election platform, Mr. Speaker, that would most assuredly have 

driven this province into deficit and debt? Is it specific policies? 

When will they stand up and say, we got it wrong? That’s why 

they’re over there and, Mr. Speaker, we’re on this side of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Standardized Testing and Student Achievement 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, while our neighbours in other provinces and friends 

internationally pull away from standardized testing, 

Saskatchewan is moving in the wrong direction. Alberta and 

BC [British Columbia] are both contemplating changes to their 

standardized testing because they know that tests aren’t 

improving outcomes for students. And now, Mr. Speaker, 

checking in our school system and talking about improving 

learning as a whole is a good thing. But tying the hands of 

teachers and forcing students to meet arbitrary tests won’t 

improve learning outcomes and it won’t improve the province’s 

abysmal graduation rate, which has been too low for far too 

long, especially for Aboriginal students. 

 

The minister’s had many opportunities to give a clear answer 

why his government is doing standardized testing. He’s even 

said the evidence is evident, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: what 



2826 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2013 

evidence does he have that standardized testing instead of actual 

improved learning opportunities is the way to go for our 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

and thanks to the member opposite for the question. You know, 

our government is committed fully to the success of all students 

in our province, every single one of them — northern, southern, 

First Nation, non-First Nation, French. We’re committed to 

every student. 

 

The student achievement initiative, Mr. Speaker, didn’t just 

come out of the blue. As my colleague said it, we didn’t find it 

in a garage sale. This student achievement initiative is the 

product, is the result of the provincial panel on student 

achievement, Mr. Speaker. And one of their recommendations 

was for the government to conduct a comprehensive and 

individualized student assessment program for students in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. We see that as a strategic and valuable 

investment in the future of our students. And we’ll continue to 

do that and we’ll continue to invest in the future of our students, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, the people of Saskatchewan need to understand exactly 

what the minister is saying here. He’s saying he’s all for 

dictating when the school boards should start their classes. And 

he’s saying he’s all for telling them how long a school day 

should be, down to the minute. And he’s saying he’s all for . . . 

[inaudible] . . . testing instead of teaching, and yet he won’t 

provide the school boards with the resources to keep class sizes 

low. It just doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Parents, teachers, students have learning as their priority. Why 

isn’t it a priority for this minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to thank the hon. minister for his work with the 

panel on student achievement. I want to thank the four school 

divisions we featured in this House earlier this week who 

already are using standards-based testing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In my home constituency, in Chinook School Division, here’s 

the evidence. We have kids that were learning 63 per cent 

learning at grade level. Because of standards-based 

achievement, because of resources for teachers, four years later 

the number is 80 per cent. 

 

He mentioned graduation rates. In Melfort where they are using, 

as a pilot, standards-based testing, we see what? An increase in 

graduation rates, Mr. Speaker. This is the evidence that we’re 

encouraged by. This is what we’d like to see for the whole 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our education system has challenges. We want to 

ensure graduation rates are higher. There are more people living 

in this province now, so there are more students than ever 

before. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting that roughly 10 

years ago the then NDP government issued a press release, and 

they said that out-migration . . . The headline was, 

“Out-migration is now at a slower rate in the province of 

Saskatchewan,” Mr. Speaker. And then the press release went 

on to call that momentum. Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 

House, we call that gravity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re interested in seeing growth happen. We know there are 

pressures in education when that happens, so we will provide 

the resources necessary. We will improve graduation rates and 

education results for kids, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 

ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to submit the estimates and supplementary estimates 

accompanied by a message from Her Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — Would you all please rise for a message from 

the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 

sums required for the service of the province for the 12 

months ending March 31st, 2014, and supplementary 

estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

province for the 12 months ending March 31st, 2013, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. The 

Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant 

Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You may all be seated. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

[14:15] 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

colleagues, and visitors, I am honoured to rise today and to 

deliver our government’s 2013-14 budget for the people and 

province of Saskatchewan. This is our government’s sixth 

budget, and my third as Minister of Finance. 

 

I want to thank my cabinet and caucus colleagues and all the 

government officials involved in the enormous task of 

preparing this budget. I also want to thank the groups and 

individuals who provided recommendations and suggestions on 

what should be in this budget. I cannot guarantee that you will 

see everything you asked for, but I can guarantee you, you were 

heard and your ideas were appreciated. 

 

[14:15] 

 

And I want to thank my family and friends. Throughout the 

Chamber are many friends and relatives who have travelled 

from different parts of the province to be here, and I’m 



March 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2827 

extremely grateful. Seated in the gallery opposite and not on the 

Assembly floor are my son, Bryce; daughter-in-law, Olivia; and 

granddaughters, Willow and Scarlett from Yorkton. They are up 

in the gallery because Scarlett probably would have run over 

here exclaiming, grandpa, grandpa. Or even though the budget 

speech will be exciting, the girls might find it quite boring after 

10 or 15 minutes and need to leave the Chamber. It’s great to 

have you here in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the floor of the Assembly I’m honoured to 

have our friends Mark and Cheryl Eskra and their daughter 

Alexandra. Alex is a student at the University of Regina, and 

Mark and Cheryl are business owners in Invermay. Mark is a 

former student of mine, employee of mine, business partner of 

mine, and of course always a great friend. Thank you to Cheryl 

and Mark for all you do for us. 

 

I’m also extremely pleased to have my sister and 

brother-in-law, Sally and Glen Braithwaite, from Winnipeg. 

Thank you so much for being here and happy anniversary, your 

50th anniversary, this coming summer. 

 

Last but not least, my wife Gail is here. And I can only say 

thank you for everything you do that allows me to serve the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for years Saskatchewan was Canada’s best-kept 

secret. Well the secret is out. This year thousands of Canadians 

will discover the Saskatchewan advantage first-hand. 

 

In fact next month our province will host the Canadian music 

awards, the Junos, in Regina and Moose Jaw. That event will be 

followed by the Memorial Cup junior hockey championship in 

Saskatoon this May. And of course the Grey Cup, our national 

party, will be held here in Regina in November. All of us in 

Saskatchewan are confident the Roughriders will represent the 

West in this year’s Grey Cup. Will they win it? We can’t say 

for sure. But there’s one thing we do know. With music fans, 

hockey fans, and football fans set to converge on Saskatchewan, 

we know the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority will 

have a good year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these events will attract thousands of visitors. But 

in the new Saskatchewan, people aren’t just coming to visit. 

They’re coming to stay. They’re coming to build a career and a 

future and a family and a life. And they are coming in numbers 

that we have not seen since the earliest days of our province. 

Just this morning we learned that Saskatchewan has grown 

again — 1,089,807 of us now call Saskatchewan home. That’s 

more people living here than ever before, and it’s an increase of 

21,000 in the past year alone and 82,000 since the start of 2008. 

 

Last fall our Premier released The Saskatchewan Plan for 

Growth and set a bold goal — 1.2 million people living in 

Saskatchewan by 2020. This is a goal that would have seemed 

unimaginable a decade ago. Today we are right on track to meet 

that goal. 

 

The growth plan sets an objective of 60,000 more people 

working in Saskatchewan by 2020. We are on track to meet that 

goal as well. Employment last month was up more than 24,000 

from a year ago. Our province’s strong economy and now our 

entrepreneurs are creating new jobs. And now our 

unemployment rate is just 3.8 per cent, by far the lowest in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the growth plan is working. But the growth plan is 

not about growth for the sake of growth. It’s about improving 

the quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. It’s about 

balance — not only balancing the books but also balancing the 

priorities of Saskatchewan people. Not only continuing to grow 

but also meeting the challenges of growth. Not only providing 

opportunity but also ensuring we protect those in our province 

who need our help. 

 

Our plan is about balance, Mr. Speaker, balanced growth. And 

the first thing I want to tell you about this budget: it is a 

balanced budget. It is balanced in the General Revenue Fund, 

and it is balanced in the summary financial statements.  

 

And it is balanced in other ways as well. It is a budget that 

balances the need to control spending with the need to make 

important investments in key areas. One of those key areas is 

helping people who need it most. Today we are keeping our 

election promise by once again increasing support for 

low-income seniors under the seniors’ income plan to $250 a 

month, nearly triple what it was when we took office. 

 

The growth plan sets a goal of making Saskatchewan the best 

province to live for people with disabilities. This budget takes a 

number of important steps toward meeting that objective. We 

will increase support by $50 per month for individuals and $60 

per month for couples under the Saskatchewan assured income 

for disability program. This budget provides a $10.2 million 

increase for community-based organizations that help those 

with disabilities, part of the $20 million increase for 

organizations that provide care 24 hours a day, 7 days a week 

for some of our vulnerable citizens. And we are increasing 

transit assistance for persons with disabilities by 10 per cent, 

including a doubling of capital funding for paratransit buses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is another group of people in our province that 

need more help. A few weeks ago, we heard that violence 

against women in Saskatchewan is double the national average. 

These numbers are disturbing because they are not just 

numbers. They represent real women, and they represent real 

families and lives being torn apart by the devastation of 

domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, all of us pray for the day that 

violence against women no longer exists. But until that day 

comes, we must do more to provide a safe haven for those 

women and their children fleeing abusive relationships. Today 

we are increasing operational funding for all women’s shelters 

in Saskatchewan, including facilities in Regina and Prince 

Albert that have been expanded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1989 a dedicated group of volunteers in Swift 

Current partnered with the province to open a new transition 

house in that city. Regrettably that was the last new transition 

house announced in our province — until today. Our 

government, through Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, will 

partner with the federal government and the local community to 

cover the $1.3 million construction cost of a new transition 

house in Melfort. Our government will provide operational 

support as well to the community of Melfort. I would like to 

thank and congratulate all the community volunteers in Melfort 

whose efforts have made this much-needed project a reality. 



2828 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, this budget is a balanced budget. 

At a time when most other jurisdictions continue to struggle 

with large deficits and mounting debt, Saskatchewan’s finances 

remain sound. That said, it’s no secret that resource revenues 

are down. So in order to achieve that balance, our government 

has to control spending. 

 

This budget does just that with a modest overall spending 

increase of just 3.1 percent. Well over 40 per cent of each year’s 

provincial budget goes towards health care. So if we are to 

control spending, we need to control health spending while still 

providing the best possible quality of care that puts patients 

first. 

 

We saw a great example of that just a few weeks ago when, 

through the leadership of Premier Ghiz and our Premier, the 

provinces got together to co-operate on the purchase of six 

generic drugs. This co-operation will save our health system 

$10 million a year while still providing the prescription drugs 

that patients need. It’s just one example. Those working in our 

health system continue to find new and innovative ways to 

manage while ensuring quality care is the highest priority. We 

thank them for their efforts. 

 

Today there are more doctors practising in Saskatchewan. 

Today there are more nurses working in Saskatchewan. Surgical 

wait times are much shorter than they were just a few years ago. 

These results prove that quality care is not just about spending 

more; it’s about spending smarter. 

 

Health spending is up 3.5 per cent in this budget to a total of 

$4.8 billion. Part of that increase is to address demographic 

pressures. Over the past six years, health spending has risen 

under our government by more than 41 per cent. And since 

2007, our government has made tremendous progress in 

reducing surgical wait times in Saskatchewan. 

 

We also recognize that more work needs to be done. Our 

government has set a target of reducing wait times to no more 

than three months. To help meet that target, this budget includes 

$10 million in additional funding for the Saskatchewan surgical 

initiative, boosting the total so far to more than $70 million. 

 

Including the surgical initiative, this budget provides a $131.5 

million increase, four and a half per cent more overall compared 

to last year, to our province’s regional health authorities for 

operating funding. This boosts health authority funding to more 

than $3 billion in 2013-14. Health authority increases include: 

nearly 45 million to cover operating increases and cost 

increases to drugs and other medical supplies, 29 million to help 

address pressures attributable to population growth, 4.3 million 

to establish collaborative emergency centres and enhance other 

innovations to improve primary health care, and $2 million for 

an innovative home care services pilot project for seniors here 

in Regina. 

 

This budget also provides a net increase of nearly $12 million, 

up 8.6 per cent from last year, to the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency. Funding for that important agency has been increased 

by more than 90 per cent over the past six years. 

 

This budget also includes an additional 1.5 million to extend the 

rural doctor locum pool by an additional four to five doctors, 

and $250,000 for a rural physician recruitment incentive 

program to attract and retain more doctors in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This budget also provides significant funding totalling nearly 

$164 million for health care capital investments, including 86.5 

million to begin or continue construction of 11 long-term care 

facilities and $50 million for the Moose Jaw Union Hospital 

replacement. 

 

And this budget provides $350,000 more — 400,000 in total — 

to expand Alzheimer’s First Link services. This is a seven-fold 

increase compared to last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you recall last year, I had the honour of 

introducing the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] air 

ambulance service in Saskatchewan. Since that time, STARS 

has responded to 220 calls from people in our province. In fact 

last year in my constituency, the mayor of Canora’s son was 

airlifted from Yorkton to Regina after sustaining critical injuries 

in a motor vehicle accident. Today this young man is healthy 

and very appreciative that this service is available to rural 

Saskatchewan. This year our government will again provide a 

$10.5 million in funding to STARS, matching the amount 

provided last year to help the residents of our province when 

they need it most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is also providing additional 

support to Saskatchewan’s elementary, high school and 

post-secondary students. Pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to 12 

operating funding is up 2.3 per cent in this budget compared to 

last year — a total of nearly $1.8 billion. Funding includes a 

boost of 17 million to address enrolment increases, as well as 

2.4 million more for a total of 3.5 million to cover rising 

enrolments at independent schools. 

 

[14:30] 

 

More than $20 million, an increase of nearly $600,000, to 

support 15 new pre-K kindergarten programs for a total of 301 

pre-kindergarten programs in Saskatchewan. 

 

And this budget includes nearly 120 million for school capital 

projects, including more than 18 million for the next phase of 

capital construction in Hudson Bay, Leader, and Martensville. 

This also includes nearly $2 million to begin the planning for 

new projects in Langenburg and Gravelbourg. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I need to also say a few words about how we fund 

education in our province. As you know, a large portion of K to 

12 [kindergarten to grade 12] funding comes from the education 

property tax. So here again, we need to find balance. We need 

to balance the need to properly fund our K to 12 system with 

the need to keep taxes as low and affordable as possible. Just a 

few years ago, this system was badly out of balance. Education 

taxes were far too high and there were property tax revolts 

throughout the province. 

 

In 2009 our government fulfilled our campaign promise to fix 

the broken education property tax system, and in doing so we 

delivered the largest property tax reduction in Saskatchewan 

history. 

 



March 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2829 

Now, four years later, we had another important decision to 

make. 2013 is a reassessment year, and as a result of our strong 

and growing economy we have seen property values in 

Saskatchewan increase by 67 per cent. While this is great news 

for property owners, it also means those same property owners 

would have faced dramatic tax increases if we had left the tax 

rates at current levels. Our government wasn’t going to let that 

happen. So in order to offset the impact of the huge increase in 

property values, today we are lowering the education property 

tax mill rates to keep the impact of reassessment revenue 

neutral overall. 

 

The new mill rates will be 2.67 mills for agricultural land, down 

from 3.91 mills. 5.03 mills for residential property, down from 

9.51 mills. We will go from three tiers of mill rates on 

commercial property to a single rate of 8.28 mills. And we are 

creating a new category of resource property with a rate of 

11.04 mills. 

 

Of course some people will still see property tax increases, 

while others will see taxes decrease based on the relative 

assessed values of their properties. Overall the impact of the 

reassessment will be revenue-neutral. But as the Premier told 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention last week, this may need to change in the future as 

we work to achieve the right balance between education 

funding and affordable taxes. 

 

This budget also provides the Ministry of Advanced Education 

with nearly $788 million in annual funding, an increase of 

nearly 9 per cent compared to last year. Since 2007 our 

government has increased funding for post-secondary education 

by more than 40 per cent. This year’s funding to Advanced 

Education includes: more than 448 million in base operating 

funding for Saskatchewan’s universities and federated and 

affiliated colleges, an increase of 2.1 per cent; nearly 150 

million in operating funding for Saskatchewan’s technical 

institutes, a 3.1 per cent increase; and over $27 million in 

operating funding for regional colleges, an increase of 2.1 per 

cent. 

 

Our government is also working to make education more 

affordable for Saskatchewan students. We are providing almost 

$20 million more to advance these three initiatives and other 

direct student supports this year. This will boost funding to 

more than 117 million including: more than $63.9 million for 

the graduate retention program, an increase of over $12 million; 

$34.5 million for the Student Aid Fund; more than $7 million 

for the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, an increase of 

nearly 3 million; over $6 million to establish the Saskatchewan 

advantage grant for education savings; and $5 million for a 

number of other provincially funded scholarships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget also provides more than $25 million 

for post-secondary capital including: over 16 million of 

maintenance capital, 1 million to support the planning and 

design development phases of the Trades and Technology 

Centre project at Parkland Regional College in Yorkton, $4 

million for continued construction of the new Southeast 

Regional College in Weyburn. In total this budget includes over 

$16 million in funding that will go toward the Health Sciences 

facility’s capital and operating costs at the University of 

Saskatchewan. In addition, Mr. Speaker, a $10 million grant 

through the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will be 

invested in a new student residence at the University of Regina. 

 

This budget also provides significant funding to help train 

Saskatchewan’s future doctors and nurses, including 17.8 

million to support postgraduate physician training seats, an 

increase of $2 million; more than 14 million, an increase of 

over 2 million, to continue the 690 registered nurse training seat 

expansion; and $21.5 to continue the implementation of 100 

medical undergraduate and 120 medical residency seats, an 

increase of 2.9 million from 2012-13. 

 

Our government is also providing an increase of more than $1.5 

million compared to last year’s budget, over 21 million in total, 

for the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 

Commission to purchase an additional 300 training seats. $1.5 

million more is being provided to begin to eliminate the 

wait-list for adult basic education. 

 

This budget also provides increases to support the plan for 

growth commitment to build on promising programs that assist 

First Nations and Métis students to pursue jobs and educational 

opportunities. Work-readiness employment development is 

receiving a $1.5 million increase, boosting annual funding to 

nearly $25 million, in part to accelerate essential skills training 

and to increase employment opportunities for First Nations and 

Métis people through the northern career quest program, the 

Saskatchewan industrial trades and employment partnership, 

and the inroads to agriculture careers program. 

 

We are also providing a half million dollar increase overall for 

the skills training allocation, including $150,000 for the aircraft 

maintenance engineer training program at the Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technology. In addition, the provincial 

training allowance is receiving a $900,000 increase, bringing 

total annual funding to more than $30 million. 

 

As we see more people come to Saskatchewan from outside our 

borders, helping our province grow and our workforce expand, 

it is important we help our new neighbours get a good start. 

That’s why an increase of 1.5 million, more than 9 million in 

total, is being provided for immigrant settlement support 

programming. And, Mr. Speaker, our government will continue 

to advocate for an expansion of the Saskatchewan immigrant 

nominee program which helps bring skilled immigrant workers 

and their families from around the world to our great province. 

 

A highly skilled, well-trained workforce is key to achieving our 

goal of 600,000 people working in Saskatchewan by 2020. As 

we work to build a skilled labour force, we’re continuing our 

focus on one of Saskatchewan’s distinct advantages — a young 

and growing Aboriginal population. We are stepping up efforts 

to engage Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan’s economy and 

labour force. We will ensure that in the coming years, First 

Nations and Métis people have every opportunity to become a 

major component of the growing Saskatchewan workforce and 

economy. 

 

To succeed, we need to enhance education and employment 

outcomes for First Nations and Métis people. That means more 

support for Aboriginal students and training programs. It means 

more support for initiatives recommended by the joint task 

force on improving education and employment outcomes which 



2830 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2013 

our government has undertaken in partnership with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. In this budget, our 

government has dedicated $3 million in new funding for 

initiatives to respond to the joint task force’s recommendations 

which will be made public in the weeks ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget provides $184.8 million, an increase of 

10.8 million or 6.2 per cent from last year’s budget, for targeted 

program funding from our government’s ministries for 

initiatives that benefit First Nations and Métis people. This 

support is over and above our government’s spending that 

benefits all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Moving forward, our government’s focus will be more funding 

for education and training programs with a proven record of 

success as well as the funding of new programs that are clearly 

dedicated to achieving results. One of the real success stories in 

terms of northern and Aboriginal employment has been our 

province’s uranium industry. Close to half of those employed in 

Saskatchewan’s uranium industry are Aboriginal. However in 

recent years, uranium mine expansion has been discouraged due 

to the royalty regime and more attractive taxation policies in 

other uranium-producing countries. 

 

In this budget, we are moving to addressing that barrier to 

growth in the same way the government introduced a successful 

new potash royalty structure a few years ago that resulted in 

major expansion and employment opportunities. Today our 

government is looking to duplicate that success through 

changes to modernize our uranium royalty structure which we 

believe will lead to new expansions, new investment, and new 

jobs in the North, particularly for First Nation and Métis people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government continues to move forward on the 

children and youth agenda. This budget includes a total increase 

of $12.1 million for the priorities of the children and youth 

agenda including the child welfare review and increases for 

programs addressing fetal alcohol syndrome and autism. This 

brings support from all areas of government to these most vital 

initiatives to over $290 million. We are providing an increase of 

almost 6.7 million for the organizations that provide child and 

family services. 

 

In the last five years there were 33,000 new housing starts in 

Saskatchewan, 65 per cent more than the number built during 

the previous five years. Last year alone there were nearly 

10,000 housing starts in our province, the largest number since 

the 1970s. As well in 2012, rental starts hit 1,072. This is more 

than the rental starts in the years 2002 to 2009 combined, but 

we need to do more in order to meet the housing demands of a 

growing province. 

 

This budget continues our government’s commitment to invest 

$344 million in 12,600 new affordable housing units by 2016. 

This year’s commitment includes: $10 million investment in the 

proposed students’ residence at the U of R, construction of 

1,300 new rentals under the rental construction initiative with 

funding of $6 million, development of 240 new home 

ownership units through the affordable home ownership 

program with funding of 1.2 million, support for 70 secondary 

suites with funding of $1 million, construction of 40 new homes 

through Habitat for Humanity by doubling the current funding 

from 1 million to $2 million, repairs to 275 existing affordable 

housing units to keep them viable with $3.2 million in funding 

through the Saskatchewan repair program, and construction of 

140 new government subsidized homes with $5 million under 

the federal-provincial cost-shared rental development and 

capital rent subsidy programs. This budget also provides nearly 

$4 million more to cover increased use of the Saskatchewan 

rental housing supplement. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, food safety continues to be a priority of our 

government. This budget provides 1.5 million, a $250,000 

increase, to ensure adequate resources for provincial meat 

inspection as well as $3 million for the first year of 

Saskatchewan’s seven-year, $15 million commitment to the 

Global Institute for Food Security. 

 

And in the area of water security, we’ve established the Water 

Security Agency, bringing together government’s core water 

management responsibilities. And we will be increasing 

funding to the rural water control program by $500,000 to $1.2 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our growing economy allows us to invest in the 

arts and creative industries. This budget provides a 5 per cent 

increase to the Saskatchewan Arts Board, bringing annual 

funding for that organization to $6.8 million in support of 

funded art organizations. This budget also provides $5 million 

to the new Creative Saskatchewan’s investment program to 

support growth and development in the areas of music and 

sound recording, film and television, digital media, visual arts, 

publishing, crafts, theatre, and dance. 

 

We are also providing $100,000 in new funding to match the 

city of Regina’s commitment to support operations at the 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] Heritage Centre. And 

this budget provides $50,000 in new funding to support the 

development of a military history project to help promote and 

safeguard Saskatchewan’s proud military heritage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another way to improve the quality of life for 

Saskatchewan people is to provide more options for their 

retirement income. Saskatchewan has been supportive of the 

federal government’s efforts to strengthen Canada’s retirement 

income system through the introduction of pooled registered 

pension plans, or PRPPs. In order to make PRPPs available to 

all Saskatchewan employees and the self-employed, our 

government will introduce The Pooled Registered Pension 

Plans Act in 2013. 

 

Saskatchewan’s PRPP legislation will mirror federal legislation 

with modifications as necessary to align with existing 

provincial pension rules. As with the federal legislation, PRPPs 

will be a voluntary option for Saskatchewan employers, 

allowing them to choose whether or not to offer a PRPP to their 

employees. Our government will also be introducing legislation 

that will create the opportunity for the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan to become a PRPP provider. 

 

Pension discussion, Mr. Speaker, reminds me of Gail’s 

questions about my retirement and when I might be able to do 

something about that list of things that have been postponed for 

years. It’s almost easier to deal with the growth of the province 



March 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2831 

of Saskatchewan than it is to deal with the growth of that to-do 

list. Sorry, dear. 

 

One of the biggest challenges facing a growing province is 

addressing its infrastructure needs. Our government is meeting 

that challenge. We have invested 4.9 billion in infrastructure 

since 2008. And with an additional $847.5 million in this 

budget, we are investing close to $5.8 billion, close to double 

what was invested from 2002 to 2007. 

 

The growth plan calls for an additional $2.5 billion investment 

in infrastructure over the next three years. We are on track. This 

year’s capital plan invests 847.5 million, an increase of 7.6 per 

cent or $59.8 million over last year, for schools, post-secondary 

facilities, hospitals and long-term care facilities, highways and 

roads, municipal infrastructure, parks, and other provincial 

government buildings and facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that we’re ahead of schedule 

to meet our government’s commitment to invest $2.2 billion in 

highways and transportation infrastructure over a four-year 

period. This budget includes more than 168 million to repave at 

least 280 kilometres of highways as well as upgrade an 

additional 75 kilometres to a higher standard; nearly $142 

million for preventative maintenance on provincial highways 

and bridges; more than $63 million for economic corridors, 

projects such as the Regina west bypass, the Estevan bypass, 

the Highway 10 passing lanes, and completion of the Highway 

11 twinning initiative; more than 49 million for bridges and 

culverts, including over $14 million for the St. Louis bridge 

near Prince Albert; more than 49 million in winter maintenance 

as well as safety maintenance activities such as mowing, 

drainage, and pavement marking and illumination; and more 

than $33 million for rural and urban municipalities to help 

improve and maintain their road systems. 

 

Our government is also extremely proud of our record when it 

comes to building schools. We have funded more than 40 major 

school projects and hundreds of smaller renovation and repair 

projects since 2007 — a total capital investment of close to 

$600 million. 

 

School enrolments are continuing to grow in most of 

Saskatchewan for the first time in many years, so we need even 

more new schools. And we need to look at innovative ways to 

get those schools built and opened as soon as possible. If we 

only used the old funding formulas to build new schools, we 

simply will not catch up. That’s why we’re moving toward an 

innovative approach in the construction of groups of some of 

our new schools potentially as P3s [public-private partnership], 

as P3 projects under SaskBuilds. 

 

Saskatchewan is growing like it never has before. SaskBuilds is 

all about bringing innovation to the infrastructure needs of 

Saskatchewan, whether it’s schools, highways, or hospitals. We 

will look at all of the viable options to achieving our 

infrastructure needs, and P3s, public-private partnerships, will 

be an important option as we move forward. 

 

This budget is providing $6 million to SaskBuilds to review the 

financial viability of the following P3 opportunities: the 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, Regina’s southeast 

bypass infrastructure, and SaskBuilds will be examining the 

financial viability of constructing a number of new schools 

through a bundling approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget also provides clear direction for the 

future use of the Growth and Financial Security Fund. 

Beginning this year, the fund will retain a security portion of 

just over $500 million for unforeseen events outside of 

government’s control as outlined by the Premier in the plan for 

growth. The remainder of the fund, this year about $182 

million, will be designated as the growth portion of the fund for 

future infrastructure projects and debt reduction. The money in 

the fund will not be allocated to any specific projects until the 

impact of the potential spring melt of this year is known. This 

money will be available to cover flooding costs if necessary. 

 

Our commitment to partnering with municipalities continues. 

This budget provides $362 million in direct provincial support 

to municipalities, a 5.7 per cent increase from last year. 

Importantly it’s a 49.6 per cent increase from 2007-08. That’s 

just over $120 million in additional support. This includes just 

over $264 million for municipal revenue sharing, equal to the 

revenue from one full point of the PST [provincial sales tax]. 

That’s an increase of more than 11 per cent compared to last 

year, or $27 million. 

 

Since 2007-08, revenue sharing to municipalities has more than 

doubled. In this spring session, Mr. Speaker, our government 

will also introduce amendments to The Planning and 

Development Act to help us plan in various areas of our 

province that are growing quickly. 

 

This budget has $250,000 in new funding for regional planning 

authorities, which will help cities and nearby rural 

municipalities work together so that all Saskatchewan people in 

cities, in surrounding towns and villages, and on our farms to be 

able to continue to benefit from growth. 

 

In addition this year, funding for the municipal roads for the 

economy program is increasing by $2 million to 25.5 million to 

help build and repair the roads that sustain our rural economy. 

 

Saskatchewan is well placed because we produce what the 

world needs — food, fuel, and fertilizer. 2012 was a record year 

for Saskatchewan in terms of exporting international goods. 

And a renaissance is underway in the agricultural industry, 

historically one of the pillars of Saskatchewan’s economy. The 

growth plan calls for a doubling of the value of exports by 2020 

and a 50 per cent boost in agriculture and food exports and an 

increase in crop production by 10 million tonnes. This budget 

includes support for international engagement, trade missions, 

market development, and advocacy. 

 

With the goal of boosting exports and building competitiveness, 

our government is providing Innovation Saskatchewan with 

annual funding of over $28 million, more than a three-fold 

increase compared to the previous year. That funding includes a 

$19 million increase for a total of more than 22 million for the 

nuclear research and development strategy. Funding for this 

strategy includes over $16 million for a cyclotron, with the goal 

of producing medical isotopes in Saskatchewan and $5 million 

for the Sylvia Fedoruk Canadian Centre for Nuclear Innovation 

at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 



2832 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2013 

We are also providing nearly $1.9 million more this year for a 

total in excess of 3.3 million to Innovation Saskatchewan for 

the Saskatchewan Advantage Innovation Fund. This includes $1 

million for enhanced oil recovery, $890,000 for SpringBoard 

West Innovations, and $500,000 for International Minerals 

Innovation Institute. As exemplified by the cyclotron and our 

nuclear strategy overall, we’re looking for innovation to 

accompany new investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to help ensure our ongoing competitiveness in the 

agricultural sector, this budget provides nearly $407 million to 

the Ministry of Agriculture. This includes more than 198 

million — a $21 million increase — to fund crop insurance, 

which includes record-high coverage levels of $194 per acre on 

average. Mr. Speaker, this budget’s allocation to crop insurance 

is the largest ever. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Agriculture funding also includes more than $70 million for 

strategic initiatives through the federal-provincial Growing 

Forward 2 framework — an increase of 25 million over the 

previous framework. This budget will provide a record high 

$27.7 million for agricultural research — an increase of over 7 

million. This includes the $3 million to fund the Global Institute 

for Food Security. For the first time ever the budget includes $1 

million for irrigation bridge rehabilitation to support the 

long-term growth of irrigation in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is about growth, and this budget is 

about balance. In recent years, deficits and debt have once again 

become the norm across Canada and around the world. But 

during this time, there is one place that chose not to go down 

that road. There is one province that has balanced the budget 

every year — year after year. We have also reduced the debt, 

and we remain committed to reducing the debt a further $400 

million by March 31st, 2017. 

 

This is not simply an accounting exercise. It means real savings 

for Saskatchewan people. Reducing the debt by $3 billion since 

our government took office has resulted in accumulated savings 

of $600 million in interest costs. Six hundred million dollars — 

money that in turn was used to build roads and schools, to lower 

taxes, to increase support for low-income individuals, and to 

invest in training and education for our young people. That’s 

why balance is important. 

 

Now to get there, you may have to make some difficult choices. 

You have to control spending, and that means some groups in 

our province will have to get by with a little smaller funding 

increase than they might have hoped for. Sometimes decisions 

have to be delayed. Our government remains committed to 

reducing the business tax rate as outlined in the plan for growth, 

but that reduction will not start this year. It will start when it is 

affordable and sustainable within a balanced budget. 

 

This budget will also raise the tobacco tax and liquor markups. 

Cigarette taxes will increase by 4 cents a cigarette with the 

same increase per gram on other tobacco products effective 

midnight tonight. And liquor markups will increase about 3 per 

cent effective April 1st, 2013. In order to achieve balance, we 

continue to reduce the size of government. We are on track to 

achieve our four-year target of reducing the public service 

workforce by 15 per cent, more than 1,900 positions, including 

600 positions in 2013-14. This will result in cumulative 

annualized savings of $198 million over four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget comes at a remarkable time in our 

province’s history. Our province is growing at its fastest pace in 

nearly 100 years. Our economy is leading the nation and 

creating jobs at record pace. Saskatchewan is the place to be. 

 

At the same time, it is important that we meet the challenges of 

a growing province. We need to invest in infrastructure, and we 

are. We need to shorten surgical wait times, and we are. We 

need to support our students and create an educated, 

well-trained workforce, and we are. We need to do more for 

people with disabilities, for people with lower incomes, and we 

are. We need to ensure better training and more opportunities 

for First Nations and Métis, and we are. We need to control 

spending, and we are. We need to balance the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people. We need to balance the opportunities and 

challenges of growth. We need to balance the budget, and we 

are. 

 

We know there’s more to do, Mr. Speaker. However I am 

pleased to be able . . . I am pleased to table a budget that does 

all of these things and more, and that keeps Saskatchewan 

moving forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member for Saskatoon Greystone: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 

seconded by the member for Saskatoon Greystone: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 

opposition, it’s my honour to respond briefly to the budget 

tabled today. Our response is informed by listening to the 

people of Saskatchewan. The priorities that NDP MLAs hear 

from middle-class families all over the province are the things I 

want to focus on here today, although I’m sure Saskatchewan’s 

common sense people will have more to say in the days and 

weeks to come. 

 

I’m pleased to be joined here today in this Assembly by 

community leaders from all across our province — leaders in 

our municipalities, First Nations and Métis leaders, business 

leaders, educational leaders, working men and women, many 

good friends, and family. Thank you so very much for 



March 20, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2833 

attending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP has been absolutely clear on what this 

budget needed to contain. Quite simply, we called for 

improving education to support our students in classrooms, 

recognizing they’re under great strain and pressure. 

 

We called on government to support our parents and 

grandparents, seniors across Saskatchewan, through more 

choices and more spaces in long-term care. And we called on 

the government to be transparent and accountable, to put 

forward one set of books, to cut the budgetary manipulation and 

spin and to comply with public sector accounting standards, to 

listen to the call of the Provincial Auditor and to provide 

Saskatchewan people with the straight goods on their money, 

the full and true state of our province’s finances. They deserve 

nothing less. Unfortunately, the NDP is disappointed to say that 

the Sask Party is 0 for 3 in satisfying these common sense 

priorities. 

 

I would add the budget had another major concern that we need 

to talk about. What we have here is a credit card budget. The 

Sask Party is now turning to expensive, risky P3 privatization 

schemes for infrastructure, which is kicking the can down the 

road, passing the buck to future generations, and a plan that is 

sure to catch up with Saskatchewan some time soon. Whether 

it’s in education or costly P3s or debt, the Sask Party’s mantra 

seems to be, just let the kids pay for it. 

 

In education, classrooms are bursting at the seams, but we’ve 

had refusals from the Sask Party to cap class sizes at a 

reasonable level. Some teachers are actually forced into 

teaching students in hallways and in staff rooms. Three hundred 

and fifty educational assistants have been cut by that Sask Party 

government, eliminating supports for the most vulnerable and 

impacting all students. Schools that require renovation because 

of safety issues like asbestos haven’t been fixed, and 

communities that need a school haven’t been helped. 

 

This budget fails to address these challenges. The new money it 

coughs up is for areas like testing instead of teaching, Mr. 

Speaker. That government is stubbornly pushing ahead with its 

own standardized testing agenda despite the absence of 

common sense or evidence to support its short-sighted plan. 

Students, teachers, and families deserve better. 

 

As for long-term care, too many of our parents and 

grandparents have to wait for a dignified long-term care space. 

For many, the right space never becomes available. For some, 

the space they get is away from their hometown, sometimes 

away from family, often separating couples. The stories are 

heartbreaking. 

 

This budget makes modest steps in home care, and we want to 

thank the government for that. But the support is merely a 

fraction of the work that’s required. This budget should have 

created more choices and more spaces in long-term care. It 

failed to do so. Failing to provide long-term care doesn’t just 

impact our parents and grandparents, but it creates a backlog in 

our hospitals. While seniors wait in hospital wards, the ripple 

effect means patients wait longer in emergency rooms, and it 

delays surgeries. 

 

The long-term care projects mentioned in this budget are 

recycled, rehashed announcements, announced a full four years 

ago in 2009, still not complete at this point in time. Many of the 

people that are here today will have been here for that budget 

when they were announced. 

 

As for transparency, Saskatchewan people deserve nothing 

short of the straight goods, the full, true state of our finances. 

Once again, that’s being denied. The way this government 

reports our finances is improper, out of date with accounting 

standards, out of line with every other province, acceptable 

nowhere else in Canada. The reporting has been called 

“misleading” and “wrong” by our Provincial Auditor. Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party stubbornly insists on using misleading 

books, using misleading books and numbers in their boastful 

spin and PR [public relations], including in today’s speech. 

 

This budget lends itself to the same sort of budget manipulation, 

games, and spin we’ve seen from this government in the past, 

despite on budget day every year, each and every year, the 

Finance minister standing up and claiming budgetary balance. 

The reality when the public accounts have been tabled, when 

the books have been closed, is that this government has run 

three consecutive deficits, a fact that has been verified by our 

independent Provincial Auditor. 

 

We’ve learned that the government’s annual song and dance on 

budget day doesn’t reflect the reality of our finances. This side 

of the Assembly will take solid books and a sound budget over 

expensive, misleading, boastful billboards and ads and spin any 

day of the week, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The official opposition is disturbed that while Saskatchewan’s 

economy is doing well, the Saskatchewan Party government 

can’t seem to manage to do the same. With this budget, debt is 

growing nearly $2 billion between this year and next — $2 

billion in just two years, Mr. Speaker, of debt growth. 

Debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] ratios are going in the 

wrong direction. And again the Sask Party’s paying for this on 

the credit card, and the kids, the next generation, will be picking 

up the tab. 

 

Once again the budget raids our Crown corporations. The fact is 

Saskatchewan’s best economy will need both modern, 

profitable, private companies and strong Crown corporations. 

The members opposite seem to have a surprising renewed 

disagreement with that. 

 

The NDP is also disappointed to see that other specific actions 

we’ve called for in the budget are missing. We’ve called for the 

reinstatement of the film employment tax credit with an equal 

or better program. Alas, instead of the government admitting 

that it made a mistake while gutting the film industry, the Sask 

Party has stubbornly doubled down, announcing the elimination 

of SaskFilm too. 

 

We’ve called for the reinstatement of the Aboriginal 

employment development program and action, meaningful 

action on Aboriginal education and employment. I see some 

funding for Aboriginal skills training, and we’re going to have a 

very close look at that program. Certainly we’re willing to 

support positive steps if they’re there. But the benefit of the 

AEDP must be replaced and enhanced to make up for the years 



2834 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2013 

of damage done to First Nations and Métis employment and lost 

opportunity since the Sask Party eliminated that program. 

 

Now there is a silver lining. We’re pleased to see that the 

NDP’s specific request for funding for the First Link program 

for Alzheimer’s patients and their families will see some 

funding. This is a good thing. We’re also supportive of some of 

the new shelter funding. I know recently in meeting with 

shelters in Prince Albert, they shared with me that they were 

forced to turn away over 2,000 women last year alone. That’s 

an investment we need to be making. 

 

[15:15] 

 

I’ve talked about our great disappointment with this budget’s 

failure on health care, on pre-K to 12 education, and on 

transparency. But there are a number of other areas that are also 

of concern. For example, $1 million has been slashed from 

efforts to stem climate change, efforts which were already too 

few when action is needed now to protect our natural 

environment for future generations. 

 

Post-secondary students are facing massive tuition hikes and 

universities have been left in a debt crisis. There’s no 

infrastructure plan for growing communities, which is 

short-sighted and will come as a direct cost to property tax 

payers, homeowners, and businesses. There’s little to address 

affordable housing despite that government’s wrong-headed 

sell-off of affordable homes that will rake in millions of dollars 

this year alone. 

 

There were major cuts in agriculture, including tens of millions 

of dollars taken directly from producers. The Conexus Art 

Centre had its funding cut in half. And there are many, many 

more concerns and cuts, with more consultation and analysis to 

do. 

 

It’s fair to say that the official opposition will continue to 

examine the budget in the coming days and weeks. We’ll be 

listening to Saskatchewan people and their thoughts and their 

ideas. We’ll keep in mind the scrambling that went on to prop 

up the budget, that we see the selling off of assets including 

affordable homes, public land, and the selling off, the 

privatization of a Crown corporation — ISC [Information 

Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] — a profitable, 

dividend-paying Crown corporation. 

 

And we’ll also keep in mind the wasteful priorities of this 

government: spending millions of dollars on three more 

politicians; spending nearly $100,000 of taxpayer money to 

warn taxpayers that the government had created a bad budget; 

spending on expensive ads, PR, and spin; spending on more 

costly, private schemes in ministries and our Crown 

corporations; spending on extravagant hardwood flooring in the 

Premier’s office while telling Saskatchewan’s middle class to 

expect less and get ready for more budget pain. 

 

Simply, Saskatchewan people deserve better. Mr. Speaker, 

because Saskatchewan people deserve better, the NDP will not 

be supporting this budget. In the coming days and weeks, we’ll 

be working hard to listen to and stand strong for families and 

communities all across Saskatchewan on the issues that really 

matter. We’ll have more to say on this budget tomorrow, a more 

detailed analysis and critique. It has been my pleasure and my 

honour to join debate here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I move that debate be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the member for Regina 

Rosemont that the debate now be adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Thursday, March 21st, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Thursday, March 21st, 2013. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I place the question on adjournment, I 

want to first say thank you to our guests who have joined us 

here today and for your co-operation in observing the rules of 

the Assembly. 

 

I would now like to extend an invitation to our guests to join the 

members for a tea in the Legislative Library to your right as you 

exit the Assembly and in room 218 to the left as you exit. 

 

At this time I will place the question. The Government House 

Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands adjourned to 

10 a.m. Thursday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:20.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2819 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2819 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2819 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2819 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 News Director Wins Lifetime Achievement Award 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2819 

 Creativity in Food Budgeting 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2820 

 Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Hall of Fame 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2820 

 Web Series Selected for Festivals 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2820 

 Moose Jaw Salvation Army’s 125th Anniversary 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2821 

 4-H Hall of Fame Inductees  

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2821 

 Saskatchewan Grows 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2821 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Performance of Government and Opposition 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2821 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2821 

 IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2824 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2824 

 Technology Company and University 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2824 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2824 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2825 

 Performance of Government and Opposition 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2825 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2825 

 Standardized Testing and Student Achievement 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2825 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2826 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2826 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2826 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2826 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2826 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2832 

 Resumption of Budget Debate 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2834 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


