
























































Hansard: April 02, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 44A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 2, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5035 
 April 2, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce a number of guests who have 
joined us in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, first of all we have a 
number of guests with us from the Autism Resource Centre 
here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d maybe ask for them to wave when I read their 
name. Keely Wight, who is the executive director of ARC 
[Autism Resource Centre] and has been on the job for a month 
now and, Mr. Speaker, I know is doing a great job in assuming 
her role as the executive director. Bret Bennett: Bret’s a young 
man who has been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. 
He has been employed in the Office of the Lieutenant Governor 
of the province of Saskatchewan, and joining him is his 
grandmother, Agnes. Also Anna Barone, who is a board of 
directors member of the board; Kellie Garrett; Trudi Ihme; and 
Connie Falconer. As well joining us is Arden Fiala, the director 
and vice-president of Autism Society Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few moments ago, members of the 
Assembly joined us in raising a flag for World Autism 
Awareness Day, and one of the colleagues on the government 
side will have more to say about that in a member’s statement 
in a few moments. So I would ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming our guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 
behalf of the official opposition to welcome the delegation here 
today for World Autism Day and Light It Up Blue. To all those 
who advocate for and provide the support services for those 
who are living with autism and their families, thank you for all 
that you do in the community and your advocacy work in 
ensuring that those services grow and those supports grow to 
ensure that all people have an opportunity to lead a full and 
productive life. So thank you for all the work that you do, to 
Arden and Keely and everyone else. I know the minister’s 
already listed you all off, so thank you. I’d ask all my 
colleagues to join in welcoming these guests to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure on behalf of my seatmate, the member from Cypress 
Hills, to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, 
22 grade 11 and 12 students from Eastend. They are here to 
witness the proceedings of the House and tour the building. And 

after they’re done their tour, we’ll have the pleasure of meeting 
with them and attempting to answer some of their questions. 
And hopefully I will provide answers to at least some of their 
questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied today by their teacher, Marie 
Hanson, and the chaperone, Shelley Morvik. And if I 
understood the tour guide correctly, I understand that Ms. 
Hanson has brought a number of her classes to the Assembly. 
And I know my seatmate certainly regrets that he’s not here to 
greet them, but I will fill in for him. And I would ask all 
members to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it’s always a pleasure to 
introduce family members in this Legislative Assembly, and to 
you and through you to the members of the Assembly, I wish to 
introduce my brother from a different mother but the same 
father, George Cote from Yorkton. 
 
George is very involved in the community in Yorkton and the 
surrounding area, manager of Yorkton Parkland Housing, very 
involved in Grace River Mission, does a lot of ministry work 
there as well. And I know he’s in town to visit his little lifesaver 
baby, Dez, and his other grandchild and his family. So I’d ask 
all members to welcome George to his Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition against Saskatchewan health care laundry 
privatization. And we know that in May 2013, the Government 
of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize health care 
laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a for-profit, 
Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen; and that as a result of 
that decision, we know that to privatize health care laundry six 
non-profit health care laundry facilities will be closed within 
two years in the communities of Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, 
Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon. And we know that 
the privatization of health care laundry will mean the 
devastating loss of over 300 good-paying jobs, and devastating 
local economies and families. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in the 
devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 
an Alberta-based corporation; and, furthermore, the 
privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 
risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 
over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 



5036 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents who are in 
support of safety on Dewdney Avenue, and in support of 
rerouting the dangerous heavy-haul truck traffic off of Dewdney 
Avenue. They cite their concerns and cite that it’s unacceptable 
for that government to delay any longer addressing this unsafe 
condition that was created by that government. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today to present a petition on the housing program for northern 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to restore the rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters of the social housing program and to 
reinstate the remote housing program. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular page, 
the people that have signed this page are primarily from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition for real action on climate change. And the undersigned 
residents of this petition wish to bring to your attention the 
following: that Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse 
gas emissions per capita in all of Canada; that Saskatchewan’s 
emissions have continued to grow to 74 million megatonnes, as 
reported by Environment Canada on October 2013, and show 
no signs of decreasing; that the Saskatchewan government has 

failed to tackle climate change, reduce emissions to the 
province’s own targets, or put in any real plan to protect the 
natural environment; that slashing programs such as the Go 
Green Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses energy efficiency 
program set the province on a backwards course; and that since 
2009 the Government of Saskatchewan has reduced climate 
change funding by 83 per cent including another 35 per cent cut 
in the 2014-15 budget: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a real 
plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this come from 
the communities of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

World Autism Awareness Day 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
acknowledge that today, April 2nd, is World Autism Awareness 
Day. To mark this day, we have raised the autism awareness 
flag in front of the Legislative Building. This is a valuable 
opportunity for us to learn more about autism spectrum disorder 
and to build a better understanding of this complex condition 
that has an impact on so many Saskatchewan families. 
 
It is estimated 1 out of 93 children in Canada is affected by 
ASD [autism spectrum disorder], which makes it more 
prevalent than childhood cancer, diabetes, and AIDS [acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome] combined. That is why, Mr. 
Speaker, our government supports a comprehensive approach 
and responsive system for individuals and families affected by 
autism. 
 
We are proud to provide funding to support enhanced autism 
interventions. In 2014-15, we are investing over $7 million 
towards targeted autism supports. That is a 1,400 per cent 
increase since 2007-08. This investment will go towards 
education, training specialist support workers, and diagnostic 
assessment. Our government and health regions work very 
closely with other interested parties to build comprehensive 
autism service systems in Saskatchewan. 
 
On this very special day, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind my 
colleagues that we all have a responsibility to raise awareness, 
to provide support. I ask you all, please join me in recognizing 
World Autism Awareness Day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the 
seventh annual World Autism Awareness Day and the day 
where people around the globe are lighting it up blue. Light It 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5037 

Up Blue is a unique global initiative to kick off World Autism 
Awareness Month, as iconic landmarks and venues as well as 
homes and communities light their buildings blue. 
 
The goal of World Autism Day is to raise awareness of the 
autism crisis and to provide public information about the 
incredible importance of early diagnosis and intervention. Mr. 
Speaker, around 400,000 Canadians live with autism. 
 
In Saskatchewan, families impacted by this disorder have strong 
allies in their corner like SaskFEAT [Saskatchewan Families 
for Effective Autism Treatment] that has been advocating for 
people living with autism spectrum disorder and their families 
for more than a decade; the Autism Resource Centre here that 
provides critical supports and services; and for the second year 
in a row, student Janelle Mandes who organized a Light it Up 
Blue event at the First Nations University of Canada this 
morning. Mandes says it’s important for people with autism to 
be recognized within our communities. She says, “I hope this 
day can bring understanding, acceptance, hope, and pride for 
the community.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in expressing 
our gratitude to those responding to the needs of individuals 
living with autism spectrum disorder and their families and to 
the autism organizations who give a voice to millions of 
individuals worldwide. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Program Helps Developing Nations 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Last Thursday I had the opportunity to bring 
greetings to SaskTel’s We See You event here in Regina on 
behalf of the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure. This 
special event saw SaskTel’s We See You program and the 
University of Regina’s Faculty of Education join forces to 
collect supplies to fill an industrial 40-foot shipping container 
destined for Malawi, Africa. Many organizations around Regina 
donated items such as medical supplies, school supplies, 
clothing, and home items. 
 
This ongoing program benefits a multitude of groups, from the 
students developing their empathy and global awareness and 
education of the people of Malawi, to the beneficiaries of the 
contents who will be immensely impacted by the donated 
goods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was the 15th container shipped through the 
SaskTel We See You program, which focuses on providing 
assistance to various locations throughout the developing world. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to remember that we must never 
take for granted the spirit of community involvement, social 
responsibility, and global awareness we see in Saskatchewan. 
It’s especially inspiring to know that a project like this has the 
power to engage the youthful energies of students, instilling 
within them a sense of global social obligation and 
philanthropy, as truly they are the leaders of tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
great work done by all the partners in this initiative. The team 
work, generosity, and social responsibility behind this cause is 

truly something to celebrate. Thank you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Hindu Society of Saskatchewan Banquet 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday I had the pleasure of 
attending the Hindu Society of Saskatchewan’s 29th annual 
vegetarian banquet along with the member for Saskatoon 
Centre and the member for Saskatoon Nutana. It was a great 
evening to raise money for the Shri Lakshmi Narayan Temple 
in Saskatoon and to support its expansion, Mr. Speaker. The 
food was delicious, the entertainment was lively and enjoyable, 
and the crowd was a big and diverse one. 
 
Successful events like this do not happen on their own. They 
require the work of a committed group of people to make them 
happen. So I want to thank the Hindu Society of 
Saskatchewan’s board of directors: Anu Kashyap, Isha Kumar, 
Rahul Mukherjee, Suresh Kalagnanam, Leela Sharma, 
Neermala Kavia, Atul Desai, Vishal Jheengut, Laxmi Bhargava, 
Dineh Patel, Raj Dhir, Sulochna Parmar, and Subhash Biswal. 
 
I also want to thank banquet advisors: Dr. Kulwant and Ms. 
Janek Rai, Drs. Tilak and Lalita Malhotra, and Drs. Mini and 
Mahesh Khurana. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
the Hindu Society of Saskatchewan on another successful 
banquet and to thank the Hindu community for their ongoing, 
extraordinary contributions to the economic, intellectual, 
cultural, and social fabric of our province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 

Climbing Mountains to Raise Awareness  
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year in 
this House, I recognized an extraordinary woman, Denise 
Heppner. In April 2013, she was the only Canadian woman in a 
group of 44 women from around the globe who trekked Mount 
Everest to summit Mount Kala Patthar. 
 
These amazing women did this to raise awareness and funds to 
help women and children who are in desperate situations. It is 
to stir action and compassion on issues such as slavery, 
exploitation, and trafficking of women and children, women 
and children who live lives that we in Canada cannot even 
begin to imagine. 
 
Well Denise is at it again. This summer she will be joined by 
several other Canadian women for Operation Mobilization’s 
Freedom Climb. They will head to Colorado to summit seven 
mountains in four days. I want to quote from their website: 
 

Women are invited to get dirty, completely uncomfortable, 
and stretched beyond their wildest imagination as they 
climb these mountains in a symbolic gesture of the climb 
to freedom for women and kids around the world. 

 



5038 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

The women participating in Freedom Climb are doing this to be 
the voice of those who have been silenced. This organization 
and the women participating in the climb are guided by the 
principles set out in Proverbs 31, and I quote: 
 

Speak up for those who cannot speak for themselves; 
ensure justice for those being crushed. Yes, speak up for 
the poor and helpless, and see that they get justice. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I continue to be amazed and so very proud of 
Denise. I wish her health as she trains for this incredible 
adventure and for success and safety in her climb in July. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Team Wins Provincial D Midget Hockey Championship 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last year at 
about this time, I rose in the House to inform you and the 
members about the success of the Cupar senior hockey team 
who had won the provincial A championship. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this year the seniors fell a little short, but there is still 
good news coming from the Cupar hockey program. 
 
The Midget team, last weekend, won the Midget D provincial 
championship. On their way to their championship, Mr. 
Speaker, they defeated Glentworth 14 to 3 in a two-game total 
point series. And then they went on to defeat Gull Lake 8 to 4, 
and then to become the southern champions.  
 
Then they battled the northern champions, the Porcupine Blues, 
and the first game ended in a 4-all tie in Cupar. There was a fair 
bit of angst amongst the players and coaches travelling back to 
Porcupine Plain last Saturday. But I’m here to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Cupar Canucks’ Midget team were successful. 
They defeated the Porcupine Blues 4 to 2 to take the two-game 
total point of 9 to 6. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the coaches and the 
managers and all the parents and fans of the Cupar Canucks on 
their success. And yes, Mr. Speaker, in case anyone was 
wondering, there was two players with a Hart name tag on their 
sweaters: no. 12, Ethan, a nephew; and no. 15, Owen, a 
grandson of mine. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Aboriginal Youth Leadership Symposium 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On February 24th this 
year I had the opportunity to speak at the first ever Aboriginal 
Youth Leadership Symposium which was held in Saskatoon. 
This event was hosted by the Aboriginal Friendship Centres of 
Saskatchewan, along with the BC [British Columbia] Centre of 
Excellence for Young Indigenous Leaders. This symposium 
brought together 17 Aboriginal youth between the ages of 18 
and 29 from around this province, to work and learn from 
successful Aboriginal leaders in areas such as finance, 
governance, leadership strategies, wellness, and traditional 
knowledge. 
 

For five days youth heard from facilitators like the members 
from Saskatoon Fairview and Saskatoon Greystone; Aboriginal 
banking specialists; former Assembly of First Nations chief, 
Phil Fontaine; Rick Brandt, director of Aboriginal sport; and 
elders, Maria and Walter Linklater. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is a quote from one of the attendees: “The 
best thing I received this week was a sense of knowing that I 
have a solid network of like-minded individuals from around 
this province I can turn to. That feeling will drive me to better 
our communities for a long time to come.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government was a major sponsor of this 
project and we are very pleased to support the work of the 
Aboriginal Friendship Centres of Saskatchewan as they strive to 
improve the lives of urban Aboriginal people of our province 
through culturally relevant programs and services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know there was some future leaders in that 
group, not only leaders in their own communities, but in 
provincial jurisdictions as well. I ask all members of this 
Assembly to join me in congratulating and thanking the 
Aboriginal Friendship Centres of Saskatchewan for their work 
in empowering our youth. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Training for Health Care Workers and the Lean Initiative 

 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
rejected $540,000 in requests for training from front-line care 
facilities. This included training for care aids in the gentle 
persuasive approach which is recognized as a best practice for 
caring for those with dementia. It also included training for the 
Eden Alternative, which is also a best practice for seniors’ care. 
Care facilities said they desperately needed this training in order 
to improve the quality of care for their residents. But this 
government said no to $540,000 for that important training, but 
it said yes to untold millions of dollars for its lean project. 
 
My specific question is for the Premier: why did this 
government reject $540,000 in training for front-line health care 
workers, and how much is it spending on lean training for 
Saskatchewan health care workers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, through the Urgent Issues Action Fund, funds were 
available for front-line staff as well as some training and some 
equipment. The regional health authorities knew that there was 
$10 million that was available and we asked them to keep their 
request within that $10 million based on the number of beds in 
proportion to what they had across the regions. When they first 
came back to us, as I’ve said in this House, Mr. Speaker, we 
asked them to prioritize their items instead of the government 
choosing their priorities for them. 
 
But I can say with respect to gentle persuasion approaches, six 
health regions now have certified trainers in gentle persuasion 
approaches. As well the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, for 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5039 

example, has begun training their staff to implement gentle 
persuasion within their health region as well within this 
particular health region — Regina Qu’Appelle is what I’m 
talking about — purposeful hourly rounding which I think will 
have a benefit for those residents. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well I can see, Mr. Speaker, why the 
Saskatoon Health Region would want such training for its 
employees. I think the Premier should read through the 250 
pages of urgent requests that came from care facilities. Here’s 
what the Saskatoon Health Region says on page 206: 
 

We heard from residents and families how the approach 
and philosophy of care varied from one special care home 
to another. We do not have a consistent approach or 
philosophy of care and the variation produces very 
different resident outcomes. 

 
To fix that, the Saskatoon Health Region wanted to standardize 
the quality of care across the region in order to use a similar 
approach used at Sherbrooke which is recognized as a best 
practice. So the region asked for just $350,000 to do this 
training, but this government forced them to remove that 
request. They’re making jokes on the other side, the member 
from Sutherland, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the Premier: why would he refuse to pay $350,000 for 
desperately needed training but pour untold millions of dollars 
into lean promotion? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
With respect just to gentle persuasion approach, I can inform 
the House that Heartland Health Region has held training in 
Rosetown and it will be implemented in Kyle and Biggar by in 
fact March 31st of this year. So that training has been 
completed. Training in other facilities will complete it in the 
next year, and staffing levels were increased in Rosetown, 
Davidson, Outlook, Kindersley, and Biggar. 
 
Gentle persuasion, two instructors have been taking the training 
at Kelsey Trail Health Region. They took the training in 
Saskatoon. That’s where some of the experience lies. And 
facility administrators are now organizing upcoming training 
sessions for staff all across the region. That’s Kelsey Trail. 
 
Gentle persuasion, four trainers attended from Prairie North 
Health Region. They attended the certified coach training in 
Saskatoon on February 27th and 28th and they are now, those 
four trainers are now able to train all across the health region. 
That’s just three of the health regions that did receive money for 
this particular program. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health Region, the 
largest health region in the province, wanted $350,000 to 
expand this training across the region, and this government said 
no, and made them pull back that request. If the Premier took 
the time to flip through the 250 pages of urgent requests from 

facilities, he would see them talking about how mandatory 
kaizen basics training is getting in the way of the training that 
would actually help and improve the quality of care for 
residents in care facilities. 
 
So this government, Mr. Speaker, said no to fixing the basics 
and improving the quality of care for residents, but has said yes 
to untold millions of dollars for the Premier’s lean pet project. It 
said no to staff training, Mr. Speaker, that would have 
standardized and improved the quality of care for residents, Mr. 
Speaker, but it said yes to mandatory kaizen basic training 
sessions, Mr. Speaker, where front-line health care workers 
learn Japanese words and learn how to properly fold paper 
airplanes. 
 
My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how on earth can he 
justify this? Why is this government continually wasting dollars 
and failing to fix the basics that are affecting seniors’ care and 
health care here in Saskatchewan? To the Premier. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to lean methodology and the deployment 
of lean throughout the system, the members will know that to 
date we’ve already saved more than what it will cost to 
implement lean. Mr. Speaker, for example, the $26 million that 
we’ve saved in not wasting blood products as we had in the 
past, those dollars can be spent within the health care system. 
Rather than throwing away blood products that don’t actually 
get to the patient, we’ve reduced that amount of waste and that 
can go back into the system. 
 
With respect to what the Leader of the Opposition has asked, 
we did ask the regions to come back and prioritize their dollars 
based on their percentage of beds. But it did result in increase in 
staff and training. For example Saskatoon, we asked them what 
were the priorities. They said 53 total lifts, so we funded those. 
They said facilities receiving extra staffing at Sunnyside, 
Porteous Lodge, Last Mountain pioneer lodge, and Pleasant 
View Care Home. We increased staff in those facilities and 
provided lean . . . Eden training . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well we did. Eden and purposeful 
rounding of hours within several other health regions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Capital Funding for Schools 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Holy Cross High School in 
Saskatoon is the largest Catholic high school in Saskatoon, and 
they need to leave their much needed renovation projects on 
hold, not completed, half done, because that government hasn’t 
provided the appropriate funding. To the Education minister: 
why can’t that government get the job done when it comes to 
the renovation at Holy Cross High School in Saskatoon? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can advise 



5040 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

the member opposite that a funding request was approved in 
2012 for Holy Cross High School. I’ve been at the high school. 
I’ve looked at it. The application was to include things for five 
additional classrooms, a makeover for the gym, locker rooms, 
cafeteria, and other things. 
 
The initial estimate, Mr. Speaker, was $13.2 million of 
government money. When the project went to tender or it was 
going out to be completed, it was going to be significantly over 
budget. The government at that time increased funding so that 
the total project costs would be in the range of just under $30 
million. The government fully supported that and provided 
additional funding for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the course of construction, the school 
division wished to add a science lab, a band room, and a 
number of other things, all good and valid projects but, Mr. 
Speaker, those things were not part of the original application, 
which was significant, and we did not wish to leapfrog anything 
over Connaught, Sacred Heart, or any of the other priorities that 
we have. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we keep hearing more and 
more details about how that government is failing to get the job 
done in the education system and how they’re ignoring 
educational leaders in this province, school boards, and 
teachers, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard about how the Saskatoon 
Public School Division needed 11 portable classrooms but all 
that government gave them was two. We’ve heard that the 
Greater Saskatoon Catholic School Division needs 12 portable 
classrooms and all that government gave them is four. 
 
Now we’ve learned that the government can’t even get the job 
done when it comes to building the schools and renovating the 
schools that we need. This government will actually leave a 
much needed renovation that’s going to cost a lot more to deal 
with in the future in Saskatoon’s largest Catholic high school 
not complete. To the minister: how is this acceptable? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the 
economies when things can be done together. Unfortunately this 
one was not applied for at the same time, so it will be dealt with 
by phases. And the other one will be dealt with in its turn as 
soon as is reasonably done. 
 
I can advise the members opposite that our government has 
provided Saskatoon and area major capital funding since we 
formed government. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have provided 
over $146 million. That includes 10 major capital projects: 
Willowgrove, Nutana, Holy Family, Georges Vanier, Holy 
Cross, St. Matthew, E.D. Feehan, St. Mary, Martensville High 
School, Warman. We’ve provided 21 relocatables. There’s 180 
renovation projects, 14 early year projects and, Mr. Speaker, six 
joint-use schools. Mr. Speaker, that’s the equivalent of 12 
schools that we’ve provided to Saskatoon and area. We’ll make 
no apologies, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Landfill Management 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am going to 
ask questions about muda, but this is real muda — the landfill 
wastes. On December 4th I asked the government about 
contaminated water from the landfill flowing into the river 
upstream from the water intake system in Saskatoon. This 
government had absolutely no answer to that question. But 
we’ve obtained internal documents that show that leachate from 
the Saskatoon landfill is likely reaching the South 
Saskatchewan River. To the minister: what does he know now, 
four months later, about landfill contamination of the river in 
Saskatoon and what is the government doing to protect the river 
and our water quality? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much for the 
question. As the member and I had talked about in estimates the 
other day, landfills are very important to this government. There 
are some 700 that are located around Saskatchewan. We have a 
dedicated branch of the Ministry of Environment that looks to 
them to monitor all of them and to ensure that they operate in a 
safe and healthy manner. We continue to do that. Any 
information that’s brought to our attention we certainly look 
into it and would certainly do that at this particular time. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, four months later and still no 
answer from that minister on the situation in Saskatoon. This 
government’s approach to landfill management is far from 
adequate. The Provincial Auditor said this government needs to 
do much more to protect ground and surface water from 
contamination by landfills. And the government’s own Water 
Security Agency acknowledged in their state of the watershed 
report that 18 of the province’s 29 watersheds are under 
moderate- to high-intensity stress from landfills. Let me repeat 
that: 62 per cent of Saskatchewan’s watersheds are under 
moderate- to high-intensity stress as a result of landfills. 
 
To the minister: why is this government leaving people open to 
the risk of drinking contaminated water by not properly 
regulating and monitoring Saskatchewan’s landfills? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 
question. I’ll reiterate again, this government considers landfills 
a top priority. Certainly if a landfill has been found to be in 
non-compliance, notices of violations are issued and, depending 
on the severity, it’s accompanied by a fine. That indeed does 
happen from time to time. It’s happened when members 
opposite were in government. It happens today. One is too 
many and that’s the way this government views it. 
 
But again we look at all 700. We have some under annual 
compliance. Our goal is to have them looked at at least every 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5041 

three years. Again if there’s additional information that the 
member has, we certainly will look into that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Social Services Expenditures and Responsibilities 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Social Services claimed last week that 
she is not cutting jobs in the child and family services division 
of Social Services, but the budget documents clearly show a cut 
of $5.6 million in salaries from the child and family services 
division. To the minister: why won’t she just admit that she is 
cutting child and family services jobs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 
members opposite. If he looks at the budget document, the 
member will see that there is money being transferred from 
government organizations to community-based organizations. 
The member opposite knows that Dales House and Red Willow, 
the last two government-operated group homes in 
Saskatchewan, were closed at the end of the month and that we 
now have more group homes that are run in the communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are now about 900 spaces in the community. 
The last 16 that were operated by government are closed and, 
Mr. Speaker, that work started under the previous 
administration. The previous administration had all but 16 left, 
and now we know that the work can be done within the 
community, and that’s what we’re doing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, at a time when the minister’s 
been cutting jobs in child and family services and elsewhere in 
her ministry, you would think she would show a bit more 
restraint. To the minister: why did taxpayers have to spend 
$3,634.33 for a limousine service when she was in London, 
England for four days last June? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the expenses that happened 
last year in England was during a trip where I took not only to 
England but to Ghana, and I talked about fetal alcohol spectrum 
disorder. And then when I was in England, I had an opportunity 
to meet with a number of organizations, including the ministers 
of Education, people from housing, and also people involved 
with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. 
 
I was very cautious of the amount of money that we were 
spending, but I also know that as a government we learn from 
other organizations. We talked to the disability community as 
well and at that time the conversations that we had helped us to 
direct our own disability program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that the money that we spend as 
ministers are looked at by the taxpayers. I’m aware of that, but 
I’m also conscious of what we can be learning from other 
organizations. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services 
and one government official, the cabinet secretary, charged 
$3,634.33 for limousine services while she was in London, 
England for just four days. That’s eight months of social 
assistance and shelter allowance for a single adult. To the 
minister: why didn’t she just take a black cab or the 
underground subway? Why did she rack up over $3,600 in limo 
fees? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am very, very much 
aware of the costs when I’m travelling. So is every other 
minister when we go out on the trips. And I know when we 
make any movements around cities like London, which I’m 
sorry I’m not familiar with, I do ask somebody to take me 
around to them. We had an opportunity to meet with a number 
of different organizations that have an impact on what we’re 
doing as government. 
 
When you can see the spending that we have done as members 
of government, it is considerably less than was spent by the 
members opposite, and I would dare to say that the result of 
what we’re doing has had an impact on the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can talk about me all he 
likes. I think what he should be asking is how we’re making a 
difference to the people that are vulnerable in the province. And 
I’ll stand up for that record any day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services 
and the cabinet secretary spent almost $19,000 in total to visit 
London and Ghana. The Ministry of Social Services has no 
notes about the minister’s trip to Ghana and neither does 
Executive Council. But taxpayers paid $19,000 for her trip, 
including over $3,600 for a limo in London. To the minister: 
how can she justify this kind of spending when she’s making 
cuts from her own department, including the child and family 
services division? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to clarify 
the last statement that the member made when he said that there 
was cuts. Actually the budget for the child and family services 
last year was $209,911. This year it’s $218,397. That is an 
increase, not a decrease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also know that as a government the work that 
we’re doing, especially in countries like Ghana where there is 
very little information about issues like fetal alcohol spectrum 
disorder, we know that in a province that’s growing, we have an 
opportunity not just to talk about economic issues, but I think 
we have a responsibility to talk about social issues as well. I had 
an opportunity to talk to health officials, the Minister of 
Education, and various organizations there to talk about FASD 
[fetal alcohol spectrum disorder]. And that’s something that’s 
been important not only to us, but I remember being in 



5042 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

opposition where the members opposite actually agreed to a bill 
where we’re talking about awareness. 
 
In a province that’s leading Canada in so many ways, I am 
proud to be able to say that our province is talking not just 
about economic issues, but about social issues. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Payments to Contractors 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
keep hearing about how that government is obsessing over pet 
projects and dropping the ball on the basics. Now we’ve learned 
that the Ministry of Highways is failing to pay its bills, and I’d 
say getting the province’s bills paid is pretty basic. It’s 
embarrassing, Mr. Speaker. There are millions of dollars in 
outstanding bills. 
 
So again to the Highways minister: how much does this 
government owe in unpaid bills? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think the member opposite, being a former Highways 
minister, albeit for a short time, would understand the process 
that goes on, Mr. Speaker, when contractors do work in the 
province. And a significant amount of work has been done over 
the last seven years in the province. 
 
Money is paid out as that process goes on. Roughly about 90 
per cent is paid out as the contract goes on. Roughly about 10 
per cent of that money is withheld to make sure that the work is 
done to our satisfaction, Mr. Speaker. It wouldn’t be wise to 
pay all the money out and then have issues with work that 
hadn’t been complete. That’s why that money is held back. 
 
There’s also some issue with paperwork, Mr. Speaker, making 
sure the contractors get the paperwork in on time so we can pay. 
 
I will say, Mr. Speaker, there are cases that we haven’t been as 
diligent as what we needed to be, Mr. Speaker. We are working 
on that within the ministry to ensure that all contractors get paid 
on a timely basis when the work is complete, both agreed on by 
the contractor as well as the ministry. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, workers in the Ministry of 
Highways have been telling the Construction Association that 
lack of staff is the problem. Now let’s look at his record, Mr. 
Speaker. That government and that minister cut 342 jobs in the 
ministry over the last three years, 342 jobs — 42 more job cuts 
just in this last year’s budget. Now, Mr. Speaker, again to the 
minister: are these staff cuts the reason why this government is 
failing the simple, the simple job of paying their bills on time? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say to the 

question . . . First of all, he’s used some numbers there. I would 
use the 664.5 million that’s spent on highways this year, a 
record amount of spending, Mr. Speaker, far outstrips anything 
that the former government did. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would say that there is work to 
do within the ministry. We work very closely with the 
Construction Association to make sure that those payments are 
done on a timely basis. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think all members of this 
House would expect us to hold back money until the job is 
complete. That is just a practice that was done under the former 
government. It is done under this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in the case where payments aren’t being made as timely as 
what they need to be, we are working on that within the 
ministry. We don’t believe it’s an issue around staffing, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s an issue around paperwork that we need to lean 
up, Mr. Speaker, and we will certainly assure to do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — There’s that word lean again, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families know that they have to pay 
their bills on time or pay a price. And having a reputation for 
failure to pay for a service could mean higher bids from 
contractors leery to take another job from this government. No 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, some contractors don’t finish the roads 
on time. This government isn’t paying them on time. Once 
again to the minister: what repercussions could Saskatchewan 
suffer or has the province already suffered as a result of its 
failure to pay their bills on time? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, we 
work very closely with the Saskatchewan truck . . . the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association. And the Trucking 
Association as well, Mr. Speaker. But the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association, I’ve met with representatives from 
Morsky’s, for example, from Botkin on an individual basis, as 
well as Shantel Lipp, Mr. Speaker, from the Construction 
Association, Sean Wilson. We know this is an issue. We’re 
working on it to make sure that we can address it into the 
future. 
 
But I will say, Mr. Speaker, to a construction company and 
especially through the Construction Association, never have 
they seen record spending on highways like they have seen 
under this government over the last seven years. Mr. Speaker, I 
would say that there is more work to do, absolutely. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a far cry from the 200 and $300 million budgets 
under the NDP [New Democratic Party] to the $600 million 
budgets under the Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the Sask Party math. 
They talk about record revenues and spending on highways, but 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5043 

nobody has been getting paid, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Highways minister has a lot of bluster today, and I’ve 
asked a straightforward question. I’ve asked how much the 
Highways ministry owes in unpaid bills — a very simple 
question, Mr. Speaker. I’ve asked why the Highways ministry 
isn’t paying its bills and whether it’s because this government 
cut 342 jobs from the ministry. And I’ve asked about the 
repercussions of not paying these bills. But the minister has no 
answers, Mr. Speaker, just a whole lot of rhetoric and spin. 
Saskatchewan people deserve answers to these questions. 
 
So once again to the minister: how much does the Ministry of 
Highways owe? Why isn’t it paying its bills? And what are the 
consequences of not paying these bills? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there are 
about 78 contracts since 2012 that are outstanding. The vast 
majority of those contracts have been paid, roughly about 90 
per cent. It would be only prudent for a government — which 
was again, done under the previous government — to withhold 
money to ensure those contracts are completed adequately, Mr. 
Speaker. About 40 per cent of those remaining contracts still 
have additional work to be completed. About 60 per cent of 
them, Mr. Speaker, are waiting for some more paperwork from 
the contractor. 
 
But I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, the Construction Association 
has also said that we’re working diligently to address the 
problem. Not that there isn’t a bit of an issue here, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re working with the Construction Association. But once 
again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a far cry from, for example, the 
members opposite, when they would talk to a city, for example 
to take the top off the bridge and then never pay for it from the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker. They expected Prince Albert to pay for it. 
We’re a long ways from those days under the NDP. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
this bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 120, The 
Lobbyists Act and that the bill be now read the third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 120, The Lobbyists Act, be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 100, The Assessment Management 
Agency Amendment Act, 2013 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 100, The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 and that 
the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 



5044 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2013 

 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 100, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 
2013 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment 
Act, 2013 (No. 2) without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 116, The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) and that the bill be 
now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
to report Bill No. 117, The Municipalities Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2013. This is a bilingual bill without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 117, The 
Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 and that 
the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi 

intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 117, The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 
2013 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5045 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 312 through 325. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 312 through 325. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Public-Private Partnership and New Bridge for Saskatoon 

 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
privilege to rise today and talk to a motion that I will be moving 
at the end of my comments, Mr. Speaker. It’s regarding bridges 
within the province of Saskatchewan and especially bridges that 
are built in a certain model called a P3, which is a 
public-private partnership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that in Saskatchewan over the last number of years, 
seven years to a decade, Mr. Speaker, the population certainly 
has grown. We continue to see growth throughout the province, 
Mr. Speaker, and with that growth becomes obviously some 
infrastructure challenges. There are larger traffic numbers that 
we see here in the southern part of the province in and around 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we’re doing a lot of work 
to ensure that we have an east and west Regina bypass to 
alleviate some of the congestion that we see on Vic East. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if there’s anywhere in the 
province that’s growing more rapidly than the Saskatoon area, 
with all the development north of Saskatoon, the Martensville 
and Warman area. Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing extreme growth in 
that area, developments, rural developments in between those 
communities and Saskatoon, a lot of growth on the north side, 
on the east side — Mr. Speaker, quite frankly all around 
Saskatoon. Even on the south side as you’re going up No. 11, 
you see new acreages going up.  
 
So the growth is significant, and I think that’s reflective in Stats 
Canada’s numbers, year over year, when you see our population 
increasing. It’s great to see it increasing at above, Mr. Speaker, 
the national average. 
 
I remember being in this House a number of years ago, sitting 

on the opposition side when we were talking, as an opposition 
party at that time, that I think it would be realistic if we as a 
province — and at that time as an opposition, but hopefully 
becoming government — if we would set some targets and say, 
we should be able to grow at the national average.  
 
And I remember the members that were under the NDP flag at 
that time that sat on this side said, that is statistically 
impossible. There is no way this province will grow at the 
national average, which was about 1 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And 
I guess I think it really did show the lack of foresight that the 
members opposite had when they were on this side and, as a 
result, I think that’s probably why they’re on that side. But we 
have seen significant growth and especially in the Saskatoon 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this past budget you would have heard the 
commitment by our government to the city of Saskatoon on 
their proposal to PPP [Public-Private Partnership] Canada 
asking for federal money through PPP Canada for the north 
bridge, Mr. Speaker. Actually they’ve asked, they’ve bundled 
the bridges — the commuter bridge and the north bridge — into 
one application to PPP Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we wanted to show commitment. Especially from our 
perspective, the north bridge is quite significant because we 
really do believe with that bridge it will alleviate some of the 
pressure we’re seeing on that north side of Saskatoon coming 
in, for example, on we’ll say Idylwyld — it turns into No. 16 
eventually — but coming in on Idylwyld and Circle Drive 
north. That intersection there is significant with a backlog of 
traffic. You’ve got heavy traffic. You have commuter traffic. 
 
We think that a north bridge, working with Saskatoon and PPP 
Canada, that that will certainly alleviate a lot of the commuter 
traffic. It doesn’t impact the heavy truck traffic as much, Mr. 
Speaker, because it is where it’s situated. But it certainly will 
alleviate a lot of the commuter traffic that I think then backs up 
and congests the roadways that we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very evident that our government has 
been very committed to municipalities over the last seven years 
of our mandate, with record amounts of revenue sharing. Mr. 
Speaker, municipal revenue sharing in Saskatchewan has 
increased by 102 per cent, from $127 million in 2007 and ’08 to 
$257 million in this year’s budget. That’s a significant increase. 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have been supporting . . . 
 
And when in the budget we say we want to commit to the city 
of Saskatoon for the bridges, I think the city of Saskatoon . . . 
And I can tell you from experience of being in Saskatoon, the 
mayor and council, but in particular the mayor of Saskatoon, 
Mayor Don Atchison, has been extremely supportive and 
extremely grateful for the support that our government has 
shown the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The city of Saskatoon has seen revenue increases just through 
revenue sharing of 159 per cent. They’ve gone from 17.8 
million when we took government, Mr. Speaker, — that’s what 
the revenue sharing was under the former government — to 
$45.9 million in this year’s budget. That’s an increase of 159 
per cent. That is amazing, Mr. Speaker, but what is even more 
gratifying is to hear the mayor of Saskatoon and how he 



5046 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

acknowledges that pretty much any time that I’m at a public 
event with the mayor. And council as well have done a great job 
in acknowledging that. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t mean there aren’t 
more pressures in that area. And that’s why in this year’s 
budget we have committed to Saskatoon to support them in 
whichever way we can as they put forward their P3 approach to 
the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government I think has been very . . . There’s 
a trademark I’m sure on this government, and that’s the fact that 
in seven years, a balanced budget each and every year. Mr. 
Speaker, so what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is not only 
operating within a balanced budget, but we’re also looking at 
other jurisdictions and what they have done in those 
jurisdictions to deal with the infrastructure pressures they have 
seen, whether it’s in British Columbia; whether it’s in Alberta; 
even in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, I was there just earlier today 
and yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and dealing with some of their 
pressures; Ontario. But you don’t even have to look just within 
Canada. There are many other jurisdictions around the world 
that have gone down the road of public-private partnerships or 
P3s. 
 
[14:30] 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I was at a conference not too long ago; I 
guess it would be in the summer. It’s called the NASCO [North 
American Strategy for Competitiveness] Conference — which 
is the Prairie provinces and kind of a corridor down through the 
middle of United States, down into Texas — and, you know, 
making sure we have proper linkages with transportation. And I 
was amazed at how, for example, the elected officials and 
community officials, municipal or state officials, were talking 
about the various P3s that they’ve had implemented in Texas 
and how successful they have been over the past number of 
years to deal with the infrastructure challenges that they’re 
facing, not unsimilar to what we’ve been looking at as well. 
 
Let’s make sure though that the people of Saskatchewan realize 
that P3s are not for every project. Roughly about 80 to 90 per 
cent of all the projects — capital projects that we’re going to be 
doing as we move forward here in Saskatchewan — will be 
traditional builds. So for the traditional build fans on that side 
of the aisle, they’ve got something to cheer about there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I just think that they should probably put another song in their 
playbook and start looking at P3s because everyone else across 
Canada and certainly down into the States have been singing 
from that song sheet, Mr. Speaker, and have been very, very 
positive with it, Mr. Speaker. And I think there’s enough 
evidence now. I know the opposition will like to look at a 
project that happened in Nova Scotia back in the early ’90s. But 
if you look at, Mr. Speaker, the projects that have been done in 
Canada over the last number of years, there have been over 200 
projects, P3 projects in Canada — 206 to be exact, roughly 
about $63.5 billion worth of projects under construction. 
 
The Conference Board of Canada, Mr. Speaker, has looked at 
many of those and they’ve reported that Canada’s P3s have 
delivered an average of 13 per cent in cost savings compared to 

traditional build. That’s a significant amount of dollars that you 
wouldn’t want to leave on the table, Mr. Speaker. I heard that 
mentioned last week, that you don’t want to leave any money 
on the table. So certainly P3s is an example of not leaving those 
dollars on the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also we know that Australia has, not 
experimented, but certainly had success with P3 projects. The 
University of Melbourne had looked at P3 projects in Australia. 
They’ve examined 21 P3 projects. They have found that, Mr. 
Speaker, they vary in design, build, finance and design, build, 
finance, maintain. But they have studied this through the 
university and realized anywhere from 11 to 31 per cent cost 
savings by using the P3 model. It’s been done in other 
jurisdictions. It can be done here. 
 
But right now I do know that for the most part — not 
everybody, but for the most part — members on the other aisle 
are just ideologically, absolutely dead set against P3s. Not 
everybody on that other side of the aisle. Not everybody, we 
were able to learn that last week, but the majority, the vast 
majority are certainly not in favour of looking at this model 
even though it’s been a model that’s shown success. Yes, there 
were some issues back in the early ’90s, and they’ll always cite 
that one issue of schools in Nova Scotia. We’ve heard it day in 
and day out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in fact I was talking to the infrastructure minister just 
yesterday from Alberta, and he was talking about the school 
bundling and how successful that has been over the past number 
of years. And they’re moving forward with their next bundle of 
nine schools, Mr. Speaker, and they’re very comfortable with 
the process that they’ve done. If they hadn’t been successful, 
Mr. Speaker, they wouldn’t be on iteration number four. But 
they are because they’ve seen savings. They’ve seen success. 
And most importantly, they’ve seen the infrastructure built 
today that will be used for decades into the future, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s what we’re looking at as we move forward. 
 
There are P3 . . . As the Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds, 
we’re looking at various examples of P3s and various 
applications for P3s, one being in the Swift Current area on a 
long-term care facility. That one is moving ahead quite nicely. 
We’re on the request for proposal stage, so we’re well along. 
 
And it’s been interesting, Mr. Speaker, and it’ll be interesting to 
hear the response of the opposition, whether they’re against P3s 
because they haven’t said a word about that one, or they’re 
against bundling because we’ve certainly heard their concerns 
around bundling and bundling of the schools. So it’ll be 
interesting as we move through this motion and debate on this 
motion where the opposition stands because the opposition has 
described their stand as common sense approach, except 
they’ve never agreed with a P3 project yet, Mr. Speaker, unless 
maybe they are in Swift Current and perhaps we’ll hear that 
today. But they have been pretty much ideologically, absolutely 
dead set against P3 projects. And I certainly learned that today. 
 
I was in the beautiful capital city of Manitoba where I was 
talking to the minister of highways and infrastructure, Mr. 
Ashton. We had a very interesting meeting earlier this morning, 
and he’s not a fan of P3s. That’s obvious to say, Mr. Speaker. 
He doesn’t believe in them. He doesn’t think they’re done 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5047 

properly, and that’s all fine, perfectly fine. The city of 
Winnipeg has gone forward with P3 proposals, as have 
municipalities here in Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
really do believe that this is an option. 
 
And I do believe that there are members on that side of the 
House, on the opposite side of the House that feel that it’s an 
option as well. And this was finally evident in a scrum that we 
saw last week. The former minister of Highways but now the 
critic, the member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, when he was 
asked in a media scrum what he was . . . you know, his 
thoughts. In fact I think he was probably initiating a lot of this 
media coverage because, Mr. Speaker, he wanted to talk about a 
bridge in Prince Albert, but he also wanted to talk about bridges 
in Saskatoon. And here is his exact quote: “Saskatoon needs a 
bridge. We agree. Saskatoon needs a bridge.” But you know 
what? He also went on to say, “We cannot leave money on the 
table,” Mr. Speaker. “It’s good for the economy so we have got 
to take advantage of it.” 
 
So what he was talking about was Saskatoon has applied to PPP 
Canada. There is possible money coming from PPP Canada. It 
wouldn’t be wise to leave that money on the table, Mr. Speaker. 
It’d be very important to bring that money into our economy so 
that we could build those bridges. So I would conclude from 
that, if he doesn’t want to leave the money on the table and he 
wants the bridges and he wants to support Saskatoon in a PPP 
Canada project, Mr. Speaker, then he must be standing up for 
P3s. And I would applaud him for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he is not the only NDP member that is supportive 
of P3s, Mr. Speaker. Thomas Mulcair has said that P3s can be 
the right solution in certain cases, Mr. Speaker. The federal 
NDP has also said the P3 model can enable greater value for 
money in some infrastructure projects. Mr. Speaker, we 
couldn’t agree more with Thomas Mulcair on this one issue, 
and we could not agree more with the member from Athabasca. 
Mr. Speaker, in fact he was very clear that he was supportive of 
P3s through the city of Saskatoon. 
 
What was also interesting, and I would say to the member from 
Regina Rosemont, he was also very supportive that Saskatoon 
was bundling bridges to be built, Mr. Speaker. Now the member 
from Rosemont has used the bundling word an awful lot, and 
he’s dead set against bundling, but I would say that you should 
listen to your learned scholar. I know those two members have 
had disagreements before. I remember the member from 
Rosemont throwing the member from Athabasca under the bus 
on some . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Math skills. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — On his math skills. That’s right. But I 
would say to the member from Rosemont today, don’t worry 
about his math skills; worry about his P3 skills because he’s on 
the right page, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so I think I’ve spoke enough on P3s. And I think 
we’ve got the members’ statements on the record, very clear, 
supporting of P3s, supporting of bundling, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
sure he won’t have any problem supporting the motion. 
 
Mind you after last week, Mr. Speaker, or was it the week 

before when we voted on the budget, I will never know where 
they stand because they’ll come into the House day in, day out. 
They may talk outside in the media about a specific policy or a 
stand — oh, let’s say a long-term care facility in La Ronge — 
and then they’ll come in here and vote against it, Mr. Speaker. 
He’s talked about it in the rotunda, Mr. Speaker, supporting 
P3s. We’re going to give him another chance to support it on 
the motion here in the House, Mr. Speaker. So I move, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

That the Assembly support the use of a P3 model in the 
construction of new bridges in the city of Saskatoon. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Infrastructure: 
 

That this Assembly supports the use of the P3 model in the 
construction of a new bridge in the city of Saskatoon. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was just 
pointed out to me in that long sort of political sort of rant from 
the minister opposite, it was pointed out though he was talking 
about voting against budgets. And I thought it was interesting 
the course the Premier . . . I understand when there was a 
hospital that was being built in Swift Current and there was a 
budget back a few years back, and of course it was a New 
Democratic Party government that was delivering that hospital 
in a budget, and that Premier actually voted against that budget 
and that hospital, a hospital of course which is pretty important 
to the entire region in Swift Current. 
 
So I find it kind of, you know, I guess maybe it’s cute what the 
minister’s doing here today, but I think most people would see 
through that sort of game. And I think what they’re looking for 
on this front is a little bit more substance and better 
performance rather than political games, Mr. Speaker. A little 
bit more action. A little less talk, Mr. Speaker. Because the 
reality is that we have infrastructure needs across Saskatchewan 
that need action. They need responses from all levels of 
government. 
 
And in many ways that government has been sitting on the 
sidelines as a quiet, a potential partner and not making its 
commitment where they need to be making some clear 
commitments. And a few stand out. I think of Regina right now, 
and I think of the pressures that the region is facing and the 
unsafe conditions. I think of them on Dewdney Avenue. I speak 
to it regularly, and of course we need some short-term plans 
there. We also need the long-term plan for the west bypass. 
 
I also think of the lives that are at risk every single day out at 
White City and Emerald Park and Highway No. 1 and one of 
the most dangerous intersections, Mr. Speaker, you could ever 
imagine. And from this government, we hear little and we see 
no actions, Mr. Speaker. And I know the folks, the business 
community, the families all through Emerald Park and through 
White City, what they’re looking for from this minister is a 
little less talk and a whole lot more action, Mr. Speaker. And I 
know on that front there again too, this minister sometimes gets 
caught on sort of big or shiny concepts and these complex 



5048 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

schemes of a P3, whether it’s going to be P3 or not P3. 
 
What Saskatchewan people are looking for are some practical 
steps and measures that would be immediate. And I think in 
both of these circumstances there are some practical short-term 
and immediate steps to be taken when I’m highlighting Emerald 
Park and White City, some considerations that I think need to 
be heard around the pressing need for an intersection, I think 
some needs that need to be heard about the potential speed 
limits on that section of Highway No. 1, immediate measures 
that that minister could be helpful on if he were there really 
sincerely listening and ready to work to ensure safety and 
ensure safe flow of traffic and more importantly, most 
importantly, families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course we see the same on the west side of Regina 
where we see that government create an issue, inundating 
Dewdney Avenue with heavy-haul truck traffic, Mr. Speaker, 
forgetting in its plans to create the GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] to make sure there was an adequate flow of truck traffic to 
be routed properly in a safe way. And it created an unsafe 
condition that thank goodness, as each day goes by, that there’s 
not a critical incident on it, but requires actions by this 
government and needs short-term actions. I’ve been calling for 
solutions such as rerouting, calling for a little bridge out on 
Pinkie Road where the Goulet golf course meets it to be rebuilt. 
And let’s get those trucks off that heavy-haul route. 
 
The problem is that this government seems so intent on 
focusing on the P3 project, it would seem. That’s many years 
down the road. What we need to see from this government is a 
clear commitment and actions that will assist communities here 
today with safety and that will deliver the infrastructure we 
need well into the future. And we just don’t see that sort of 
meaningful discussion from this government. 
 
And you know, it’s the same up in Lloydminster where the 
heavy-haul truck traffic and the artery in through Lloydminster 
is incredibly congested. We didn’t see anything in this budget to 
support the pressing needs and the call for action from the 
business community, from families, from the mayor and council 
up in Lloydminster. 
 
And of course, then it takes us to Saskatoon, which is what 
we’re talking about here today. I find the motion put forward 
from the minister here today a tad rich to bring this motion 
forward. The motion itself for one doesn’t even acknowledge 
that there’s two bridges that Saskatoon is working towards. It 
only references one bridge. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And you know, again I think it speaks to the lack of listening of 
that government, the lack of willingness to make commitments. 
That’s of concern. I know that it’s been many years that 
Saskatoon has been talking to that government about the traffic 
bridge, and it’s been for the past few years that that government 
has sat quietly, sat silently, been noncommittal. And that’s 
created all sorts of issues for Saskatoon to be able to put 
together the proposal that they need for those bridges. This 
government hasn’t been the willing partner that it should be. 
 
We also know the north commuter bridge is really an important 

piece of infrastructure. We’ve been calling for funding for it. 
We’ve been calling for action. We’ve been calling for 
commitment. And you know, it’s kind of interesting now to see 
the minister get up and sort of play political games with 
statements here today when he’s speaking to a budget that 
doesn’t even have a single dollar for the north commuter bridge 
or for the traffic bridge, for those bridges in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It kind of reminds me of saying that you’re going to commit 
something, pulling out your chequebook, filling out the person 
you’re sending the cheque to, but then forgetting to put in the 
amount, forgetting to put in the date, and forgetting to sign it, 
Mr. Speaker. So it’s really at this point a very weak 
commitment from that government. 
 
I know the Finance minister was pressured on his level of 
commitment at the North Saskatoon Business Association 
recently, and rightfully so because I understand that just a few 
years ago, three years ago the Premier was up there, is what I’ve 
heard, and was promising that north commuter bridge. And of 
course it wasn’t delivered. Now we see it in the budget but with 
no funding. So there’s reason for a lot of skepticism for many. 
That being said, we’re going to continue to press this 
government to make sure they fund the bridges Saskatoon 
needs. 
 
As I say, the people across the province, certainly Saskatoon, 
are looking for a little less talk, a lot more action from this 
government. And they want to have a clear commitment from 
that government as it relates to the project. That’s something we 
don’t have right now. We have political gamesmanship and 
rhetoric. But they need a clear commitment and they need a 
timeline, Mr. Speaker. So as I say, it’s just a tad, you know, a 
tad rich for that minister to get up here today with the motion 
that he has before him. 
 
You know, here’s where we stand on this issue. We support the 
city of Saskatoon in its effort to build these bridges using 
whatever model is deemed to be the most affordable, the most 
effective, and in a manner that provides the accountability and 
transparency that residents deserve. And we also urge the 
federal and provincial governments to partner with the city of 
Saskatoon to build these bridges regardless of the model that’s 
chosen that’s deemed to be in the best interests of Saskatoon. 
 
We’re looking for a common sense approach, not tying the 
hands of municipalities. We think it’s unwise and imprudent for 
provincial or federal governments to tie the hands of our locally 
elected municipal leaders, our mayors and councils from 
making the decisions that are in their best interests and forcing 
or dictating only one approach such as a P3 model. We think all 
options should be on the table, and we trust greatly in our 
municipal leaders in this province. 
 
If governments . . . You know, we understand that Saskatoon is 
sort of between a rock and hard place. We understand that the 
federal government is only making dollars available if it goes a 
P3 route. We think that’s wrong. But if governments are going 
to go with a P3 approach, then we think it’s important that 
there’s mechanisms built in for accountability and transparency 
back to residents. That’s an important key piece. You know, it’s 
why we’ve said all along we’re not ideologically opposed to 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5049 

P3s. We have a lot of concerns for common sense reasons as it 
relates to these models. 
 
Now we will oppose projects when they don’t make sense, 
when they clearly will cost more, or when they don’t have clear 
mechanisms for accountability or transparency. And it’s in part 
why I brought forward a bill relating to the schools that this 
government’s ramming forward with, relating to accountability 
and transparency. 
 
The bill I brought forward is The Public-Private Partnership 
Transparency and Accountability Act to ensure that there is a 
basic level of accountability and value-for-money analysis done 
upfront and independent to ensure taxpayers are protected. A 
very common sense piece of legislation — one that doesn’t 
encumber governments, one that leaves all options on the table, 
one that would have put an independent watchdog in place to 
make sure that that level of accountability was appropriate, one 
that would have ensured an economic analysis to ensure that 
Saskatchewan businesses and Saskatchewan people’s interests 
were understood in the whole equation and that we understood 
what the consequence may be. And this is particular to the 
schools but, you know, the cost of shutting out the 
Saskatchewan companies that have built schools all across the 
province. Those are common sense types of questions that a 
responsible government should be asking. 
 
Or like a provision that if, you know, on the side of the schools, 
if government bundles together schools as they have, which is 
fraught with issues, but bundle it together and then they take it 
out to the market and they only get one bidder, like we see in 
Alberta where you have no competition, no value for taxpayers 
. . . And of course that’s where now in Alberta as it relates to 
schools we see all the opposition, the Wildrose, the NDP, the 
Liberals, opposed to that approach for schools. 
 
But, you know, these are the kinds of measures that we were 
calling for for schools, very simple measures. And what that 
government did was vote against accountability and 
transparency, and I think it speaks volumes to their approach 
with people’s dollars. 
 
But yet again here today we see political gamesmanship from 
that government at a time they need to be performing better for 
the people of Saskatchewan, advancing the infrastructure that 
Saskatchewan people need, making sure that there’s immediate 
interim steps in the different parts of this province to ensure 
safety, and making a clear commitment to the city of Saskatoon 
to build the bridges that it needs in the most affordable, 
effective way possible, in a way that makes sure that taxpayers 
have the accountability and transparency they deserve. But 
we’ve seen a rather unwilling partner on this front. 
 
So as I say, what Saskatoon needs less of is the talk and rhetoric 
of that government. What they need more of is action. It needs 
less tying of hands and it needs more flexibility and it needs 
some clear commitments. And yes, it’ll actually need some 
dollars, something that government’s neglected to provide. 
 
So I have a common sense amendment to move today, and I 
hope the government will see fit to support it. I move: 
 

That all the words after “supports” be struck out and 

replaced with the following: 
 

the city of Saskatoon in its efforts to build new bridges, 
using whatever model it deems most affordable and 
effective in a manner that provides accountability and 
transparency to residents; and further 
 
that this Assembly urges the federal and provincial 
governments to partner with the city to build these 
bridges regardless of the model chosen by the city. 

 
I so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 
the following amendment: 
 

That all the words after “support” be struck out and 
replaced with the following: 
 

the city of Saskatoon in its efforts to build new bridges, 
using whatever model it deems most affordable and 
effective in a manner that provides accountability and 
transparency to residents; and further 
 
that this Assembly urges the federal and provincial 
governments to partner with the city to build these 
bridges regardless of the model chosen by the city. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to 
rise today to speak to the motion. Mr. Speaker, I am a 
Saskatonian through and through. I was primarily raised in the 
city of bridges and attended the schools of Sutherland, Princess 
Alexandra, Forest Grove, and Confederation Park before 
moving east. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say this because I remember a time when the 
east of Saskatoon ended at the old drive-in in Forest Grove and 
when the Forestry Farm was just out of town. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
dating myself now but it is important to tell this story so a 
comparison can be made. Mr. Speaker, to simply say that 
Saskatoon has grown is an understatement. There is growth in 
population, economic sectors, education, housing, retail, across 
every scope imaginable, and we are the largest city in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Fairview has many vibrant 
businesses, and what used to be empty storefronts are now 
filled. I use the South Bridge almost every day I am home, 
because it is the easiest way to get access to the rest of the city. 
And I also use it because it’s a nice drive to the southeast side 
or even on my way here to Regina. It’s cut my commute out of 
the city by at least half an hour because I live right on the edge 
of the west side. 
 
More young families are in Saskatoon than ever before. And 
this is evident in what is now traffic, traffic that we didn’t have 



5050 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

to deal with back then when I was growing up. And in a CTV 
[Canadian Television Network] News article from February 
27th, 2014, StatsCan states that “Saskatoon is the youngest and 
second-fastest growing city in Canada.” And we have a 3.9 per 
cent population, just behind Calgary which has a 4.3 per cent 
growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with all the growth that Saskatchewan is 
experiencing, we simply can’t expect that every capital project 
will be through traditional channels, which we simply cannot 
afford to do. So, Mr. Speaker, as a government we are 
responsible for managing the people of Saskatchewan’s money 
and we also have to mitigate the challenges of growth, and also 
while finding efficiencies that commit to finding innovative 
ways to address these challenges. And one way is to explore P3 
projects. And, Mr. Speaker, we can access these. We have 
access to federal programs through such projects. 
 
So you know, Mr. Speaker, I can only try to understand the fear 
of the members opposite — fear of the P3 projects, fear of new, 
unfamiliar terminology. I understand there is fear of the 
unknown, fear of where we could go. And dare I say it, fear of 
success. I am sure that people who moved here many years ago 
also had that fear. And Saskatoon was established in 1883 and 
incorporated in 1906. We are still a young province compared 
to others and we still have very young cities, and growth is a 
part of the process of a strong economic outlook. The north 
commuter bridge is integral in Saskatoon. The amount of traffic 
to the north has increased and this P3 project will bring together 
all three levels of government. 
 
So improving infrastructure, building new infrastructure, capital 
projects, schools, bridges, it’s just part of the economic activity 
in Saskatchewan now and will be quite steady as we welcome 
new families to the province. The government has committed to 
invest 2.5 billion over three years to building for growth. So the 
province is committed to exploring public-private partnerships, 
but we’ll also proceed with the vast majority, which are 
between 80 and 90 per cent of projects being traditional builds. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to explain the value-for-money 
process of SaskBuilds, as members opposite like to use this 
term quite often. So value for money is a process that must be 
completed in order to determine whether or not a P3 is 
preferable to traditional procurement. And while P3s save 
money under the right circumstances, those savings are only 
confirmed when the final bids come in, and that’s when cabinet 
makes the final decision. And we will disclose value for money 
and the agreement details once the procurement process for a 
project is complete. 
 
So the question is, how do you pay for a P3? And public assets 
developed under P3s are reported on the government’s books as 
an asset and expensed over time, with the obligation to pay for 
the asset reported as an offsetting liability. And across Canada, 
P3 projects are recognized on government balance sheets. An 
off-balance-sheet treatment is not a motivation. There is 
generally payment made when the asset is completed and the 
balanced is paid for and expensed over the life of the asset. 
 
So P3s equal jobs. Governments are able to have more projects 
on the ground at the same time, including those which have 
taken years to begin because of sizeable costs. So, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to conclude by saying I support the motion and I do not 
support the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is an 
honour for me today to speak for the Saskatoon Meewasin 
constituency and how important this P3 motion is. The north 
end businesses and their employees will benefit greatly from the 
commuter bridge and so will all the people from Saskatoon 
Meewasin, who would get relief from the congested traffic we 
have to drive through daily trying to get home and to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have lived in Saskatoon for almost 55 years, and 
I remember that Sutherland wasn’t even part of Saskatoon. It 
was kind of a suburb. I have also lived in the north end of 
Saskatoon in the Meewasin constituency and various locations 
in the north end for almost 35 years. Mr. Speaker, first I would 
like to thank the people of the constituency of Saskatoon 
Meewasin for having given me the honour of representing them 
in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new bridge would also help people from all 
over the city who daily have to sit in long lineups of traffic to 
and from work. Mr. Speaker, it has also helped businesses to 
get their products and services from one side of the city to the 
other side, saving money for people, and the services being 
provided would be done quicker and on time. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember the northwest by-election in 2010. My 
good colleague friend won it. It took me 35 minutes to get to 
the campaign office on Circle Drive on Venture Crescent from 
51st Street using Millar Avenue. And from some of the emails I 
have received today, three years later, it takes 45 to 60 minutes 
to do the same route. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the population in Saskatoon has grown from, in 
2006, of 208,218 people, and in 2010 the population was up to 
225,137, and in 2013 the population of Saskatoon was 248,293 
— a difference from 2010 to 2013 of 23,156 people. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the metropolitan area population has grown in 
2006 up to 240,548 people. In 2010, the metropolitan area 
population of Saskatoon was 262,929, and then in 2013, the 
population of the Saskatoon metropolitan area was 292,597 
people — a difference of 29,668 people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this change in population, travel from 
51st Street to the Circle has increased by 10 to 25 minutes, and 
just think what it will be like with a projected growth of over 
500,000 people in the Saskatoon metropolitan area by 2035. 
 
Here are some basic points I received from Randy Donauer, city 
councillor, ward 5: 
 

Traffic on Circle Drive North bridge was 60,000 vehicles 
per day in 2010. Now it is over 85,000 vehicles per day, a 
jump of 41.6 per cent in four years. The South Circle Drive 
bridge is helping us to manage growth and traffic 
increases, but has not reduced traffic in the north 
significantly. Growth is still out-pacing our ability to keep 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5051 

up. 
 
Thirty- to 40-minute waits on Attridge and Circle Drive 
North bridge, not uncommon during rush hour getting to 
work. Commercial vehicle trucks getting bogged down on 
the bridge and Circle Drive North. Businesses in the north 
say the delays are costing them money. The new bridge 
won’t be a freeway or a truck route, but it would take 
35,000 cars per day off Circle Drive North, to free Circle 
Drive North up for commercial truck traffic, get more 
economic moving. Again it would be a relief valve until 
the perimeter freeway opens up. 

 
Mr. Donauer also said: 
 

Resources, cars sitting idling on the Circle Drive North 
bridge every day, thousands of litres of fuel being burned 
every day needlessly. Environmentally, opening up the 
north commuter parkway bridge is expected to 
significantly reduce emissions from vehicles sitting and 
idling 30 minutes per day trying to get across the Circle 
Drive North bridge. 
 
More people work in Saskatoon’s north industrial area than 
in Saskatoon’s downtown. A huge percentage of them live 
in the northeast and work in the northwest. The only way 
to get . . . is across the Circle Drive bridge. 
 
Eight new neighbourhoods planned in northeast quarter 
over the next few decades. Traffic between northeast and 
northwest will increase significantly, getting worse over 
the next decade. 
 
We are learning more and more that infrastructure is one of 
the key factors in a growing economy. We must keep our 
transportation infrastructure healthy in the biggest 
economy engine of the province, Saskatoon, to keep our 
growth agenda moving forward. We need to get the north 
commuter parkway bridge open as soon as possible. 
 
Randy Donauer, city councillor of ward 5. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here are some emails I have received from 
just a few businesses I have asked today about their daily 
commute to the north end from the east side, as well as how 
many employees they may have and how many of these 
employees would use the new commuter bridge. Mr. Speaker, 
here is one quote from the president of JNE Welding: 
 

Hi, Roger: I am a strong supporter of the north commuter 
bridge. The congestion on Circle Drive during the rush 
hours is very problematic for our city currently. If we 
continue to grow adding an additional few thousand cars 
on our streets per year, the problem will become very 
serious. As it is, for anyone working in the north end 
needing to use Millar Avenue can expect to spend a 
minimum of a half hour just to get onto Circle Drive to 
cross the river. This becomes a real challenge for 
businesses that need a reasonable and smooth flow of 
traffic to be successful. The north commuter bridge will 
make a huge difference and help prolong the need for the 
north Yellowhead route bridge, the perimeter bridge. 
 

We employee 170 people, and my best guess is one-third 
of them would live on the east side of the river. And 
reasonably speaking, I would say at least half of them, 
being about 25, would be using the Circle Drive bridge at 
least twice a day. Further to that, at least 75 of our 
employees who work at our 56th Street location would be 
using Millar Avenue to get out of the north end and, thanks 
to the bottleneck at Circle and 51st and Millar Avenue, 
they end up in very slow-moving lineups. 
 
Keep in mind the Marquis North Industrial will soon 
double the number of people trying to get in and out of the 
area as more businesses grow and others locate to the area. 
If we had Marquis extending to a new commuter bridge, I 
think the problem would all but disappear. 
 
Good luck with your presentation. Thank you for your 
effort in driving this important issue forward. 
 
Best regards, Jim Nowakowski 
President, JNE Welding 
 

Mr. Speaker, here is another email quote from Luna Metals: 
 

Dear Mr. Parent: It has been brought to my attention that 
you will be speaking to the Saskatchewan legislature on 
Tuesday, April 2nd regarding the north commuter bridge in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Being a business person in Saskatoon for the last 30 years, 
I have seen many changes in this city. The most aggressive 
growth has occurred since the Sask Party has been at the 
helm. Keep up the good work. With such growth, there are 
growing pains and that is usually seen most predominantly 
in infrastructure such as roads and bridges. With that said, I 
hope that the current government sees the urgent need to 
fast-track the support in funding for not only the north 
commuter bridge in Saskatoon but also the north perimeter 
bypass highway and bridge. With Saskatchewan highly 
visible on the world map nowadays, let’s not slow down 
the growth and prosperity by not being proactive on large 
scale infrastructure projects that we know are strongly 
needed to support the population needs in the not too 
distant future. 
 
Currently in the north end of Saskatoon and satellite 
communities, traffic flow is dangerously congested and 
will only get worse. We need these projects now. Let’s 
spend the money now as we all know that by waiting costs 
will only increase, and if investors see that we are not 
equipped to handle large scale growth, they may look 
elsewhere to do capital projects on their own. 
 
We currently employ 11 people and out of that there would 
be three employees that would directly benefit from the 
north commuter bridge. But not only to and from work 
commutes would benefit. Our day to day operations would 
benefit from less congestion in traffic for our services and 
delivery trucks also. 
 
Put my name on the list of supporters to Get’r Done Now. 
Thank you for your time. 
 



5052 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

Rick Luczka, Luna Metal 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is another email quote from I & M Welding: 
 

Hi Roger: I am in favour of the new north commuter 
bridge in Saskatoon. I reside on the east side of Saskatoon 
and work in the north end of Saskatoon. What was once a 
10 minute commute to work in 1996 is now closer to an 
hour today. This bridge project is long overdue in my 
opinion. We employ eight, and four would use the new 
bridge. 
 
Michael Tumbach, I & M Welding & Fabricating Ltd. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here is an email quote from Alpine 
Interior Systems: 
 

Roger: I live in Willowgrove but have offices in the north 
industrial area of Saskatoon. We absolutely need this 
bridge to mitigate the severe traffic congestion that occurs 
on Circle Drive every day. Saskatoon’s continued growth 
is only going to make this problem much worse. 
 
Alpine and associated companies employ in excess of 120 
people. At least half would use the new bridge. 
 
Please advise how I may help in this endeavour. 
 
Fraser Sutherland, Managing Partner 
Alpine Interior Systems 

 
Mr. Speaker, here’s another quote I received from Supreme 
Steel: 
 

Hi, Roger: As I live in Silverspring area, I of course want 
to get to work faster but it also should have a positive 
effect for all north end businesses. 
 
Supreme Steel Saskatoon currently employs about 85 
people at their north Corman Park location and of these I 
would guess about 35 live on the east side of the river. It 
can take 15 to 20 minutes to get to work at non-peak 
times, but anywhere from 45 to 60 minutes to make the 
trip during the day [during the rush-hour day]. During the 
winter, or if there is an accident or road work on north 
Circle Drive, it can take even longer. 
 
At the end of any given work day, traffic can be backed up 
on Warman Road 2 or 3 blocks north of 51st Street, south 
past 33rd Street, west to Airport . . . waiting for east access 
to the current Circle Drive bridge. 
 
I understand that the overpass intersection of Circle Drive 
and Warman Road carries huge traffic volumes which will 
only continue to grow as new areas in Saskatoon’s 
northeast (Evergreen) and southeast (Rosewood) continue 
to be developed. 
 
It is simply unacceptable that we wait 10 or 20 [more] 
years like we did for the south bridge for a new north 
bridge. Thanks. 
 
Ross, Supreme Steel 

Mr. Speaker, here is an email quote from Hertz Equipment 
Rental: 
 

Hi, Roger: This is a short note in support of the north 
commuter bridge. The south bridge is awesome for getting 
around town, travelling east to west and alleviated traffic 
going south or transports going through the city. What I’ve 
noticed though is it had virtually no change for anyone 
working in the north end coming from any direction . . . or 
after work. It is particularly bad in the morning coming 
from the east side. Thanks for your efforts to move this 
forward. 
 
Kind regards, Curt Taylor, Marketing Representative 
Hertz Equipment 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as our population has expanded, we’ve 
seen the need for many infrastructure upgrades. P3 construction 
enables the schools and bridges to be built in a much smaller 
time frame. The NDP model would cost more time and dollars, 
as we have heard from the members across P3s are not the way 
to go. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here is what the NDP did when they were 
in government. Power purchase agreements. The NDP signed 
four power purchase agreements, partnering with the private 
sector, between 1999 and 2006. Partnerships BC email. NDP 
top officials sent an email dated September 2007 to Partnerships 
BC, saying they “. . . are interested in the possible application 
of P3 models to schools, hospitals, and utility Crown corps.” 
 
The NDP had their own P3. The NDP government owned a 
public-private partnership, corporate development division, 
from 2000 to 2005, under Maynard Sonntag and Pat Atkinson. 
They pretended SPUDCO was a P3 for six years. They finally 
admitted that they had put in 9 million while their partner 
invested a total of $153, or point zero zero one seven per cent of 
the total project. In total the NDP lost $34 million. In a report 
for the premier, the deputy minister wrote the relationship was 
inappropriately portrayed as a relationship where the risks and 
rewards would be shared. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are a few successful P3s. In highways, 
Alberta’s Northwest Anthony Henday Drive, the road was 
delivered, cost savings projected to be 240 million over the span 
of the 30-year agreement. Manitoba’s Disraeli bridges and 
freeway project, the city of Winnipeg saved $47 million. 
Manitoba’s Chief Peguis Trail roadway, 108 million P3 project 
was finished ahead of schedule, a year ahead of schedule and on 
budget. It saved the city of Winnipeg $31 million compared to 
the traditional procurement. 
 
P3 schools. Alberta used bundling to procure schools. The 
project delivered 40 schools with savings of 245 million. A 
fourth phase is in procurement right now. 
 
Hospitals. Surrey Memorial Hospital redevelopment and 
expansions. A new critical care tower including a new 
emergency department, perinatal centre, in-patient beds, 
intensive care unit, and academic space to be built at Surrey 
Memorial Hospital. Would have cost 543 million, did cost 512 
million, saving 31.4 million. 
 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5053 

[15:15] 
 
Interior Heart and Surgical Centre. The IHSC building will 
include a brand new home for the interior cardiac 
revascularization program as well as a new surgical suite. The 
support services include a new medical device reprocessing 
department. Would have cost 202.1 million, will cost 169.1 
million, complete in 2015. There are others on hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are some NDP quotes. In March of this year 
the federal NDP released a statement on P3s: 
 

The P3 model can enable greater value for money for 
some infrastructure projects, where it provides quantifiable 
value-added benefits . . . and ensures maximum 
transparency and integrity in the process used. 

 
Manitoban NDP Finance minister Stan Struthers said, 
“Public-private partnerships can provide an opportunity for 
public sector to build projects more efficiently and receive 
better value for the money being invested.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here are some P3 facts: Ontario, Quebec, 
Alberta, British Columbia, and New Brunswick all have P3 
programs. There are over 204 projects built or under way in 
Canada since the early 1990s. From 2009 to 2011, 39 P3 deals 
worth $21.7 billion were finalized in Canada. The federal P3 
Canada Fund oversees $1.2 billion and will contribute up to 25 
per cent of a project. The Conference Board of Canada analyzed 
19 P3 projects and found that Canadian P3s have so far 
delivered saving ranges from a few million dollars to 750 
million when compared to traditional procurement. 
 
With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the motion 
on P3 models. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People watching 
today and from the opposition on this debate, this is a pretty 
telling story of the differences between the NDP and the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It goes back. You could probably look at this debate that we’re 
having and it’s the same debate that we had in the ’07 election 
and in the 2011 election. Mr. Speaker, it’s about 
forward-looking Saskatchewan Party government versus the old 
NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the old NDP would have us believe that those 
were the glory days of Saskatchewan when they were in power. 
Mr. Speaker, the facts just don’t support their position. Mr. 
Speaker, we know that we’re now a province, a have province 
of 1.1 million people, Mr. Speaker. That’s 100,000 people 
we’ve grown the last six years. The last time it took us to grow 
100,000 people it took 77 years, Mr. Speaker. That’s the old 
NDP way of doing business in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can look at the need in Saskatoon for another 
bridge. And why is that, Mr. Speaker, is we’re actually 
growing. And this is where the voters in the next election are 
going to look at: are we going to go forward with the Sask Party 

or back with NDP? Mr. Speaker, I’m pretty sure we’re not 
going back in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s nine NDP members over there versus the 
49 over here. And, Mr. Speaker, I know how the next election is 
going to go because the people of this province like what they 
see. The people of this province like jobs. They like growth. 
They like having to pay less tax, not more tax like with the 
NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that Saskatoon is growing. I’m proud to 
call Saskatoon home. We have a quarter million people 
population in the city. It’s growing. We’re going to be at half a 
million very shortly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this goes back to the difference between our government 
and our party versus the NDP. We know the NDP philosophy is 
they do not like growth. They don’t like anything new. They 
don’t like new people in the province. They don’t like new 
subdivisions. They don’t like any growth at all, and worse, Mr. 
Speaker, they hate business. Anything involved in business, 
they don’t want anything to do with. 
 
This is what boils down on the P3. It’s involvement of private 
enterprise in providing infrastructure, infrastructure that we 
need in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The old NDP would have 
you believe that this is not what we need. We would need to go 
back to the day when Saskatchewan wasn’t growing, that we 
didn’t need more infrastructure. And that’s what we had, Mr. 
Speaker, if you remember the stat that it took 66 years . . . sorry 
77 years to grow that 100,000 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at the growth rate and the GDP [gross 
domestic product] in Saskatoon, we’re at 6.1 per cent. That 
leads the nation. We never had anything that led the nation 
when the NDP was in power other than exodus of people from 
one province to another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have job growth in Saskatoon of 8.2 per cent. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got to say that the job growth of those 8 per 
cent, people that are now working, increased working year over 
year in Saskatoon, are not going to be voting for the NDP. They 
do not want to go back to the old days of jacking up taxes and 
out-of-control spending. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we saw that. We saw that, and that is why 
the NDP lost the last election. That is why, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
nine NDP members on the opposite side and 49 over here. Mr. 
Speaker, they looked at what the NDP was offering in that 
campaign was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to remind the member to put his 
comments through the Chair, please. I recognize the member 
for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, when you look at the needs in the 
province for infrastructure, it’s going to have to take new 
approaches to meet the demands that we face in Saskatchewan. 
We know that if we kept doing the old NDP way that we just 
wouldn’t get the job done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the city needs more infrastructure, 
but what I believe is really telling, Mr. Speaker, is their 



5054 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

amendment to this motion. Mr. Speaker, their amendment was 
best known . . . The NDP philosophy is that NDP knows best. 
Don’t leave it up to the city of Saskatoon to decide what to do 
with their money or what they would like to do with the bridge. 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP knows best. And this is what their 
amendment says, is that they know what’s best to get that 
bridge done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have talked about the different 
quotes that . . . why this bridge is needed. I just want to touch 
on the differences in approach to P3s. We know that there is 
one enlightened member on the other side that has claimed that 
he now supports P3s out there, Mr. Speaker. And I hope the 
other colleagues would talk to him and hopefully, Mr. Speaker, 
have a conversation about, you know what? We can’t keep 
doing the same old things. We’re going to have to try new 
innovations to meet the demands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With that we also look at the different positions of NDP 
governments in other provinces. We know the NDP in 
Manitoba are looking at different P3s. We know that their 
federal leader has been said that P3s work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know in committee last night we had the 
member from Rosemont make comment that . . . he was 
pressing our minister that he wanted us to talk to the feds about 
their P3 program and asked why we don’t push the feds on the 
issue that it’s P3 or nothing for infrastructure. The member 
from Rosemont’s position is that the feds were being inflexible, 
that it had to be P3s, and why aren’t we pushing back on that? 
Well I asked the member from Rosemont, why does it have to 
be anything but P3s? That’s his position. Anything but P3s, and 
they’ll get behind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be wrapping this up just shortly. And 
I’ve just got a quote here I’d like to share with you: “People 
who say it cannot be done should not interrupt those who are 
doing it.” That’s from George Shaw, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 
quote that’s I think relevant to this, is that the NDP likes to talk 
about different things they would do. But you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? On this side of the House, we’re actually getting them 
done. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to get that bridge built in 
Saskatoon. It will be there to help the people of this province 
and the northern part of Saskatoon. And with that, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m going to be supporting the motion, and against the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very excited to be entering this debate, and thank you to all of 
my colleagues in and around me for their wonderful support. I 
appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad that we’ve had so many 
representatives on this side of the House from Saskatoon talking 
about this important subject. I’m still waiting to hear from some 
of the MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from 
Saskatoon on the other side of the House. I haven’t seen any of 
them step up to the plate. The member from Rosemont did step 

up and talk about this, Mr. Speaker, but I’m wondering if I 
could hear from the members from Saskatoon on the opposite 
side of this House, because they have yet to say anything about 
this important issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take it back to when Saskatoon was 
formed. The primary mode of transportation in Saskatoon was 
the river in Saskatoon. That’s the transportation that was 
happening that built our city. From there it went to highways. It 
went to rail lines. It developed over time and evolved. Mr. 
Speaker, the grid roads, the highways, and the rails in and 
around Saskatoon certainly added to our city and helped out 
with the infrastructure. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the NDP are still stuck in the days of 
the horse and buggy. They have yet to evolve, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to update them and say there is no more horse and buggies 
out there. Things are changing in Saskatoon. There is no more 
Pony Express. There are no more telegraphs out there. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not sure if Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition has 
evolved in the last 70 years. I’d just like to give them an update 
of this is how things happen here and now in Saskatoon. 
 
The NDP in the past, Mr. Speaker, would be very famous for 
making announcements. They would make an announcement up 
in Saskatoon with the sole purpose of trying to get extra seats in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. What we do on this side of the House 
is we make sure that we look after the growth of the entire 
province — Saskatoon, Regina, the North, South, rural, urban. 
We want to make sure that we look after absolutely everything, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Their leader at the time in the 2011 election was running around 
this province promising everything. Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter 
would promise a highway in Prince Albert, a bridge in 
Saskatoon, twinning down by Estevan, over here, every day. As 
a new person within the whole campaigning system, it was very 
difficult to keep up with all of the announcements that that 
leader at the time was making certainly about Saskatoon. But 
one of the one things that was very easy to calculate was the tab 
that they were running up with all of these announcements. And 
I think it was in and around $5 billion. 
 
We are announcing this bridge because we’re here to support 
Saskatoon. We’re making sure that the Saskatoon north 
industrial area is looked after by the province. As a commuter 
bridge . . . We need to make sure that the city of Saskatoon has 
the potential to be able to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, gone are the days of the $5 billion promises, by 
the way, which the leader of . . . the new NDP leader actually 
wrote that book for the campaign promises. Gone are the days 
of debt financing major projects. Gone are the days of just 
looking after the constituencies that were within their caucus. 
Mr. Speaker, thank God those days are behind us. 
 
What I can’t understand, Mr. Speaker, and what the people of 
Saskatchewan can’t understand is why the provincial NDP 
cannot jump into 2014. This is a reality check for them, Mr. 
Speaker. They need to understand this is the new way of 
financing major projects throughout Canada and around the 
world. 
 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5055 

Saskatoon has some unique needs, as my colleague from 
Saskatoon Meewasin said about the traffic increasing up in 
Saskatoon. There are major gridlocks up in Saskatoon, and I’m 
sure I would love to be able to hear what the members opposite 
from Saskatoon have to say about the traffic jams if and when 
they’re up in the north end of Saskatoon. 
 
[15:30] 
 
What we have committed to, Mr. Speaker, is working with the 
federal government, the city of Saskatoon, and the stakeholders 
on how to alleviate some of the traffic issues within Saskatoon. 
Not once since this government was formed in 2007 have I ever 
heard our Premier, our cabinet, or anybody say we’re not 
willing to sit down at the table and discuss any infrastructure 
projects. We are always willing to listen. We are always willing 
to hear the stakeholders, and we’re always working with them. 
That doesn’t always necessarily mean that they’re going to get 
everything that they want, Mr. Speaker, but it means we’re 
going to sit down and work with them and actually be at the 
table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I need, I really need, and the people in Saskatoon 
have been telling me that they do not fundamentally understand 
why the NDP do not understand this P3. It’s very simple. It’s a 
very simple process. And it’s very simple for them to 
understand the lean process as well. And I’m very, very happy 
that the member from Athabasca is finally understanding this, 
Mr. Speaker. The good news is, maybe he could be a voice 
within his caucus to be able to, say, tap the member from 
Cumberland on the shoulder and say, here’s actually how it 
works. Then maybe he could tap the leader beside him and say, 
this is actually what I understand. And then maybe, as fast as 
the NDP move, that’d probably take about six months to work 
around all nine of them there, Mr. Speaker, to be able to say, oh 
I get it now. I understand what they’re doing. 
 
P3s have been proven to work. They are proven to work on 
major projects over $100 million, Mr. Speaker, and I’m glad 
again that the member of Athabasca has finally come out and 
talked about the benefits of P3 and how they can work within 
. . . [inaudible]. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Mulcair, their federal leader, he 
understands it. He understands the process of P3s can work. 
The Manitoba NDP, they understand that P3 can work. The 
member from Athabasca can say that it’s work . Who’s next, 
Mr. Speaker? Is it going to be the member from Nutana? Maybe 
the member from Rosemont will understand. Maybe Saskatoon 
city centre, maybe Riversdale, maybe Rosemont. Maybe you’re 
next. Maybe you’ll be the one that the next light bulb goes off. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, no, I don’t think so. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well hopefully. I doubt it though. They 
seem to be very tightly controlled over there by their leader and 
their ideology. 
 
I would like to know, Mr. Speaker, on how, if we are as a 
government and as a province to finance this project, I would 
like to see them come up with a solution, maybe an idea. As a 
father of four, when my kids come to me with a problem, I 
always ask them what would be a potential solution for this. Go 

think about it and come back. They have come back with 
nothing. Their leader has been in place for over a year — no 
plan, Mr. Speaker. No plan, no nothing. Do they have a plan to 
build all the new schools? No, they just don’t like the way 
we’re going to do it. Do they have a plan to build the new 
bridges? No, they don’t have that either, Mr. Speaker. All they 
have is complaints and all they do is perpetually whine to this 
government, whine to the media about what is not happening 
and the way that it shouldn’t be done. But they never come up 
with actually the way that it should be done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we over here have a vision of what’s going to 
happen within the next few years in Saskatchewan. Our Premier 
unveiled our Vision 2020, what is going to go forward in the 
next bit. We have the leadership over here. We have the vision 
and we have the support of the people of Saskatchewan who 
need common sense, quick decisions. We need to be able to 
make sure that we’re meeting their needs. On the other side, 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t have much over there. They have no 
plan. They have no vision. All they have is complaints and 
arguments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here on this side of the House we understand that there are 
different ways of financing projects. There are traditional ways 
and then there are new, innovative ways. We like to look at all 
of those.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the only way that the NDP will do anything on 
financing is the old way. They do not understand what’s 
happening in the new Saskatchewan because they’re not up to 
speed with new Saskatchewan. And I would ask them, pick up a 
glove, get in the game. Find out what’s happening in the new 
Saskatchewan. Go out and talk to the parents that are, the new 
schools are being built. Go out and talk to the people on Circle 
Drive that are saying this traffic jam is absolutely insane. 
 
We need to be able to make sure they understand because I 
don’t think they understand, and it shows by the lack of 
representation from the Saskatoon MLAs that will stand up and 
talk about this. We have almost all of our Saskatoon MLAs 
getting up and speaking on this specific subject. They on their 
side have nobody. That’s very depressing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the NDP are stuck in their ideology. I 
think they are being extremely dismissive towards the people of 
Saskatoon and being arrogant, stuck in their ways, and not 
understanding what is actually happening over there, Mr. 
Speaker. They are very, very stuck in their ways. I think they’re 
70 years behind the time. I think the people of Saskatchewan 
have demonstrated that in 2007 and again in 2011. And I think 
that you’re going to even see it even more in the next election 
up there to how out of date their philosophies and their ideas are 
in dealing with what is going on in the new Saskatchewan. 
 
The good news is, Mr. Speaker, is the new Saskatchewan can 
see through the NDP. They can see through their lack of vision 
and their lack of plan. The new Saskatchewan wants a plan. 
They want a vision to keep moving forward. They want to grow 
and evolve. We want to be the leaders in the country, not be led 
by the rest of the country. 
 
What the problem is across there, is it’s the same old NDP. 
They have a new leader but it’s the same old NDP. It is not 



5056 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

evolved. The new Saskatchewan residents have a higher 
expectation of their political leaders now. They are not going to 
be caught up in political rhetoric and ideology. They want a 
vision. They want to be able to understand what’s going to 
happen in the future, and they’re receiving that from this 
government. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion and I will 
not support the amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to, honoured to rise in support of the motion, as we 
begin to, as we begin to think very carefully about the tradition 
and history of co-operation, of collaboration, social innovation 
that defines Saskatoon. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there is likely an apocryphal story that 
is shared by Will Ferguson in his book Beauty Tips From 
Moose Jaw. And he offers a snapshot of the vision of John Lake 
pertaining to Saskatoon. And the quote that’s offered is simply 
this: John Lake looked and offered, “Arise, Saskatoon, Queen 
of the North!” 
 
That spirit of optimism was echoed over the course of the early 
decades of Saskatoon, and we know that. We can turn to 
Saskatoon’s board of trade. In fact they put out early pamphlets 
where they offered great enthusiasm, in fact a simple 
boosterism. One of the statements that they made was that “you 
have no excuse for indecision — Come West! Come to 
Saskatoon.” 
 
And we think about Saskatoon today. We think about the 
majesty of this remarkable community. It rests comfortably on 
the shores of the South Saskatchewan, where you will also find 
some of the most refined and easily identified examples of 
campus Gothic at the University of Saskatchewan. You’ll find 
the memorial for Prime Minister Diefenbaker. You’ll see the 
Vimy Memorial as well, obviously close by the landmark 
Bessborough hotel. Then the renewal of a riverfront that sat 
stagnant for many, many years, and that riverfront leads 
ultimately down through the Meewasin Valley Authority along 
those remarkable trails. 
 
That’s one of the reasons that we can begin to understand the 
easy brand, no matter where you are in the country, when 
people begin to speak about the City of Bridges. They 
understand the significance of Saskatoon, of the South 
Saskatchewan, of those bridges. In fact our mayor makes 
specific reference to those bridges, including the new one. I had 
the opportunity, like several members from both sides of the 
House, to participate in the Hindu dinner this past weekend in 
Saskatoon. And even there, although rushed for time, His 
Worship, our mayor, Don Atchison, offered once again his 
sincere thanks for the construction of the south bridge. 
 
So there’s that era of early optimism, of what Jeff O’Brien, 
Ruth Miller, and William Delainey refer to in their book, 
Saskatoon: essentially the evolution of a city from its roots as a 
temperance colony in the late 19th century to current efforts to 
brand it as a global centre of science and innovation. And it’s 

that spirit of innovation that I’m going to continue to turn to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, it was not a straight line simply built 
on optimism. Saskatoon, like Saskatchewan, went through its 
share of challenges, especially during both the great drought 
and Great Depression, the 1930s. But it was a time once again 
where that spirit of innovation actually captured the city. 
 
In fact it was C.J. Mackenzie, the first dean of the College of 
Engineering at the University of Saskatchewan, who had a 
vision for putting people to work and leading the charge on the 
construction of the Broadway bridge as we know it today. In 
fact for many years it was known as the dean’s bridge. That 
bridge is obviously iconic, not simply here within the province 
but again across the country. In fact Joni Mitchell makes 
specific mention of the Broadway bridge in one of her songs.  
 
There’s an example of social innovation during the Depression. 
It was an opportunity to help reflect and reinforce that 
commitment to enhancing employment opportunities, 
enhancing more opportunities for Saskatoon and 
Saskatchewan’s families. And, Mr. Speaker, as a result, we 
have an iconic bridge that helps to define the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that allows us to begin to think about the strength, 
the existential strength, that reassurance. When we begin to 
think about innovation, we know that for now more than 100 
years, in times that have been challenging and times that have 
seen plenty, the city of Saskatoon has helped to define 
innovation, not simply for the province but for the country. 
 
And now we live in a very unique time in Saskatchewan, one 
that’s gaining momentum. We can see that with a population 
that’s grown now to more than 1.117 million people. What we 
see, Mr. Speaker, is a time of growth, and that growth is 
reflected in a number of ways. It’s reflected on the ground, and 
we see the growing number of families. 
 
In fact Saskatoon was identified on February 27th in a piece 
that came out reflecting data from Stats Canada, based on a 
CTV story: 
 

Saskatoon youngest and second-fastest growing city in 
Canada. 

 
Youth is on Saskatoon’s side. 
 
The bridge city has the youngest population of any major 
Canadian city, according to a new report from Stats 
Canada. 
 
The average age in Saskatoon and the surrounding area is 
between 34 and 35, which is about five years below the 
national average. 

 
There’s evidence, evidence again reflected in any number of 
empirical offerings. For example in their new book by Loleen 
Berdahl and Roger Gibbins, Looking West: Regional 
Transformation and the Future of Canada, recently published 
by the University of Toronto Press, they quote: “In 2011, 2012, 
and 2013, the Conference Board of Canada predicted that 
western Canadian cities would lead urban economic growth in 
Canada, with Saskatoon heading the pack.” Page 61. 



April 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5057 

Again an empirical offering of what’s being felt on the ground. 
And what’s being felt on the ground is the need to continue to 
help foster and facilitate this growth — growth in a sustainable 
fashion, growth in a sensible fashion, growth that helps to 
ensure that we continue to meet the needs of families and 
businesses. 
 
And this allows us to have conversations about, as my 
colleagues have said and they’ve spoken eloquently, about 
financing and funding options for infrastructure. It allows us to 
turn our attention to ask basic questions when it comes to P3s. 
And that is, what’s the federal government doing? In fact the 
federal P3 Canada Fund oversees more than $1 billion and can 
contribute up to 25 per cent of any specific project. That gives 
us a pretty significant indication that this is a national dialogue, 
a national conversation about meeting the infrastructure needs 
of communities right across the country. It is a Canadian 
imperative to find new ways to fund infrastructure. 
 
[15:45] 
 
It allows us then to look at what other provinces are doing. 
Ottawa is taking a lead role, helping to reflect and reinforce the 
significance and legitimacy of P3s. What about other 
provinces? In Ontario and Quebec, Alberta and British 
Columbia, New Brunswick as well as in Manitoba, we see P3 
programs. So out of the federal government, we see a strong 
statement of support and then across the country, which allows 
us to then speak about some of the analysis that has been 
undertaken regarding P3s. And there are a few I think pieces of 
information that are relevant to the debate in our support of the 
minister’s motion. 
 
The Conference Board of Canada has analyzed 19 P3 projects 
and found that Canadian P3s have so far delivered savings 
ranging from a few million dollars to $750 million when 
compared to traditional procurement. It is to reflect and 
reinforce that this is a legitimate instrument for us as public 
policy-makers for the city of Saskatoon and for federal decision 
makers to be looking at. We also see more data. There have 
been more than 204, there have been more than 200 projects 
built or that are currently under way in Canada. And these 
began, the P3 model essentially began in the early 1990s. 
 
We’ve got a lot of track record in Canada about what best 
practices are, and there are examples that come up from time to 
time. The members opposite raise them. But there is a solid 
track record of increasing progress. In fact from 2009 to 2011 
there were 39 P3 deals worth $21.7 billion that were finalized in 
Canada: a federal government that supports this, various 
provinces that support this initiative, this instrument not to be 
deployed always but to have on the table as at least one option. 
 
And then we think about the city of Saskatoon with its civic 
operation centre, the city of Saskatoon that is willing to play a 
lead role again reflecting that spirit that has long served the city 
so well. And it’s joined by the city of Regina. When we think 
about the wastewater treatment facility here, that’s important 
for us to understand. 
 
A Canadian imperative to help address the infrastructure needs, 
a pan-Canadian imperative to deploy P3s in Ontario and 
Quebec, in Alberta, British Columbia, New Brunswick, and 

Manitoba. We see that since the 1990s there’s been more than 
200 projects built or currently under way that are P3. And 
between 2009 and 2011, 39 P3 deals worth more than $21.7 
billion have been finalized in the country. So that allows us that 
broad horizon to see that this is legitimate and indeed we have 
an opportunity, an opportunity to act in collaboration and 
partnership with Saskatoon. 
 
But what we also see, and this is important, is that when we 
look across that broad horizon of support from P3s, we also see 
the previous track record of the members opposite. In fact the 
members opposite also had a P3 office. It had a moniker; it was 
called the corporate development division that was overseen by 
a couple of ministers, Maynard Sonntag and Pat Atkinson. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what we see is that through the spirit of 
innovation and collaboration in Saskatoon, we see an 
instrument that we support and that in fact is consistent and 
congruent with forces and factors that are shaping contemporary 
Canadian debate on how to meet our infrastructure challenge. 
 
And so when we think about what’s going on the ground, when 
we think about certainly conversations I’ve had with 
constituents and others, they reflect this: that that Stats Canada 
report . . . Again this comes from a CTV news report from 
February: 
 

The report also showed that Saskatoon is the second-fastest 
growing city in Canada [the second-fastest city growing in 
Canada]. The city’s 3.9 per cent population growth was 
just behind Calgary’s 4.3 per cent growth. 
 
“The other significant feature of that is that the region is 
growing as well as the city.” 

 
“The region is growing as well as the city,” and that comes 
directly from Alan Wallace who’s the director of planning and 
development for the city of Saskatoon. 
 
And from Riversdale in Saskatoon, Noel Erickson, the owner of 
Freedom Functional Fitness on the west side, he offers this. He 
says: 
 

With the economic growth in Saskatoon it’s really bringing 
in a lot of the younger working crowd. I think it’s a market 
that’s dying to be looked after [dying to be looked after]. 
It’s a very young group of business owners; a lot of young 
entrepreneurs. 

 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re not surprised as one of the fastest 
growing cities in the country with a track record of innovation, 
defined by its river and those that have worked to bridge that 
river, both through physical infrastructure and broadening and 
deepening that sense of community commitment, making 
Saskatoon increasingly diverse, dynamic and cosmopolitan; 
building upon the compassion and care that has defined that city 
now for more than a century. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased to say that I stand today in support of the minister’s 
motion because this is going to allow Saskatoon to move 
forward in the 21st century. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the House is the 
amendment moved by the member for Regina Rosemont: 



5058 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2014 

That all the words after “supports” be struck out and 
replaced with the following: 
 

the city of Saskatoon in its efforts to build new bridges, 
using whatever model it deems most affordable and 
effective, in a manner that provides accountability and 
transparency to residents; and further, 
 
that this Assembly urges the federal and provincial 
governments to partner with the city to build these 
bridges regardless of the model chosen by the city. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The nos have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:53 until 15:55.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 6] 
 
Forbes Wotherspoon Vermette 
Belanger McCall Sproule 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. Opposed, 
sorry. 
 

[Nays — 42] 
 
Wall Morgan Stewart 
Draude Duncan Krawetz 
Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 
Harpauer Toth Huyghebaert 
Doherty Norris Reiter 
McMillan Harrison Wyant 
Weekes Hart Bradshaw 
Bjornerud Brkich Hutchinson 
Makowsky Campeau Wilson 
Marchuk Ross Kirsch 
Michelson Doke Cox 
Merriman Jurgens Steinley 
Hickie Lawrence Tochor 
Parent Phillips Docherty 
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
6; those opposed, 42. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion fails. Debate carries on 
on the main motion by the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. The motion before the House moved by the 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure is: 
 

That this Assembly supports the use of the P3 model in the 

construction of a new bridge in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:58 until 16:00.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas  42] 
 
Wall Morgan Stewart 
Draude Duncan Krawetz 
Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 
Harpauer Toth Huyghebaert 
Doherty Norris Reiter 
McMillan Harrison Wyant 
Weekes Hart Bradshaw 
Bjornerud Brkich Hutchinson 
Makowsky Campeau Wilson 
Marchuk Ross Kirsch 
Michelson Doke Cox 
Merriman Jurgens Steinley 
Hickie Lawrence Tochor 
Parent Phillips Docherty 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays  6] 
 
Forbes Wotherspoon Vermette 
Belanger McCall Sproule 
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
42; those opposed, 6. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:03.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5035 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5035 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5035 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5035 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5035 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5036 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5036 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5036 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Autism Awareness Day 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5036 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5036 
 Program Helps Developing Nations 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5037 
 Hindu Society of Saskatchewan Banquet 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5037 
 Climbing Mountains to Raise Awareness  
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5037 
 Team Wins Provincial D Midget Hockey Championship 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5038 
 Aboriginal Youth Leadership Symposium 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5038 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Training for Health Care Workers and the Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5038 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5038 
 Capital Funding for Schools 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5039 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5039 
 Landfill Management 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5040 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5040 
 Social Services Expenditures and Responsibilities 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5041 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5041 
 Payments to Contractors 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5042 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5042 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5043 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5043 
 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5044 
 Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5044 
 Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5044 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5045 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Public-Private Partnership and New Bridge for Saskatoon 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5045 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5047 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5049 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5050 



 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5053 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5054 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5056 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 5058 
 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 5058 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


