




















































Hansard: October 30, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 6A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5621 

 October 30, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly, I am pleased to introduce a number of 

guests who are joining us this morning seated in your gallery. 

And when I say their name, I’ll maybe ask them to give us a 

wave so that we know who they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this morning we have with us representatives of 

the pharmacy industry in this province. The Chair of the 

Pharmacists’ Association of Saskatchewan, the board of 

directors, the Chair of the board, Christine Hrudka is here with 

us this morning as well as the executive director of the 

association, Dawn Martin; Dr. Roy Dobson, the acting assistant 

dean of pharmacy at the College of Pharmacy and Nutrition in 

Saskatoon; Spiro Kolitsas, the president of the Saskatchewan 

College of Pharmacists; Justin Kosar, the vice-president of the 

Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists; Ray Joubert, the 

registrar for the College of Pharmacists; Sue Mack Klinger, the 

program head of pharmacy technician program at Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic campus; and Jaris Swirovich, the president of the 

Canadian Society of Hospital Pharmacists, Saskatchewan 

branch. 

 

They’re all here to hear the introduction, the first reading of 

amendments to The Pharmacy Act that will happen later today 

that will increase pharmacists’ scope of practice to ensure that 

Saskatchewan people have greater and more timely access to 

health services in this province. 

 

I want to thank each of them and the organizations that they 

represent for helping us to move these amendments forward and 

being in the position that we are in today where we will be able 

to hear first reading of the bill. And so I’d ask all members to 

join with me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

join with the minister in welcoming the delegation here to hear 

first reading on the amendments to The Pharmacy Act: Mr. 

Joubert, Dr. Roy Dobson, and a whole host of other people. 

And I look forward to actually hearing more about the Bill and 

connecting with these stakeholders to hear their thoughts. And 

we look forward to the Bill, and welcome to your legislature 

today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I have the pleasure of introducing to you and through you, 29 

grade 7 and 8 students from MacNeill Elementary School here 

in Regina. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Alana 

Nelson. So everyone please give them a warm welcome here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

thank you to all members. To you and through you, in the spirit 

of Violence Prevention Week which I proclaimed on Monday, 

I’d like to take a moment to recognize Dr. Jackson Katz who is 

seated in our gallery today. 

 

Based in the United States, Dr. Katz is an internationally 

recognized speaker, author, and educator on gender violence 

prevention in schools, sports, and the military. He co-founded 

the Mentors in Violence Prevention program, the most widely 

used sexual and domestic violence prevention program in 

American collegiates and professional sports. He’s now part of 

a pilot program in the US [United States] Navy. 

 

Dr. Jackson has also been creating a partnerships across the 

provinces and territories, between communities, corporations, 

and governments. He may be familiar with the BC [British 

Columbia] Lions, Be More Than a Bystander campaign. It 

engages men as allies to break the cycle and the silence of 

violence. He’s speaking this afternoon at the University of 

Regina about male leadership in violence prevention, part of 

that institution’s week-long look at violence awareness. 

Government officials will have a chance to meet with Dr. Katz 

as well while he is in the province. 

 

Dr. Katz, we look forward to hearing your valuable insight, and 

I would ask that all members in the legislature join me in 

welcoming you to our legislature. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I would be remiss if I 

didn’t introduce someone special to me in the House. As 

everyone knows, behind every successful man there’s a 

surprised woman, and she sits in your gallery. Joining me is my 

wife, Christine. 

 

Many in the House will know Chris as a successful 

businesswoman, an excellent pharmacist, and a very, very 

strong advocate for her profession and the profession’s role in 

the delivery of health care in this province. So I’m very proud 

of her, and I’m happy that she’s joined us today. She’s certainly 

the reason why I can be here today, and supports our family 

when I’m away. So I would ask all members of the legislature 

to welcome Christine to her legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with the 

Minister of Justice in welcoming Dr. Katz to the Assembly. 

This is very, very important work, work which we are 

continually reminded of the importance of in combating and 

stemming violence that is gender based, Mr. Speaker. And so 

we welcome his role here in the province and wish him all the 

best in the work that he will be doing and fully support the 

initiatives. Thank you. 

 



5622 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions as it relates to the unacceptable danger on 

Dewdney Avenue caused by the lack of planning by that 

government. Certainly this issue requires the immediate 

attention of that government to ensure safety. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina and White City. 

 

I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of better health care in Saskatchewan. The 

individuals who’ve signed this petition want to bring to the 

attention the following to this Legislative Assembly. 

Emergency room wait times in Saskatchewan have doubled 

since 2010. That’s only four years ago. The government’s own 

statistics show that patient safety is getting worse. Chronic short 

staffing is a problem throughout our health care system. 

Saskatoon City Hospital is underutilized, with patient rooms 

used as managers’ offices, and an independent report shows that 

2.2 billion of repairs are needed in hospitals and care facilities. 

And we know the government is spending untold millions of 

dollars on its lean project, including a $40 million contract with 

an American consultant and flying in Japanese senseis for 

$3,500 per day. 

 

And so I’d like to read the prayer. The individuals that signed 

this: 

 

Request that this Legislative Assembly take the following 

action: to cause the provincial government to recognize 

health care is getting worse under its watch and begin 

fixing the basics by listening to health care workers, 

patients, and their families; properly maintaining hospitals 

and care facilities; and focusing its resources on front-line 

care instead of spending millions on its lean pet project. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition 

come from my riding, Saskatoon Nutana. And I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Screening Program for Breast Cancer 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we reach 

the end of October, we would like to acknowledge the end of 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Breast cancer is the most 

frequently diagnosed type of cancer for women in 

Saskatchewan, with an estimated 700 women diagnosed each 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that every woman screened is a potential 

life saved. Digital mammography equipment provides the 

ability to detect cancer in its early stages when the outcomes are 

better for the patients. The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency 

provides mammography for more than 39,000 women each year 

through the screening program for breast cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, approximately 30 per cent of the breast cancer 

screened cases are detected each year through this program. 

About three-quarters of the cases diagnosed through this 

program are in the early stages, affording women and their 

medical teams the most optimal ability for fighting this disease. 

 

Because a doctor’s referral is not needed, women can stay one 

step ahead by calling the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to make 

an appointment for this mammography. Mr. Speaker, I 

personally know this is not the most comfortable test, but I 

encourage all women to participate in the screening program for 

breast cancer because it saves lives. 

 

To support our government’s goal for better quality life for all 

Saskatchewan people, we approved funding of $155.7 million 

in the 2014-2015 budget for Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to 

support enhanced access to cancer care and services. Mr. 

Speaker, we continue to put our patients first with top-quality 

cancer prevention and treatment services. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Nuit Blanche Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on September 27th I had the 

pleasure of attending the inaugural Nuit Blanche Saskatoon. 

Nuit Blanche concept originated in Paris, and Nuit Blanche 

events have since taken place all over the world, including 

several other Canadian cities, but until this year the event had 

not taken place in Saskatchewan. Less than a year ago I 

remember Sean Shaw talking about how he wished Saskatoon 

could have a Nuit Blanche festival, and incredibly Sean helped 

make it a reality in just a few months. 

 

Sean recruited several other individuals to the board: Heather 

Morrison, Mark Turner, Andrew Dickson, Chris Morin, Brett 

Suwinski, Kathleen Crowther, Trevor Pritchard, Nicole Lock, 

Sam Lock, Tara Reibin, DeeAnn Mercier, Thomas Dehod, and 

Rebecca Zakreski. This group of dedicated individuals with the 

assistance of many other talented volunteers created an 

incredible new arts and culture festival in Saskatoon. 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5623 

Nuit Blanche took place in Saskatoon’s Riversdale 

neighbourhood. It involved numerous dance, theatre, music, 

poetry, and art installations that entertained and wowed festival 

goers late into the night. Mr. Speaker, I know I am not alone in 

already looking forward to the second annual Nuit Blanche 

Saskatoon. I ask all members to join me in expressing our 

appreciation to the Nuit Blanche board and volunteers for 

bringing this new festival to our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Official Opening of St. Louis Bridge 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

excited to announce that on October 24th the new St. Louis 

bridge officially opened. The original bridge was built in 1912 

as a railway bridge, and the wings were added three years later 

to accommodate the automobile traffic. 

 

The bridge was incapable of carrying primary weight loads and 

was the bottleneck that kept traffic from using Highway 2. 

Because it is in need of many repairs, it is now closed. Mr. 

Speaker, the new bridge is located 1.6 kilometres east of the old 

bridge on Highway 2 over the South Saskatchewan River. 

 

This is a very exciting announcement, as the bridge completes 

the final link in a 683-kilometre-long primary weight corridor, 

which will allow the heaviest legal weights on Highway 2, from 

Assiniboia in the South, to La Ronge in the North. Its increased 

safety and dependability will benefit the entire province by 

encouraging trade and movement of goods and service, 

particularly for the agricultural producers in the area who 

frequently cross the river. The new bridge will also provide 

accessibility and growth in the community of St. Louis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in celebrating the 

opening of the new St. Louis bridge and the completion of the 

Gateway to the North. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Prostate Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today 

to recognize that next month, November, is Prostate Cancer 

Awareness Month. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s that time of year 

when many of us start to grow moustaches for a great cause — 

Movember. Since 2003 people around the world have come 

together to raise funds and awareness for prostate and testicular 

cancer. To date the global Movember movement has raised 

more than $574 million in 21 different countries. 

 

I’m sure all of us can think of loved ones impacted by cancer or 

mental health challenges, which is why this is so important. 

Each year Saskatchewan people do their part, growing 

moustaches, raising dollars, and importantly, awareness. 

Movember isn’t just about men’s cancers. It now seeks to 

challenge the stigma many men face around mental health. This 

is so valuable. Men need to know that there’s nothing tough 

about suffering in silence. 

 

[10:15] 

Mr. Speaker, members on both sides of this Assembly will be 

participating. I, for one, will be growing, to the dismay of my 

wife. Personally I’m aiming for a Lanny McDonald by month’s 

end. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking all 

the Mo Bros, Mo Sistas, the impressive local Movember 

organizing committee, and all that are committed to changing 

the face of men’s health. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Two Miles for Mary Radiothon 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 3rd, I 

had the great opportunity to attend the Two Miles for Mary 

radiothon and breakfast which was broadcast on 900 CKBI 

from the Kinsmen Heritage Centre in Prince Albert. This annual 

event raises money for the seniors’ transportation program 

offered by the Prince Albert & District Community Service 

Centre. Mr. Speaker, this year’s Two Miles for Mary fundraiser 

raised close to $30,000 for the seniors’ transportation program 

in Prince Albert. 

 

Each year an honorary Mary is chosen from the seniors who use 

the program. Coincidentally this year’s Mary, Mary Aspvik, is 

also named Mary. Mary has been using the seniors’ 

transportation program for two years and had this to say about 

the program: “I like it, I really do. I wouldn’t be without it. It 

helps the seniors who can’t get around to get around with a 

car.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this program provides safe, dependable, and 

affordable transportation for seniors, with local rides available 

for as little as $4 per trip. The program not only provides local 

rides for seniors but also provides trips to locations within three 

miles of Prince Albert and rides to medical appointments in 

Saskatoon. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating the organizers of 

Two Miles for Mary on their successful fundraiser and the 

Prince Albert & District Community Service Centre on 

providing this important service to the seniors of Prince Albert. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

New Hip and Knee Treatment and Research Centre 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday marked the 

official opening of the new RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region] Hip and Knee Treatment and Research Centre, which 

will serve Saskatchewan citizens living with osteoarthritis. The 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region expects to provide about 

2,200 hip or knee replacement procedures this year for 

Saskatchewan patients. 

 

The new centre is a complete redesign of the previous 

multidisciplinary clinic for people with musculoskeletal 

problems. Now patients coming to the region who are 

prospective hip or knee replacement recipients will come to the 

centre for assessment and treatment. The result is a streamlined 

process that helps patients understand their options and uses 



5624 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

teamwork to provide the care they need with fewer delays. 

 

Wait times for orthopedic care has already fallen sharply in 

Saskatchewan, and this innovative approach will reduce patient 

waits even more, Mr. Speaker. Orthopedic specialists will be on 

site at the centre to consult with patients and other health care 

providers. Patients will learn about their condition and what 

options are available at the centre. Those who end up needing 

surgery will receive post-operative therapy at the centre rather 

than in a hospital setting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

RQHR and everyone at the clinic for the successful work to 

improve patient care. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Annual Roughrider to Rough Rider Regimental Dinner 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Recently 

I had the pleasure, along with my colleagues from Regina 

Wascana Plains, Regina Dewdney, Regina South, and Regina 

Coronation Park to attend the second annual Roughrider to 

Rough Rider Regimental Dinner at RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] Depot Division in Regina. 

 

The traditional regimental dinner was hosted by the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders and the Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police. This was a chance to celebrate the shared history of the 

RCMP and our Roughriders. Mr. Speaker, a roughrider is 

defined as a person who breaks horses to saddle. The Rough 

Rider Badge of Appointment was awarded for the first time to 

Sub Constable Yorke of the North West Mounted Police in 

1874 and is still awarded today. The North West Mounted 

Police were often popularly known as the roughriders whether 

they were in insignia or not. 

 

On September 6th, 1910, the Regina Rugby Club formed with a 

large number of North West Mounted Police as members. The 

club adopted the name Regina Roughriders in 1924 and was 

again renamed the Saskatchewan Roughriders in 1948. With 

over 100 years of shared history in Saskatchewan, members of 

the RCMP and the Riders met officially for just the second time 

at this dinner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking these two 

wonderful organizations that share history for their many 

contributions to our province and congratulating them on a 

successful event. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Coverage for Surgery 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last spring, Laura 

Cone came to the legislature. She’s 29 years old and she 

desperately needed surgery for endometriosis. Rather than 

waiting for years for a Canadian surgeon, Laura underwent her 

fifth and, hopefully, final surgery in Atlanta with one of the 

most highly qualified endometriosis surgeons in the world. The 

surgery cost Laura $33,000, and this government denied 

coverage for it. To the Premier: how can he look this woman in 

the face and defend the decision to saddle her with $33,000 in 

debt for desperately needed surgery? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to meet with Ms. Cone in the 

spring. Certainly have a great deal of sympathy for what she has 

gone through for over a number of years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry had been involved over some time, 

going back over a year in working with Ms. Cone, working with 

her physicians to find out the best course of action within the 

system in Canada. 

 

I think members will know that when there are options within 

the publicly funded system in Canada, that are available in 

Canada, that that is, Mr. Speaker, that that’s the process that we 

encourage in terms of out-of-province coverage before we 

would ever think about approving an out-of-country approval. 

 

The information that had been provided to me through the 

ministry and the medical consultants is that this service, this 

type of surgery is available in Canada and so therefore the 

application was denied. It went through the appeal process. The 

appeal process found that the ministry had followed the normal 

course of action and, therefore, that’s where we stood on that 

decision. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how this Premier 

and this government can look at Laura in the face, hear her 

story, hear about the immense pain that she was in, and simply 

look the other way. I don’t know how this Premier can 

stubbornly refuse to act when a world-renowned endometriosis 

expert says that Laura’s condition, her condition was 

progressing so incredibly fast that she could not wait for years 

for surgery here in Canada. In fact, there are very few surgeons 

who are actually qualified to perform the type of surgery that 

Laura ended up needing in Atlanta, and none of those surgeons, 

Mr. Speaker, are here in Canada. There wasn’t any other option 

for Laura, but the Premier and this government are looking 

away. 

 

To the Premier: will he agree to meet with Laura today, to hear 

her story, to look at her documentation, to reverse the decision, 

and provide the support to Laura that she desperately needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, again, I have met with Ms. Cone in the spring. I’d be 

happy to meet with her again today. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

ministry, as we work through these types of approval processes, 

we do look first, look to see what specialists would be available 

in Canada before we look outside of the borders. It’s not to say 

that we would be opposed to out-of-country approval, but first 

of all we look to see whether or not specialists are available 

within Canada. 

 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5625 

What has been indicated by the medical consultants that we rely 

on to make these types of medical decisions is that specialists 

are available in Canada — in other provinces, though not in 

Saskatchewan, but in other provinces. 

 

Those names were forwarded on to Ms. Cone and her 

physician, Mr. Speaker. They chose another course. We 

certainly have a great deal of sympathy in this type of situation, 

but we need to ensure that through any type of out-of-province 

approval that we look first to what’s available in the Canadian 

system. And there were specialists available in the Canadian 

system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what Saskatchewan people cannot 

understand is how this government has untold millions, untold 

millions for its lean pet project, but it doesn’t have $33,000 to 

cover desperately needed surgery for a 29-year-old woman. 

Untold millions for an American lean consultant, $3,500 per 

day for a Japanese sensei, for each Japanese sensei, $600 per 

day for Japanese translators — no end of money, a bottomless 

pit, Mr. Speaker, for its lean pet project — but no money for a 

29-year-old woman who urgently and desperately needed 

surgery. My question to the Premier: how can he justify that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I think the Leader of the Opposition will know that 

through the work that we’ve done in Saskatchewan and lean, it 

has saved us nearly twice the amount of money that we’ve 

invested to this point, nearly $60 million in savings just on the 

cost side. We know that lean is so much more about just the 

cost. In fact one of the members on this side spoke of the hip 

and knee treatment and research centre that reopened in Regina 

using lean principles which has helped to streamline that 

system. So we can use those dollars to reinvest. 

 

For example I indicated yesterday that from 2009 until this 

year, Manitoba and Alberta have seen their blood supply 

inventory costs, their costs to CBS [Canadian Blood Services], 

increase by $8 million each. Over the same time frame, our 

costs have lowered by $13 million, and we’ve been able to 

reinvest those dollars to improve wait times, improve the care 

that we’re able to provide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in these types of cases, certainly we have a great 

deal of sympathy. But there is a process that we look to see 

whether or not there are specialists in Canada in the publicly 

funded system, and in this case there would have been. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, documents that we’ve obtained 

show that this government is planning to spend another $2.9 

million on John Black’s travel costs during the remainder of 

this toxic contract, a whopping $2.9 million for an American 

consultant to travel to Saskatchewan so he can treat our senior 

health administrators with disrespect and tattle on leaders who 

would dare to question his opinion. 

 

$2.9 million for travel for John Black coming up in the near 

future, but this government cannot scrounge together $33,000 to 

cover urgently and desperately needed surgery for a 29-year-old 

woman. My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: how can 

he justify $2.9 million in travel for John Black while he refuses 

to pay for a desperately needed surgery for a 29-year-old 

woman? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we, as all provinces, are 

looking to be more efficient within the health care system, 

knowing that the days of 7 and 9 per cent increases in health 

budgets are not realistic. We need to find more efficiencies 

within the system. That’s why we’ve embarked more than any 

other province, but certainly other provinces are looking at 

incorporating lean into the health care system. And why are we 

doing this, Mr. Speaker? Because the results speak for 

themselves. 

 

For example, Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s mental 

health and addictions clinic reduced their wait-list from 400 

clients to 9 clients, Mr. Speaker, a significant reduction. Sunrise 

Health Region, prior to some work that involved consultants 

from John Black, found that 61 per cent of colorectal surgery 

patients and 28 per cent of Caesarean section patients had not 

received a recommended antibiotic within 60 minutes of 

surgery. Obviously that’s a huge patient concern. After we have 

incorporated some lean techniques, all patients in that health 

region, within 60 minutes, get the required antibiotics. It’s 

better patient care. It’s safer care, and it’s saving us dollars in 

the long run, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have covered in this Assembly 

how John Black’s approach to this government’s lean pet 

project simply is not working for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

and not creating the type of culture that we actually need to 

have here when it comes to better health care. 

 

Documents we’ve obtained also show that this government is 

planning, planning to give another $1.3 million to John Black to 

cover administration costs. That’s over and above the 2.9 

million that this government will give to John Black for travel, 

for this toxic American lean consultant and this wasteful 

contract. Again, millions and millions of dollars for training that 

the minister admits isn’t even tailored for Saskatchewan’s 

needs. No end of money for the John Black consulting firm, but 

no money for Laura Cone’s desperately needed surgery. 

 

My question to the Premier: when will he put an end to this 

wasteful and toxic contract, focus on what matters, like 

covering surgery for Laura Cone? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as we’ve said, the John Black and Associates contract 

will be ending in June of next year. In fact we’ve lowered the 

total amount that we estimated that we were going to spend by 

about two and a half million dollars, so the contract will be 

roughly $36 million over a four, nearly four-year period. But in 

that time we’ve seen tremendous results that have allowed us to 



5626 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

then use those dollars to reinvest within the health care system. 

 

For example, in RUH’s [Royal University Hospital] emergency 

department, the time between patient arrival at the door and 

treatment was measured at one hour and 53 minutes, so nearly 

two hours. This has been reduced by approximately 51 per cent 

to approximately 57 minutes, thanks to the work of continuous 

improvement. This is just one example where we are providing 

better patient care, and frankly at a lower cost, Mr. Speaker, that 

we can then reinvest into the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken about the significant work, just as one 

example, of Blood Services, and what that has allowed us to do 

is to have the dollars to then reinvest in the system where, to the 

point Canada’s, Saskatchewan’s air . . . the helicopter 

ambulance that we have, STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Society], for the first time in Canada, that service now has 

blood products on the helicopter so that transfusions can begin 

earlier. That is because we now have the dollars that we can 

reinvest because of the savings that we’re seeing. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s blood example has 

absolutely nothing to do with John Black, and the minister 

knows it. 

 

Almost everything about this government’s approach to its lean 

pet project is appalling, Mr. Speaker. But what is especially 

appalling is to learn that John Black spent a quarter of his time 

and budget solely dealing with the optics and the politics of 

lean. And here’s a quote from John Black to the deputy minister 

of Health and several other senior level officials. It says: 

 

JBA has spent 25 per cent at least of its time and budget 

either responding to requests for data as a result of the 

opposition’s questions and of attempting to make sense 

and get clarification of many unsubstantiated comments 

and rumours about its consultants and modus operandi. 

 

That alone should have been enough to fire this American lean 

consultant, spending 25 per cent of his time and money 

consumed by the politics and the optics. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: how on earth can 

he justify that John Black spends 25 per cent of his time in 

simply dealing with the optics for this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m not going to assume that the Leader of the Opposition 

wants me to not have the answer when he asks the question 

regarding the JBA [John Black and Associates] contract. 

They’ve asked questions through written questions and other 

means here in the House. We obviously have to collect that 

information. Some of that information is held by JBA and so, 

yes, from time to time we pick up the phone and say, can you 

give us information so that we can provide the answers? Mr. 

Speaker, it’s . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order on both sides, please. I recognize the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, so these are, you know . . . 

I’ll speak to what we are seeing and why we have decided to 

invest in this and why other organizations in Canada, and 

frankly around North America, are doing the same within the 

health system. A blood clotting tool — so if you think about 

how important this is for a patient — a blood clotting tool was 

previously used only 20 per cent of the time in the hospital in 

Estevan. Now because of lean and the work that the front-line 

staff have done, it’s used 100 per cent of the time for patients 

that may be at risk of a blood clot. Important for those patients, 

but it’s work that we could replicate all across the province. It’s 

better patient care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: did 

he know that John Black spends 25 per cent of his time and 

budget on dealing with the politics and the optics of the lean pet 

project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, so here’s another 

issue that we needed to fix. In Five Hills Health Region, 

distributing the wrong medication, distributing the wrong 

medication. So errors in distributing medication went from 17 a 

year, Mr. Speaker — can you imagine the risk that the patient 

has been at? — 17 times a year in one hospital in the mental 

health unit at Five Hills, happened on an annual basis. So that 

was before. Now we need to fix that. We applied some tools to 

that, continuous improvement. The front-line staff developed 

tools to fix that to where last year we went from 17 to 1, Mr. 

Speaker. And we need to get to zero. We need to reduce all of 

those defects, but that shows dramatic improvements. 

 

Defects in blood work had been reduced in Saskatoon Cancer 

Centre — imagine, cancer care — from 35 per cent times where 

there was defects in the blood work, has been reduced from 35 

per cent to zero in the last year, Mr. Speaker. This is work that 

we need to replicate across the entire system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Smart Meter Program 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we know now that in 

August 2012, SaskPower sent a delegation to Philadelphia to 

investigate concerns about house fires related to Sensus smart 

meters. Was the minister aware of that trip at the time? Yes or 

no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as is very typical with the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] in this House when they present 

information, we should look at it very, very carefully. They 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5627 

only tell about half the story at best. 

 

The memo that the member is referring to from yesterday, 

SaskPower saw it and received assurances from Sensus. Sensus 

had upgraded the meters from a 3.2 version to 3.3 version, and 

they indicated that this upgrade addressed all of the concerns. 

Sensus also provided written assurances to that effect. 

SaskPower officials agreed and advised that we continue to 

proceed with the installation of the meters. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve always come to realize in this 

legislature, we should only take a portion of what the NDP say 

because they don’t want to read the remainder of . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So the minister says the company that 

sold us faulty, dangerous smart meters said they were safe. 

Nice, Mr. Speaker. That’s real due diligence from that minister. 

 

Throughout this crisis, that minister has been adamant that he 

wasn’t aware of any safety concerns. But yesterday once a 

briefing to that minister was exposed, his story changed and he 

revealed all of a sudden that, yes, he was aware of safety 

concerns. My question to the minister: why was he pretending 

otherwise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the indications within this 

memo are very, very clear. SaskPower went and had a look at 

these meters, the 3.2 versus the 3.3 version. They indicated 

from there that they still were fully supportive of the installation 

of these meters going forward. That is the advice that we acted 

upon. 

 

If you look back at all of this information, it’s very, very clear. 

We took all of the appropriate actions, Mr. Speaker. First and 

foremost, when the problems came to light, we instructed 

SaskPower to remove those meters, and that is taking place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In addition to that, we’ve sought from Sensus to recover all the 

money, and that has taken place, Mr. Speaker. In addition to 

that, we have put together three different reports that have 

indicated where the problems were with those meters, Mr. 

Speaker, and those actions are being acted upon by SaskPower. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the memo, the briefing 

note and the briefing had nothing to do with 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5. 

All it says is that Sensus meters were causing fires in 

Philadelphia, Mr. Speaker. We know that officials travelled to 

Philadelphia to learn about these issues with Sensus. We know 

that in September 2012, they decided to pull 400 meters from 

Hanley because of safety concerns. And we know that that 

minister was provided a briefing note and a face-to-face 

briefing by then CEO [chief executive officer]. Yet that 

SaskPower minister claims that he can’t remember any of that. 

It’s absolutely unbelievable. 

 

So to the minister: was he negligent? Was he incompetent? Was 

he asleep at the switch? How can he not remember? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when we are provided with 

information, we act upon that information. SaskPower came to 

us and said that there was problems associated with these 

meters, but those problems had been addressed by Sensus. And 

if you look in the report that was conducted just recently, Mr. 

Speaker, it outlines the stages of that. It says that there was a 

3.2 meter that was tested in the test phase of these meters. And 

then they upgraded from there to a 3.3 meter that they believed, 

and SaskPower agreed, addressed all of the concerns, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That is in sharp contrast to how you folks have handled 

problems in the past in this province. Any time, Mr. Speaker, 

any time there were problems in Saskatchewan when they were 

in government, they did their best to cover up every single thing 

until it was dragged out of them in court after six years of court 

action. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower minister 

said, “If there was information presented and we didn’t act on 

it, clearly there would be a problem with that and I would 

resign.”  

 

Well that minister was presented with information about major 

safety concerns related to Sensus a full two years ago. He 

ignored it. He didn’t take it seriously. He didn’t act upon it. He 

didn’t ask necessary questions and he didn’t demand protection. 

So by his own standard, and by the standard of ministerial 

responsibility, the member for Kindersley should be resigning 

from cabinet. Will he finally do the right thing and do so here 

today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when the information was 

presented to us about concerns, of course there would have been 

questions asked. Are these meters still safe? And they indicated, 

SaskPower officials indicated to us, because of the changes that 

Sensus had made in the meters from a 3.2 version to a 3.3 

version, that the concerns that SaskPower had, had been 

addressed. And they advised to proceed. 

 

Now is the member opposite suggesting that we did not, should 

not have accepted that advice at that time? And had that been 

the case, then I think you have a point. But we acted upon the 

advice that was given, Mr. Speaker, at the time. That advice 

said proceed, and that’s exactly what happened. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when Philadelphia was 

dealing with these issues a couple of years ago, they didn’t look 

for a 3.3 or a 3.4 or a 3.5 meter from Sensus. They abandoned 

the company that had put people at risk. 

 

That minister has been pretending that he didn’t know about, 



5628 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

and claiming and stating that he didn’t know anything about 

safety concerns. Why has he been doing that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear here that when the 

member opposite is asked what he would have done, what did 

he respond by saying? These are technical questions that 

politicians shouldn’t be in a position to be directing. 

 

But yet, Mr. Speaker, we should be the ones that make all of the 

decisions with respect to that. We shouldn’t take the advice of 

SaskPower officials. We shouldn’t take the advice of experts in 

the area. We should just say, stop right now because of the 

concerns that you say existed that were addressed through the 

report, Mr. Speaker, that were addressed through SaskPower 

officials. It’s clear the member opposite doesn’t know what he’s 

talking about. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is this government’s 

responsibility to protect people’s safety, and this minister has 

failed. Two days ago, Mr. Speaker, two days ago the Premier 

was asked if it concerns him that the SaskPower minister didn’t 

know about smart meter problems in other jurisdictions. Well 

we know that is not the case, Mr. Speaker. The Premier said, 

“Well I didn’t either. I mean we were aware about the smart 

meter installation. I wasn’t googling about them either, neither 

was any other minister.” 

 

He went on to say, “If this information is not readily available, 

you assume the appropriate processes are undertaken. It’s not 

something you’re going to go out and google perhaps and find 

out.” 

 

We now know, Mr. Speaker, that this minister knew about 

safety concerns, knew about fires, back in October of 2012, Mr. 

Speaker. He didn’t bother to follow up. He didn’t bother to ask 

the right questions. He didn’t ensure Saskatchewan’s safety was 

first and foremost. It’s time for this Premier to demonstrate 

some leadership and to fire this minister. Will he do that today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it is very clear from the very 

memo that members read selectively from yesterday, that the 

minister took the advice of SaskPower. SaskPower identified an 

issue and then SaskPower said, well he said he was not aware of 

safety concerns because that is the briefing he received from 

SaskPower. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, his own deputy leader set a standard for this 

kind of decision making two days ago. When that member, the 

deputy leader was asked, what would you do in a similar 

circumstance? The Deputy Leader for the NDP said, “I mean, 

those are technical, technical questions . . .”. He said it twice 

that, you know, politicians wouldn’t be in the position to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It would be nice if I could actually 

hear what is being said. So please, let’s listen to the answer and 

when there’s a question, let’s listen to the question. I recognize 

the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — If the Leader of the Opposition has 

problems then with the conduct of the minister, he should turn 

in his seat and talk to the deputy leader who advised that the 

minister would do exactly what he did, Mr. Speaker, to not 

intervene . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Again, members, it’s extremely difficult to 

hear the response. Can we please listen to it before other actions 

need to be taken. I recognize the Premier. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The memo that the deputy leader and the 

Leader of the Opposition talked breathlessly about says to the 

minister, there is not an issue any longer. Based on that advice, 

the minister proceeds. Let’s check on what the Deputy Leader 

of the NDP would say about that conduct by the minister. He 

would say that politicians shouldn’t be in a position to be 

directing technical — he repeats it — technical questions. That 

is exactly what happened in this case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Safety has been a priority for this government throughout this 

process. So has been getting back the money for taxpayers. So 

has full disclosure of the issue, Mr. Speaker. And that standard, 

Mr. Speaker, is new to the province because whenever there 

was an issue while they were in power, their first choice was to 

hide it, to cover up, to hope they’d get away with it. As you can 

see by their numbers today, they didn’t get away with it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved that Bill 

No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5629 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 

Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure today 

to stand in my place to respond to the Speech from the Throne. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s appropriate that I begin my comments, as 

members before me have done on both sides of the House, with 

reflections on the events that took place on the day of our 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

On that day, October 22, 2014, we as Canadians were 

challenged. Our institutions, the National War Memorial and 

Parliament Hill, were assaulted, casting a shadow across our 

nation’s capital. Public service buildings, Canadian Forces 

bases, and legislatures across this country locked their doors to 

protect those who offer their careers to the public service and 

the betterment of our country. 

 

As our institutions were assailed, so too were our ideals. The 

attack was a challenge not just to us as a nation but to the very 

principle for which we have built those hallowed institutions — 

principles of democracy, of freedom, and of the reverence 

which should accompany a life given to public service. 

 

Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, last week our nation lost two 

brave individuals in the service of their country: Warrant 

Officer Patrice Vincent and Corporal Nathan Cirillo. I add my 

name to the millions of Canadians who mourn these noble 

servicemen and who thank them and their families for the 

sacrifice which they have made. Proudly the nation has 

emerged from this tragedy not one characterized by terror but 

instead, Mr. Speaker, strong and united. Our commitment to 

peace, order, and good government was not shaken and, if 

anything, it has been strengthened as we see the honour, the 

sacrifice of Patrice Vincent and Nathan Cirillo by living up to 

the values for which they gave their lives. 

 

To this end, Mr. Speaker, it was no small gesture that our 

province went ahead and delivered its Speech from the Throne. 

By welcoming Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor to our 

Chamber, by inviting guests of the free press to report on and 

scrutinize the message she delivered, and by involving 

uniformed members of our Canadian Forces to participate in 

Saskatchewan’s ceremony, our province confirmed that Canada 

has not and will not be deterred in its commitment to 

democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before turning to the contents of the speech itself, 

I would like to extend my thanks to everyone who made that 

event possible: Their Honours, my colleagues in the House, our 

Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff, the Legislative Assembly staff, 

our police and protective services, and of course members of 

the Canadian Forces, past and present. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I continue and as is customary, there is a 

number of people that I would like to thank before giving my 

comments on the Speech from the Throne. First of all, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to thank my wife and my family for 

standing by me as I serve the people of Saskatoon Northwest. 

Christine is with us today. I’ve introduced her earlier on. And as 

most members will attest, we can’t do this job, Mr. Speaker, 

without the love and support of our families. So I want to again 

thank Christine for that and for allowing me to be here and to 

serve the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my children in particular. We 

have four — Jeremy, Kayla, Stephen, and Allison — all of 

whom are in university and, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say all 

of whom are planning a future in Saskatchewan, which is all the 

more important for Christine and I because we have one 

granddaughter, our little granddaughter, Mia, who’s almost four 

years old. And she is certainly the light of our life. And we’re 

so pleased that our children are living in Saskatchewan so that 

we can see them grow and see their families grow and see our 

great granddaughter grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take the opportunity to thank my 

constituency staff. Kelly Merriman is my constituency assistant. 

She does a great job of keeping the office running in a straight 

line in Saskatoon, and I want to thank her personally for that. I 

also want to thank my constituency association, my president, 

and the other members of my executive who help run the 

executive association and who have been very supportive in my 

career as I moved into provincial politics. 

 

In my office upstairs, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my office 

staff: Dawn, Jennifer, Marina, Mary, and Reagan. It’s certainly 

an honour and a privilege to have them working in my office. 

They certainly keep the office moving in the right direction as 

well, Mr. Speaker. And without their support, I wouldn’t be 

able to do the job that I do. 

 

I also want to thank the individuals over at SaskBuilds, which is 

my other responsibility, led by Rupen Pandya. They provide 

excellent advice to me in my role as the Minister of SaskBuilds, 

and I want to extend a personal thanks to them for their help 

and guidance. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the voters of 

Saskatoon Northwest. It is certainly an honour and a privilege 

to represent them here. I hope I live up to their expectations and 

certainly look forward to their continuing support, so I wanted 

to thank them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a welcome and appropriate coincidence that 

we begin our legislative session at this time of the year. Situated 

as we are in the month of Thanksgiving and with the days 

drawing closer to Remembrance Day, it’s timely that we begin 

our discussions on the future of this province mindful of what 

good fortune it is to live in this great province. It is clear upon 

reading the Speech from the Throne that we are living in a time 

of unparalleled promise and opportunity. This province is 

strong. Its communities, businesses, and renown are growing, as 

is our confidence in its future. It is a province in ascension. 



5630 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

More and more we are taking a leadership role in Confederation 

and at forums across the country, ranging from discussions on 

interprovincial trade and commerce to a meeting of federal, 

provincial, and territorial ministers from which I recently 

returned where Saskatchewan led the discussion on a matter to 

improve access to justice, which is something which is very 

important to me personally and my ministry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

More people than ever before are choosing Saskatchewan to 

call home. For those like me who grew up in Saskatchewan, this 

is a welcome sight. We have always known the benefits of this 

great province, and we have had potential above what we are 

achieving. 

 

From the very genesis of this province in fact, Saskatchewan 

has been heralded as a land of opportunity, and this was more 

than mere advertising. Long before the establishment of 

Saskatchewan as an independent province, the merchants, 

artists, and governments of Eastern Canada and Europe knew 

about the land called Saskatchewan and heard narratives of its 

great province. For one, there existed a prophecy at the turn of 

the 20th century that Saskatchewan was destined to become a 

land of 800 million souls.  

 

One evidence of this prophecy comes in an anthology of poetry 

called, Songs of the Great Dominion, published in London in 

1889 by, coincidentally, the firm of a man named Walter Scott. 

In it while listing features of a young Canada, the editor wrote, 

“Her valley of the Saskatchewan alone, it has been scientifically 

computed, will support 800 million.” And who are we to argue 

with the destiny that’s been scientifically computed? We do 

know that we are seeing a level of population growth 

unmatched since the formation of this province. In 1905 our 

province held 236,000 people, by 1930 there were over 900,000 

people. Perhaps such growth allows for such predictions. 

 

For our part our government has set a more reasonable yet still 

ambitious goal. In the Saskatchewan plan for growth, we 

envision a province of 1.2 million people by the year 2020. 

Meeting this goal will be a testament to everyone in 

Saskatchewan, from the businesses who continue to create jobs 

and recruit workers, down to the neighbours that welcome new 

families to their streets and their communities. And at the same 

time, the Government of Saskatchewan will have a role to play. 

In accordance with the traditions of the Throne Speech, our 

government’s direction for the upcoming session has now been 

laid out. It includes many initiatives and announcements that 

are new and exciting. 

 

The new-growth tax incentive for the creation of new corporate 

and head office jobs stands out as one example, Mr. Speaker. 

Creating opportunities for management positions will allow for 

career advancement for industry professionals, develop our 

service industries, drive demand for higher education, and 

further diversify our provincial economy. At the same time, I 

believe that these initiatives contained in the Throne Speech are 

what the Saskatchewan people should and have come to expect 

from our government. While we continue to seek innovation in 

the public service and encourage innovation in the private 

sector, the speech is not one comprised of surprises but rather of 

keeping promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a speech on parliamentary reform in 1831, Lord 

Thomas Macaulay imparted the following wisdom, “We must 

judge . . . government by its general tendency, not by happy 

accidents.” There is no doubt that we have benefited from the 

province’s good fortunes since 2007, but we’d be wrong to 

ascribe the province’s marked upswing to a happy accident 

independent of leadership. How do we determine the effect of a 

government upon the future of the province? Thinking about 

such matters, it is worthwhile to take heed of Aristotle’s words 

in chapter 5, Book II of The Physics, when he determined “. . . 

we note that some things follow upon others uniformly or 

generally, and it is evidently not such things that we attribute to 

chance or luck.” 

 

It is to these factors that we must turn our attention. For 

example, Mr. Speaker, important strides have been 

accomplished in the province’s health care sector. Indicative of 

these changes is the fact that a number of patients waiting more 

than three months of surgery is down 81 per cent. Moreover, the 

number of doctors is up more than 400 and the number of 

nurses up more than 2,600. Is this but a happy accident, or are 

these decisions underlying this trend? One could ascribe it 

simply to chance, but that would be inaccurate. For we know in 

the health field that certain outcomes can follow upon others, as 

Aristotle said, uniformly or generally. 

 

In this instance improved outcomes for patients fall from the 

government’s focused attention to bring wait times down. 

Through initiatives like the patient-first review, the 

Saskatchewan surgical initiative and the Urgent Action Fund 

investments, we’ve seen outcomes for patients improve. And 

the list goes on. 

 

We notice conditions on our highways continuing to get better 

for motorists. Again we ask, is this merely a happy accident or 

are our highways improved, or do we have reason to believe 

this government has paid careful attention to investing in roads 

and infrastructure? In this situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 

would be again be inaccurate to ascribe these improvements to 

chance or luck. For we understand that when record 

investments are made into highway construction and 

maintenance — $4.3 billion since 2008, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

it generally follows that road conditions improve. 

 

This Throne Speech highlights many of the changes we’ve seen 

from these record investments. It includes improvements to 

Highways 6, 7, 16, and 39. This includes among other major 

projects, the Regina bypass — the largest road infrastructure 

project in the history of this province. The bypass promises to 

make travel around Regina faster and safer and to the continued 

growth of the GTH [Global Transportation Hub]. 

 

It also includes a partnership with Ottawa and the city of 

Saskatoon on a P3 [public-private partnership] bridge project, 

and an offer to do the same in Prince Albert. Of course, this is 

not the only P3 project under way. SaskBuilds is leading 

procurement on a number of P3 projects, including the new 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford integrated 

correction facility, a new 225-bed long-term care centre in Swift 

Current, the Regina bypass, and nine joint-use elementary 

schools. 

 

[11:00] 

 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5631 

A P3 approach to these projects allows the innovation and 
competition of the private sector to deliver savings for 
taxpayers on public projects while at the same time bringing 
them in on time and on budget. All the while SaskBuilds will 
continue to follow Canadian best practices to ensure 
transparency and accountability. It is also worth noting for 
clarity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our interest in P3s is not 
ideological. A P3 is only pursued where due diligence indicates 
that it’s an appropriate decision or it delivers value for money. 
Many and most projects in this province will still be completed 
through conventional means. 
 
Continuing on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see accomplishments 
in other sectors. Our province’s post-secondary institutions are 
producing first-class research and world-class graduates. 
Furthermore we see these young graduates choosing to stay in 
Saskatchewan to start their careers and their families, and I 
count my children among them. 
 
It is not merely by happy accident that Saskatchewan’s young 
people are choosing to stay. Our government has also paid 
particular attention to seeing that the economy can offer job 
openings and opportunities. Our government also introduced 
measures to help students, including the Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship, the Saskatchewan advantage grant for 
education savings and, importantly, the graduate retention 
program. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the graduate retention program 
has now provided $130 million in rebates to more than 50,000 
students, and so we have reason to believe that this is not 
merely by chance that young people choose to stay in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our agricultural sector is strong, contributing 
50,000 direct and indirect jobs to our provincial economy. In 
this, immense credit is due to our hard-working farm families 
who have struggled against difficult weather and delayed 
seeding and threatened harvests. 
 
As I speak on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m reminded of the 
comments of Jonathan Swift who wrote in Gulliver’s Travels, 
whoever could make two ears of corn or two blades of grass to 
grow upon a spot where only one grew before, would deserve 
better of mankind and do more essential work to his country 
than the whole race of politicians together. While this may well 
be the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m confident there is still a 
role for government to help our farmers, ranchers, and 
producers. A partnership with Parkland Regional College is one 
of those measures helping a new generation of farmers to learn 
some of farming’s essential tasks. 
 
At the same time, SaskTel’s investment to improve Internet and 
cellphone service can make a massive difference in rural 
Saskatchewan, especially during times like harvest when 
farmers are using their phones to coordinate pickups of grain, 
parts, and importantly lunch from inside the cabin of their 
combine. 
 
There are also important initiatives coming out of the Ministry 
of Justice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over which I have particular 
interest. Legislation will be introduced that will improve the 
functioning and fairness of our province’s justice system. With 
respect to these bills, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll reserve the 
majority of my comments until their introduction. 

Notwithstanding this direction, the Throne Speech does speak 
to a number of these important initiatives. 
 
The counsel for children was established this year within the 
Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee. This program will 
ensure that children in protection hearings can have a lawyer 
appointed to them so that their voice can be heard by the court 
on matters affecting their future. 
 
Important stakeholders have voiced their thoughts respecting 
this program, which may be of interest to members. The child 
and youth advocate, in a media release following the budget, 
was heard to have said he was very happy that the government 
is establishing a program for independent legal representation 
for children and youth in child welfare court proceedings. In a 
follow-up interview with the Leader-Post, he was quoted as 
saying he was pretty excited about the new program. 
 
Other stakeholders have shared the advocate’s excitement. Pro 
Bono Law Saskatchewan on March 20th posted on Facebook, 
“Great news for children and youth requiring representation 
announced in yesterday’s budget.” Their executive director 
subsequently told the Leader-Post the program was a very 
welcome addition. We are encouraged by this positive feedback 
as we certainly believe the program will have a meaningful 
impact in the lives of some of our province’s most vulnerable 
citizens, its children and youth. 
 
Similarly, another group our government is committed to 
assisting is victims of crime. Looking at Lord Macaulay, as 
Lord Macaulay said, at the general tendencies of a government, 
we see the Ministry of Justice once again increasing support for 
victims. 
 
Last year the Throne Speech spoke to our province-wide 
expansion of police-based victim services, making these vital 
services available throughout our province. This year we had 
the opportunity to enhance the victims compensation program, 
the most significant enhancement since the program’s inception 
in 1992. The victims compensation program assists victims 
primarily with immediate expenses after a violent crime and 
during the criminal justice program. Resulting from these 
enhancements, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the maximum 
compensation level has increased from $25,000 to $100,000. 
Maximum compensation for funeral expenses has increased, 
and family members are eligible for counselling and 
compensation in more circumstances. There are in addition to 
the enhancement previously made last June.  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday I also had the opportunity to 
introduce amendments to The Victims of Domestic Violence Act 
to allow the justice system to better protect victims of 
interpersonal violence and abuse, making faster and firmer 
protections available in more situations. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
would submit that when examining the general tendencies of 
our government, that list must certainly include a commitment 
to supporting victims of crime. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are exploring innovative 
ways to improve the functioning of our justice system. The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Act is being amended to 
improve enforcement mechanisms. Additionally, the Throne 
Speech makes reference to Bills 145 and 146 concerning The 



5632 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

Fee Waiver Act. Court fees are a common requirement in 

commencing a legal action. These bills expand the 

circumstances in which fees can be waived, allowing fee 

waivers in all three levels of Saskatchewan courts, thereby 

making the justice system more accessible to low-income 

residents and making for a fair and more just society. 

 

There are a number of issues that we could explore to find a 

similar result. It’s not merely by chance that the province has 

changed so drastically since 2007. Yet among these, none stand 

out quite as much as the growth in our provincial economy. The 

statistics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are impressive: a record high in 

employment, a record low in unemployment, average weekly 

earnings have increased. And as before, we dismiss the 

possibility that these changes are merely a happy accident. 

 

When a government maintains its commitment to sound fiscal 

management by presenting seven straight balanced budgets and 

announcing an eighth, when debt payments are made and a 

vision is laid out to cut the provincial debt in half in the 2007 

level by 2017, and when governments show a commitment to 

using best practices when investing in public infrastructure, we 

know that it falls and credit markets respond favourably. 

Therefore it is more than luck that Saskatchewan today holds 

the highest possible credit rating, a AAA. 

 

The same is true when exploring the reasons behind the 

province’s economic growth. Government policy can have a 

significant impact on the trajectory of a province’s economy, 

and there are effects we can predict that follow, generally or 

uniformly, from policy choices. For example we know that, 

generally speaking, taxes create what social sciences term dead 

weight losses that are a hindrance on the efficient functioning of 

an economy. It’s worth noting that since 2007 the provincial tax 

paid by a family of four has fallen by 93 per cent. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan already stands as an export 

and trade pioneer. Recent Statistics Canada numbers confirm a 

positive outlook with wholesale trade numbers jumping nearly 

11 per cent in August on a seasonally adjusted, year-by-year 

basis. 

 

It is undoubtedly the case that government policy can affect the 

health of exporting industries. That is why in the Throne Speech 

we see measures designed to help Saskatchewan businesses that 

are reaching across borders to compete in world markets. 

Noteworthy among these is the growth incentive tax tied to the 

creation of new jobs by manufacturers and processors as they 

expand their sales out of the province. 

 

At the same time, new inroads are being made into international 

markets. The Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 

carried out 42 trade missions to 27 countries in 2013. 

 

In Asia, consumers are fuelling demand for Saskatchewan 

goods, including high quality meats and grains, and industries 

are clamouring for our fuel and fertilizer products. This region 

will continue to be a strategic priority for our government. 

Accordingly we look forward to receiving and looking to the 

recommendations of the Saskatchewan-Asia trade council and 

the advice they will provide on trade, recruitment, innovation, 

and investment. We do these things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 

Aristotle pointed out, there are outcomes that we have 

discovered to follow generally or uniformly from choices that 

government can make. 

 

When looking to how to develop an economy that is 

competitive, efficient, and sustainable, there are few matters 

more important than the trade of goods and services. It is of 

absolute importance that government pay attention to the state 

of trade and make efforts to make it freer and fairer. This fact 

has been recognized for as long as the practice of economics 

has been studied. Given the character of our province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and our economy and especially the 

prominence of agriculture and resource sectors, our trade 

agreements have become very important. The Throne Speech 

appropriately highlights these agreements and the benefits they 

bring to Saskatchewan workers. 

 

While respecting how important our trade agreements are in a 

resource-rich and agricultural province, our government is 

committed to ensuring opportunities for local businesses are 

maximized. To this end we have established Priority 

Saskatchewan and are actively meeting with local businesses to 

consult on how to ensure a level playing field for local 

companies. 

 

Furthermore, our province recently received encouraging news 

that the World Trade Organization shares the view of the 

Government of Saskatchewan that American mandatory 

country of origin labelling unfairly discriminates against 

Canadian cattle and hog exports. Our government supports the 

federal government pursuing further action if necessary to 

address this situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are only a sampling of the issues that we’ll 

address in the upcoming session which I am certain will yield 

important discussions on our province’s future. Yet as we look 

at the Throne Speech, we are wise to adopt the lens of Lord 

Macaulay and distinguish between general tendencies and 

happy accidents. It is not a happy accident that wait lists are 

down, that roads are improved, that supports for victims are 

being enhanced, that Saskatchewan’s young people are staying, 

and that our economy and province is strong. These trends are 

at the heart of our government’s vision for the future of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was told a story recently, which may in fact be 

more fable, but nonetheless imparts an important message for 

legislators and societies. According to the story, there existed in 

a tropical plateau a delicious sort of fruit tree. The dilemma for 

those interested in the fruit however was that the fruit grew very 

high up and the tree was covered in large spikes that made it 

impossible to climb by human or beast. 

 

These trees, archaeologists determined, always appeared next to 

a different sort of tree that itself would have had no protection 

and was therefore easy climbable and hence bore no fruit for 

human benefit. Experts assumed the plants were compatible. 

They soon discovered however that there was no ecological or 

biological explanation for why these trees grew together. What 

could have caused the trees to grow in such a fashion, they 

wondered. The answer to this mystery, Mr. Speaker, of course 

is that whenever the fruit trees sprouted naturally, the 

community of indigenous people to the area would plant a 

sapling of another easily climbable tree beside it. 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5633 

The remarkable fact is that these trees took decades, more than 

any lifetime, to mature. And even though the planters would 

conceivably see no benefit from their efforts, they still 

endeavoured to plant so that future generations could assess the 

fruits of their labour. Regardless of how much of this anecdote 

is meant to be fable, the story is a positive one and offers 

insight into how prosperous societies should be governed. 

 

Relatedly, Mr. Speaker, there’s an old Greek proverb of which a 

former lieutenant governor, Lynda Haverstock, was fond. It 

says, a civilization flourishes when people plant trees whose 

shade they will never sit under. In the same way as our previous 

story, it intimates how we should approach the task of planning 

for Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is one piece in that plan and 

speaks to our government’s direction for the upcoming session. 

At the same time, it is another affirmation of the general 

tendencies of our government and a sign of our long-term 

vision for this great province, a Saskatchewan that is 

prosperous, fair, and strong. Mr. Speaker, I’ll be supporting the 

direction of the Throne Speech and supporting the government 

motion. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 

speak to the Throne Speech on the fourth session of the 27th 

legislation. 

 

Before I continue on the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to say some other things. Mr. Speaker, as each day passes 

we must never forget those that serve and protect us and all the 

people of this great country — our military forces, the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police, police officers, firefighters, and all 

responders to all and any tragedies. I also want to add my 

condolences on behalf of my family to the families of Warrant 

Officer Patrice Vincent and Corporal Nathan Cirillo from the 

tragic events that occurred in Quebec and Ottawa this year. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few minutes to thank my 

wife who is always there supporting me. Sheila has supported 

me through several campaigns as well as supported me while 

I’m doing my MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

duties, which takes me away from home quite a bit, and she 

doesn’t get to eat my great cooking. I would also like to thank 

my daughter, Shanaya, who has supported me and has door 

knocked with me since she was 12 years old and has never, ever 

said no when I’ve asked her. Lastly I would like to thank the 

people of Meewasin, who have given me the opportunity to 

represent them here in the Legislative Assembly. What an 

honour it has been. 

 

I have lived in Saskatoon for over 55 years and specifically 

Meewasin area for over 30-plus years. Mr. Speaker, I have been 

a board member of the Meewasin Valley Authority for the last 

couple of years, which was established in 1979 to oversee and 

be sure that the riverbank is accessible to everyone. Prior to 

1979 there was one crescent, Spadina, which the houses backed 

the river and you can’t get access to the river there. It is such a 

beautiful sight, the South Saskatchewan River in Saskatoon. 

And I’m fortunate that Meewasin constituency has . . . The 

whole east boundary is the river, so when I’m out door 

knocking, I have the privilege of overseeing the river and the 

beauty that it . . . [inaudible] . . . to Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are several themes to Throne Speech I would 

like to speak about. Mr. Speaker, in June employment hit a high 

record of 577,000 people working in our great province, and in 

July unemployment hit a record low of 3.2 per cent, the lowest 

employment rate ever recorded in Saskatchewan. In September 

Saskatchewan had the lowest unemployment rate, the fastest 

rate of job creation anywhere in Canada. 

 

Our province has a balanced budget for the I believe seventh 

time. Moody’s recently upgraded Saskatchewan’s credit rating 

to AAA, their highest possible rating. Mr. Speaker, since 2007 

Saskatchewan exports have increased by 63 per cent while 

manufacturing shipments have climbed by more than 50 per 

cent. 

 

Saskatchewan’s population is now at an all-time high of over 

1.125 million people, which the goal is to reach 1.2 million by 

2020. That represents an increase of more than 123,000 people 

in the past seven years, a far cry from the previous seven years 

when Saskatchewan population actually declined. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first new potash mine to be built in the 

province of Saskatchewan in 40 years, the K+S Legacy project 

near Bethune is under construction, while multi-billion dollars 

are being spent on the expansions of the existing mines, are 

coming on stream again. Uranium production is also increasing 

with the opening of the Cameco Cigar Lake mine, the first new 

uranium mine to be built in Saskatchewan in over a decade. 

 

I was also very privileged, Mr. Speaker, to have a tour of the 

McArthur River mine site with our Australian delegates that 

were here in the spring. Ryan Baerg, one of Cameco’s 

employees, took that Easter long weekend and came with us 

and made sure we got a very good tour of the uranium mine, 

and it was very, very pleasing to be able to go and see that 

mine. I had never been underground in one of those mines 

before. And I know all of the Australians have sent me emails 

back, thanking us for the tour of the mine site and how they 

really enjoyed it. And we all know that Cameco is doing 

research right now into producing a mine in Australia, in 

Western Australia where some of the delegates were from, or I 

think all of them are from there. 

 

And I had the privilege of going to Australia myself with my 

wife. And when we were on vacation in Australia, of course I 

went to the legislative building in Western Australia in Perth 

and met several colleagues or several Australian MLAs and 

MLC [Member of the Legislative Council], which is the upper 

house. And after that I was privileged to meet with the minister 

of petroleum and mining, and we had some very good 

discussions about companies like BHP, etc., and how they 

operate. And I got to explain to him how Cameco has been such 

a great company for the people of Saskatchewan and Canada, as 

far as that goes. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, to help meet our government’s goal of 

doubling exports by 2020, it will introduce a new-growth tax 



5634 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

incentive tied to the creation of new jobs by the manufacturers 

and processers as they expand their sales outside Saskatchewan. 

In the months ahead, our government will undertake trade 

missions to key international markets while continuing to 

support the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, STEP, 

which carried out 42 trade missions to 27 countries in 2013, 

most of those under the leadership of Lionel LaBelle, who is 

now part of the Sask initiatives and the CEO. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the comprehensive European trade agreement, 

CETA [Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and 

Trade Agreement], will open many new markets for 

Saskatchewan exports. The Canada-Korea Free Trade 

Agreement will give Saskatchewan exporters equal footing with 

their European and American counterparts in South Korea’s 

$1.3 trillion economy. 

 

Our government has taken a leadership role in enhancing the 

dispute resolution mechanism within Canada’s agreement on 

international trade barriers that remain in place between 

provinces, and this must change. Through the New West 

Partnership, Saskatchewan is working with Alberta and British 

Columbia to harmonize labour standards and occupational 

health and safety regulations. Priority Saskatchewan, a new 

agency, is leading a cross-government review of current 

tendering practices. To provide further support to local 

businesses, the Ministry of Central Services has launched the 

new SaskTenders website. I’m glad to see that happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2008 ministries and Crown corporations 

have spent close to $16 billion on a range of capital projects 

including hospitals, highways, schools, and power plants. For 

me the completion of twinning of Highway 11 from Saskatoon 

to P.A. [Prince Albert] has made many of my trips to Candle 

Lake to my cottage a lot safer. I used to dread when it was one 

lane in each direction and you’d get some people would be 

passing 20, 30 vehicles at a time. Now it’s nice, easy sailing all 

the way to P.A. and through P.A. Also since the government 

covered the cost of rebuilding the bridge in Prince Albert, I get 

through P.A. in minutes. And if I can hit every light 

synchronized, I don’t even stop when I’m going through P.A. 

sometimes. 

 

I have already had calls from relatives from St. Louis and Hoey, 

from relatives thanking us, the government, for building the 

new bridge in St. Louis. And I’m sure I’ll get more calls, as 

that’s basically where my mother and father were born, was St. 

Louis and Hoey. 

 

I personally want to thank this government for helping finance a 

new commuter bridge for the north end of Saskatoon. You can’t 

believe the congestion in Saskatoon in the north end during rush 

hours. And I remember when we had a by-election a few years 

back for Saskatoon Northwest, and I live up in the north end of 

Saskatoon in Lawson, and it would take me 45 minutes to drive 

from my house to the campaign office which was only, walking 

probably would have only taken me 10 minutes at the most. 

And once they get that commuter bridge in, it’ll lighten the load 

on Circle Drive and the traffic trying to get to the Circle to go 

home or get up to the north end and to places north of the city to 

work. It’ll be a real pleasure to get around the city. 

 

This year alone nearly 3 billion has been committed to renew 

and expand the province’s infrastructure. That’s a lot of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskBuilds was created two years ago to help deal 

with the province’s infrastructure demands, and it has initiated a 

number of P3 projects which include nine joint elementary 

schools located in Regina, Saskatoon, Martensville, and 

Warman. And I know the one in Saskatoon in Hampton Village 

is really needed because that area is just growing like you 

cannot believe. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Didn’t they vote against that? 

 

Mr. Parent: — Yes they did. 

 

The Regina bypass project, the largest transportation project in 

Saskatchewan history, that’s a huge project. The Saskatchewan 

Hospital North Battleford integrated correctional facility also 

completed with P3. The 225-bed Swift Current long-term care 

centre is now under construction and is expected to save 

taxpayers $13 million by using the P3 approach. Our 

government has partnered with the city of Saskatoon and the 

federal government on a P3 project to build the north commuter 

bridge I was talking about, and we have entered into a similar 

partnership for the second bridge in P.A. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will no longer spend any money 

on building liquor stores. We will allow the private sector, 

wherever we need new stores, to build and operate the liquor 

stores. There are two new private liquor stores operating in 

Saskatoon and one in Regina, with another in Regina coming 

soon, as the cities continue to grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, increased traffic and unprecedented flooding have 

taken a toll on the highways in Saskatchewan. Our government 

is responding with record investments in highway construction 

and maintenance. On Highway 16 work has begun on a new 

twinning project from Saskatoon to Clavet. On Highway 7 new 

passing lanes between Delisle and Rosetown are under 

construction. Pre-construction work continues on the twinning 

of Highway 7 from Vanscoy to Delisle and Highway 6 and 39 

from Regina to Estevan. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, this 

government has spent a lot of money on infrastructure in this 

province and continues to do so to make travel better and easier 

for the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, across government the lean process which is used 

to improve services for people and businesses . . . By using lean 

the Ministry of Economy has reduced the time to issue routine 

permits for oil companies from 10 days to one day. The 

Ministry of Highways now processes 13,700 more bridge 

permits annually, double the previous volume. 

 

Over the last seven years, Mr. Speaker, our government has 

spent more than $700 million on education infrastructure, a 268 

per cent increase. Forty new schools have been built or are in 

the planning stage. This year new schools have opened or will 

open soon in Swift Current, Lloydminster, White City, Regina, 

and Saskatoon. Schools in La Ronge and Lumsden have 

undergone major renovations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, programs such as the Saskatchewan Advantage 

Scholarship, the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 

savings, and the graduate retention program have made 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5635 

post-secondary education more accessible and affordable for 

our Saskatchewan kids. Since 2008 the graduate retention 

program has provided $130 million in rebates to more than 

50,000 students who have chosen to stay in Saskatchewan after 

graduation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this month people from around the world 

gathered at Boundary dam power station near Estevan as 

SaskPower opened the first commercial power plant in the 

world with a fully integrated post-combustion carbon capture 

system. More than 90 per cent of the carbon dioxide emitted at 

Boundary dam 3 will be captured and stored for use in 

enhanced oil recovery operations in mature oil fields. This is the 

equivalent of taking more than 250,000 vehicles off 

Saskatchewan roads each year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of the province’s predictable and 

sustainable revenue-sharing program, municipalities already 

know they will receive record revenue sharing of $265 million 

in next year’s budget, more than double what it was when our 

government took office. 

 

Earlier this year, Saskatchewan was once again hit by hard 

flooding. Our government responded by establishing 11 

recovery centres, including three in First Nations communities. 

They were one-stop points of access staffed by representatives 

from ministries, Crown corporations, Canadian Red Cross, 

Samaritan’s Purse Canada, and other organizations to help 

individuals and families affected by flooding. So far this year, 

the provincial disaster assistance program, PDAP, has . . . 

[inaudible] . . . more than 325 municipalities and First Nations 

and individuals living in those communities who were affected 

by the flooding and were eligible for assistance under the 

program. PDAP has completed or is in the process of 

completing well over 3,000 claims from this year’s flooding 

alone. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s agriculture sector is strong, 

contributing 4.5 billion to the Saskatchewan gross domestic 

product and sustaining 50,000 direct and indirect jobs. 

 

In the coming weeks Saskatchewan will host the New West 

Partnership Transportation and Market Access Summit to 

discuss long-term improvements to Western Canada’s 

transportation system. 

 

In 2003 Saskatchewan set a record for agriculture exports for a 

third consecutive year with sales of 11.7 billion, and we are on 

track to meet our goal of increasing the agriculture exports to 15 

billion by the year 2020. 

 

In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan plan for 

growth, we committed 344 million to boost the supply of 

housing in the province, particularly for the low-and 

moderate-income families. In 2013 the number of rental 

housing units started was nearly 34 times higher than in 2006. 

Today the vacancy rate in Saskatchewan is 3.3 per cent, which 

is higher than the national average. Our government has 

decreased waiting lists for families needing housing and has 

increased support for the homeless. At the same time we are 

increasing opportunities for low-income families to own homes 

in co-operation with organizations like Habitat for Humanity. 

Since 2009 our government has committed 7.85 million to 

assist Habitat for Humanity build 134 houses in 12 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this year our government was pleased to 

announce the opening of the new Sweet Dreams home in 

Saskatoon. Sweet Dreams will provide at-risk single mothers an 

affordable housing and support while they complete their 

education and learn life and parenting skills. This project was 

made possible through social impact bond funding model, the 

first of its kind in Canada. Saskatchewan has the second-lowest 

poverty rate in Canada, and there’s more to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2007 our government has committed $71 

million to improve the camping experience in our parks, 

including adding 1,400 new electrified camping sites. And I see 

this at Candle Lake where I go and I have a cabin, and I have 

lots of friends that come up there and camp. And we go to the 

different places in the park and visit with them, and it’s really 

nice to see that we’re continuing to add on to them. 

 

Saskatchewan Lotteries assistance supports 12,000 non-profit 

sport, culture, and recreational organizations in Saskatchewan. 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Sport and SaskCulture 

and the Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association signed 

a five-year lottery agreement to provide funding stability and 

allowed these organizations to maintain quality programs and 

services. Last year alone, Mr. Speaker, 52 million was 

distributed to these organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to assist with the cost of operating rinks, hockey, 

curling, our government introduced a community rink 

affordability grant program in 2012. More than 3.2 million has 

been invested in programs during the last two years, with more 

than 380 communities benefiting from this program. This year 

our government has committed another 1.7 million to the 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Boundary dam 3 project, which will 

demonstrate to the world it is possible to significantly reduce 

carbon dioxide emissions while generating the electricity 

needed to sustain growth, proving economic growth and 

environmental protection are compatible objectives. In the 

coming months, Mr. Speaker, we will adopt a new results-based 

regulatory model that will improve protection of the 

environment and promote innovative management tools, 

including the Saskatchewan Environmental Code. 

 

This session our government will amend The Wildlife Act to 

increase penalties for illegal hunting. The amendments include, 

Mr. Speaker, increasing the hunting suspension for serious 

violations from one to two years, prohibiting those who have 

not paid a hunting fine from buying a licence, and prohibiting 

any Canadian resident suspended from hunting or fishing in 

another jurisdiction from purchasing a licence in Saskatchewan. 

And being a hunter, I’m very happy to see this. Those convicted 

of three serious wildlife offences will be banned for life from 

hunting in Saskatchewan, and I totally agree with that one. 

 

Our government has undertaken an online drainage consultation 

that received nearly 500 submissions, and will carry out further 

consultations with the stakeholders in the coming months. Mr. 



5636 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

Speaker, these consultations will lead to the development of 

new regulations governing drainage as part of the province’s 

25-year Saskatchewan water security plan. 

 

And last but not least, Mr. Speaker, in 2009 our government 

introduced the Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour, a $5,000 

scholarship available to returning military personnel and to 

spouses and children of Canadian Armed Forces members 

killed or permanently disabled in the service of their country. 

 

Since 1919 the Government of Canada has awarded the 

Memorial Cross, sometimes called the Silver Cross, to the loved 

ones of Canadian Armed Forces personnel who died in service. 

This fall our government will make a commemorative licence 

plate available to recipients of the Memorial Cross. And with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to speak to the 

throne, and I will be supporting the Throne Speech. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, along with 

my colleagues, have already talked about the catastrophic 

incident that happened in Ottawa last week and in Quebec a 

couple of days before that. And I would like to pass my 

condolences on to the families of Warrant Officer Vincent and 

Corporal Nathan Cirillo. These cowardly acts actually just 

enforce that we do need a strong military presence in this 

province. And I’m very pleased now to see that a lot more 

Canadians are more receptive to the military and what the 

military is doing to keep us free. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to have been part of that military 

for 33 years. And I’ve seen dramatic changes in this country 

over that time frame where the military were frowned upon. I 

was at one time uncomfortable wearing my uniform in some of 

the major cities in Canada. And as time progressed through the 

’80s, I would say I saw a dramatic shift in the attitude of 

Canadians toward the military. 

 

When the wall came down in Berlin, we went into a peace 

dividend, and I think that was very costly at the time to us, 

especially in our intelligence community. I am a believer that if 

the wall had not come down or if the peace dividend had not 

been taken after the wall came down that we would not have 

seen 9/11. 

 

Our intelligence services were depleted so much, and when you 

get somebody embedded into a terrorist organization or a 

political organization that is against freedom values . . . That 

happened, and as a result, the intelligence wasn’t there prior to 

9/11. And I believe that if it had, if we had the intelligence 

services there, that 9/11 would not have happened. 

 

And I think that became a big change to the Canadian public, 

seeing what that had done to the United States and our country 

and all the free world. And since then there’s been a pretty 

positive change in attitude by Canadians toward the military. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have talked extensively about the 

Throne Speech. And my approach is going to be somewhat 

different. I also want to say some thank yous, but then I want to 

go back in time a little bit. 

 

I want to say thank you to my family. It’s been a number of 

years since I’ve been in here, since 2000. I want to thank my 

constituency assistants. Sandy Kuffner runs my Assiniboia 

office and Charlene Orr my Glentworth office. And they do a 

good job of keeping me out of trouble most of the time. 

 

I also really want to thank the citizens of Wood River who have 

totally supported me over the last four elections. And that’s 

kind of what I want to do now, Mr. Speaker, is go back in time 

a little bit. As most members will know, I’m not running again. 

So I announced that last February, and so there was a heated 

contest for my replacement. We had four outstanding 

candidates, and Mr. Dave Marit won the nomination. 

 

We had at one of the meetings in excess of 150 people showed 

up in Ponteix and then there was somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of 500 showed up for the nomination night in 

Assiniboia. And I was very pleased to be able to speak to the 

crowd there. And what I spoke about to the crowd was my early 

days when I got involved in politics and why, and basically 

what I was going to do in the future. 

 

So I reflected back on the early days and why I got into politics. 

Mr. Speaker, when I retired and moved back to Saskatchewan 

— I have a half section of grassland — people wanted me to get 

involved in politics, and I wasn’t that interested in it. So I 

finally got talked into it. And one of the reasons that I accepted 

coming into politics is I looked at where I live in southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I grew up in a little town of Fir Mountain, and I live about 12 

miles from there now. And I reflected back to when my 

grandparents homesteaded, both sets of grandparents 

homesteaded just south of where I live. When they moved out 

here circa the 1915 time frame, there was no schools. There was 

no railroad. There was no hospital. And I would daresay the 

roads weren’t very good in those days. And when I retired in 

1994, some 80 years later, the school was closed, the hospital 

was closed, the railroad was pulled, and the roads were in about 

the same condition as they were when my grandparents were 

there. So that’s one of the reasons I got involved in politics. 

 

What caused that? How could that possibly happen? We were a 

very progressive province growing in the early days from 1905 

through the . . . Yes, I know we had a depression in there, but 

we were a growing province. And then something dramatic 

happened, I’m going to say somewhere in the mid-’40s. And we 

tried a new experiment in this province at that time. And as far 

as I’m concerned, the province went downhill after that 

experience, and something had to change. So why did we go 

downhill? I really believed it was politics. 

 

Another reason that I got involved was I looked at the area that 

I live in, and it’s a lot of ranching. At that time, Mr. Speaker, 

we were shipping 750,000 head of cattle out of this province to 

Alberta to be fed. And where did they get their barley from to 

feed the cattle? From Saskatchewan. And where did they get the 

young women and men to feed that Saskatchewan barley to 

those Saskatchewan cattle? They also came from Saskatchewan. 

Was that right? Was that policy of the then government? Why 

would this happen? 

 

And so I started looking at reasons why this would happen. This 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5637 

was a total unfriendly business province under the NDP — 

totally, totally. So I got digging a little bit. And why couldn’t 

we have those cattle fed here? Why couldn’t we have a business 

startup here? 

 

So in my research and my digging, yes, I found the Regina 

Manifesto. How could you possibly want to start a business in 

Saskatchewan if you do due diligence and saw what the Regina 

Manifesto said? They are against business. They would not be 

happy until capitalism was destroyed in this province. 

 

It promotes socialism. And doing due diligence, and if you 

looked at that, why would you ever want to come here? Also 

doing due diligence, if you looked on the books, when the NDP 

took over the potash, that bill was still on the books. That bill 

was still in place. Fortunately we formed government. That’s 

one of our first things that we did was repeal that bill and that 

helped us become a business-friendly province. 

 

Back in the early days, Mr. Speaker, I remember my first 

election. I ended up in a tie. From that tie, there was a court 

case that came about, and we had 37 pages of discrepancies of 

the election in my constituency. We had people from Alberta 

that voted, people from BC. Lots of people from outside the 

constituency voted. And we even had one member that was 

deceased who voted. Now how could this happen? How could 

this possibly happen? Well we’ve since changed our election 

laws here in the province so that should not happen again, but it 

did happen in my case. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard a lot in my early days of travel in 

this province. I had some very strong CCF-NDP [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party] people in 

my province, and one of the reasons that these people supported 

Tommy was they said in rural Saskatchewan he brought 

electricity. And I said, and that’s why you voted for him? Yes. I 

said, when was he Premier of Alberta? Well he wasn’t. Why? I 

said, well they got electricity in the rural areas too. If Tommy 

takes credit — only Tommy — for putting it in rural 

Saskatchewan, who’s going to take credit for putting it into 

rural Alberta? They could not respond to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my campaigns I had some good times, but one 

of my favourite times was in the 2007 campaign. I come across 

this little fellow and he had a box with kittens in it. And in the 

box — I think he must have been put up to it by his dad — but 

he had NDP kittens. And of course the NDP candidate was 

quite pleased with this. He’d come by and pat the little boy on 

the head every day, and I thought it was kind of cute. But about 

a week later, NDP was crossed out and he put, Sask Party 

kittens. And I remember the NDP candidate asking me, he said, 

hey, they were NDP kittens. How come they’re Saskatchewan 

Party kittens now? The little boy said, they got their eyes open 

now.  

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people in the province got their eyes 

opened. They finally realized what the NDP stood for and what 

we stood for. And every time, every election it seems like more 

people are having their eyes opened to what really went on in 

the past and what we’re doing now. 

 

I reflect back on my constituency. When I moved back, like I 

said, the roads were in terrible shape. I’m totally convinced that 

for 16 years of NDP there was not a paving machine in the 

constituency of Wood River. The roads . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Probably not in Saskatchewan either. 

But the roads were just atrocious. We even had occasion where 

it was so bad that the citizens of Val Marie and area were fixing 

roads, going to fix the roads themselves. And I was kind of 

fortunate because the day that I was supposed to help them, it 

rained, and we couldn’t do any work on the roads. Because I 

don’t know anything about fixing roads. But that’s how bad the 

roads were. And we’re making progress right now. 

 

And as I told my constituents the other night in my speech, we 

now, in Wood River, have Highway 13 that is absolutely 

outstanding. Highway 58 between Lafleche and Gravelbourg 

has been a priority of mine, is actually being finished now, but 

it won’t be paved until next year, and Highway 43. So people 

are extremely pleased that they’ve seen some progress on 

highways. 

 

And I think everyone knows that we inherited the biggest 

infrastructure deficit probably in the history of this province, 

except 1905 maybe, when the province first started. And it’s 

going to take years and years to catch up from that deficit left 

by the people opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of my constituency again see what 

we’ve been doing and how we’ve been doing it. And I’m not 

bragging or anything but my plurality in the last election, I got 

83 per cent of the vote. So there’s 17 per cent in my 

constituency that may not agree with what we’re doing. 

 

I got to speaking about this in my speech, that we have students 

. . . We have so many things that we could talk about, but we 

have jobs. I think there was, the one day I checked — it varies, 

fluctuates — we had 16,000 jobs on the SaskJobs website at 

one point. And I had one person from my constituency, one of 

the 17 per cent that didn’t support me, said that’s fine. You talk 

about all of these jobs, but they’re all in the cities. So I 

reminded the individual, out of the 16,000 jobs, they were in 

130 places in Saskatchewan. I said, unless I’ve missed 

something in the last few years, we don’t have 130 cities. So 

these jobs are all over the province, and I was very proud to be 

able to announce that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about things that have 

been extremely positive for people in Saskatchewan, but I’m 

going to refer a lot to my constituency. We know that the motto 

of our Throne Speech is: keeping Saskatchewan strong. We 

took a Saskatchewan that was weak and we have helped to 

make it strong. I give credit to the people of Saskatchewan that 

made it strong. We just got out of the way and cancelled some 

of the archaic laws such as the bill that took over potash and got 

them out of the way and made this a business-friendly province 

so businesses could expand. 

 

One business in my constituency, prior to the 2007 election he 

told me he was closing his doors and going to Alberta. But he 

said, I’m going to give a shot at waiting until this election is 



5638 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

done. We formed government, as we know, in 2007. The 

business that I’m talking about today, he’s expanding. He’s 

doing . . . His business percentage went up over 60 per cent and 

he’s adding on to his existing facility right now. And I see that 

throughout my constituency, is places that are expanding, 

businesses are expanding. 

 

Yes, we’re fortunate to have some oil industry coming into the 

area, but it’s again a business-friendly province. People are 

moving back. There are jobs. Young people are moving back. 

And I’m very proud to be part of a government that promotes 

that. But in my constituency, I want to talk a little bit . . . This is 

for the province but it’s very important for my constituency 

also, in agriculture, a record 11.7 billion in ag exports last year. 

 

Now yes, it’s agriculture that’s doing it, but we have done, the 

Premier and business have done trade missions to help support 

this. Net farm income in 2013 was 2.63 billion, a 187 per cent 

increase since 2007. The CETA agreement will do nothing but 

help producers. The western livestock price insurance program 

is extremely well received by livestock producers. 

 

We’re committed to funding, fully funding, federal-provincial 

programs upfront. And I think most of us that were here for a 

long time will know that the NDP refused to do this.  

 

Compensation for livestock killed or injured by predators, the 

NDP would not do that. A 100 per cent wildlife damage 

compensation was 80 per cent under the NDP. 

 

Increased agriculture research funding by 104 per cent over 

what the NDP did.  

 

The gopher and beaver control programs, not available under 

the NDP. We’ve opened 10 new extension services offices. And 

I think we all remember what happened before; the NDP closed 

31. 

 

In taxes, since 2007 our government has increased the personal, 

spousal, and child exemption amounts and introduced a new 

low-income tax credit. These total exemptions plus yearly 

indexations save Saskatchewan residents almost $480 million 

every year. And we have removed 114,000 residents from the 

income tax roll, 114,000. In 2007 our government’s tax 

reductions . . . Since 2007 it saved Saskatchewan people more 

than $2.8 billion. And we all know about the education property 

tax we took over. Now education portion of the property tax or 

education property tax was stated at one time as the most 

regressive tax there is in this country. And who said that? It was 

Tommy in 1944. And so there’s, there’s . . . Look at the years 

that went by under NDP governments that absolutely nothing 

was done. And nothing was done until 2009 when mill rates 

were reduced, and that has saved Saskatchewan residents $728 

million. 

 

And since forming government, we have paid down more than 

3.8 billion in debt. That amounts to a 44 per cent reduction in 

debt and will save 600 million in interest payments over the 

next four years. And we’ve heard from my colleagues our credit 

rating is the highest it can be. We also have heard from many of 

my colleagues about the population growth and where we’re at 

right now. It’s worth repeating — 1,125,410. And we’re still 

growing. 

We have the highest highways budget in history at $664 

million. And believe it or not, in 2007 that was the highest. The 

next year — we broke the record — was the highest. And we’ve 

done that every year since, so this year over $600 million. 4.3 

billion invested in our first seven years — that’s an 82 per cent 

increase over the last seven years of the NDP. And we’ve 

committed to invest 2.2 billion over this term. That brings the 

total to 1.82 billion, well on pace to meet our target. And here’s 

an interesting statistic: since 2008 we’ve improved over 8600 

kilometres of provincial highway — 8600. We’ve expanded 

primary weight networks by more than 61 per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, revenue sharing has increased by 102 per cent, 

providing more than 1.6 billion in unconditional funding to 

Saskatchewan municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s an awful lot more in our Throne Speech 

that I could talk about, but one of the things I would really like 

to talk about now is what do the NDP have? What is their 

platform? I haven’t seen anything on their platform. The only 

thing that I’ve seen that they come out with is demands of the 

Throne Speech. And this is interesting reading for some. And 

what it reminds me of is a P3 program. The NDP are very much 

against P3s but they have their own P3, and their own P3 is 

poor policy planning. That’s the NDP P3. 

 

And I want to comment on one item that they have put forward 

here, maybe more than one. They talk about in this particular 

paper, focus on diversifying our economy. Just think about that. 

The NDP wanting to focus on diversifying our economy. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, as I look around, we have a pretty diverse 

economy right now. Agriculture is the rock star of our 

economy. We’ve got oil, gas, uranium, information technology. 

You can go on and on and on about our economy and how 

diverse it is right now. 

 

So as I was driving the other day I got thinking. What possibly 

could the NDP think about more for diversification of the 

economy? So then I realized my little sheet was in my folder, 

and I figure that this is what they meant by diversifying the 

economy. They wanted to get back into dot-coms. Is that what 

they want? Diversifying the economy by getting into dot-coms? 

Well they could get tappedinto. They could get Persona. They 

only lost 15 million. Navigata only lost 43 million; Craig 

Wireless, 10; NST [NST Network Services of Chicago], 16 

million; and it goes on. 

 

Is that what they want to diversify back into is dot-coms? And 

then my favourite. I have to chuckle at this myself. I think they 

wanted to get back into the potato business. That’s how they 

wanted to diversify the economy — get back into potatoes. 

Reinvent . . . SPUDCO 2 [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company]. 

 

An Hon. Member: — If at first you don’t succeed . . . 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Yes. Try again and lose more money. 

SPUDCO lost $35 million. Or do they want to go into places 

like Guyana and Channel Lake and do that over again? 

 

Mr. Speaker, and then I got thinking, how else could you 

diversify this economy? I know what they were thinking. They 

wanted to take over bingo in this province again. Remember 

mega bingo? Mega bingo lost $8 million. And, Mr. Speaker, I 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5639 

think maybe they wanted to get back into the pulp mill 

business. That’s how they wanted to diversify. You’d think they 

would learn their lesson. Eight hundred million dollars they 

lost. I have a total here of $1.2 billion that they lost in bad 

investments. 

 

[12:00] 

 

An Hon. Member: — They tried to buy an election with the 

pulp mill. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Yes, they tried to. And the $100 million 

they put in or promised in the 2011 election to Weyerhaeuser to 

keep the mill open in Prince Albert, well I think the people of 

the province saw through that. Yes, they had their eyes opened, 

yes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s so much good news in our Throne 

Speech that, and I know my colleagues have spoke about it, but 

I wanted to reflect back a little bit to the past, where we came 

from. And I’m just so pleased that we have formed government 

and hopefully the other side never, never will form government 

again. 

 

Their socialist policies, I’m wondering where they get their 

policies from, especially now that Fidel is not around. I wonder 

how they get their policies and where they’re coming from. I 

know it’s a very poor policy set-up because they don’t have 

any. So I’m really wondering where they’re getting their policy. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I guess you can tell from my remarks 

that I will not be supporting the amendment, but I will be 

supporting the Throne Speech. And I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 

in to the Throne Speech. I’ve made a lot of them over the years. 

 

I’d like to, like all the members before me, you know, thank my 

family for all the support that they’ve given me and the reason 

that I’m being able to be here. And also with all the members 

before me and also on behalf of the constituents of Arm 

River-Watrous, and I know each and every one. 

 

And I’ve talked to many of them just over the weekend that 

want to pay their respects for what happened in, the tragedy that 

happened in Ottawa and also in Quebec. They want to express 

their total disgust at the most cowardly act that you could 

probably put on against our country. And I know everybody in 

my constituency, it doesn’t matter what stripe they are, are just 

totally . . . can’t believe what has happened and also want to 

pay their respects to the families that are grieving and going 

through that. And I know our government has always, you 

know, supported the military, honouring those who serve and 

also the people that protect us in this building. 

 

And I want to talk about, even though the members have 

already talked a lot about this, especially the member just 

before me, but I just want to reiterate how we’ve introduced 

Saskatchewan’s Scholarship of Honour. We brought that in in 

2009, just a small, a very small thank you for our gratitude for 

what the people that serve and protect us, trying to do what we 

can.  

 

And I just say I don’t think we could ever thank them enough 

for the protection that they give us and laying their life on the 

line. Myself I couldn’t imagine, you know, going to another 

country and putting my life in danger. I have the greatest 

respect for the people that do that, Mr. Speaker. And also this 

fall in the Throne Speech, you know, making a commemorative 

licence plate available to members that have the Memorial 

Cross, just a small way that our government can say thank you. 

 

I want to, as I move forward, I also want to thank my CAs 

[constituency assistant], Lavonne Lyke and Donna Petit, as 

many members have thanked theirs. And each and every one, I 

know a lot of the members’ CAs. And they’re all very, very 

competent, same as mine, and they do an excellent job of 

keeping the fort going back home and taking the calls and 

handling the cases as we’re up here. I’m in constant contact, 

when I can, by phone and trying to give them advice on how to 

deal with constituents and doing it by phone up here, rather than 

in person when I’m back home on the road. 

 

You know, my constituency is a fair size. It’s a little over 4,500 

square miles, probably three hours from one end to the other. So 

I try through the summer to visit each and every community, 

town, village, RM [rural municipality] that I can, and I gather 

what I can from the constituents. You know, I’ve spent many 

hours travelling and going to sports days and events and 

fundraisers as each . . . This fall is just like, every constituency 

in the fall is a very busy time for fundraisers. It’s when the 

Lions, the Elks, local rec clubs raising money to keep their 

facilities open and them just raising money to help anyway that 

they can keep their communities going. 

 

But in a conversation that I’ve had, you know, and just not with 

one constituent but one just happens to spring up my mind, I 

was at a steak supper, and a constituent just talked about, you 

know, the attitude of Saskatchewan and how it’s changed. 

Because the same as me, I can remember how we had talks 

about, you know, the jokes about if you’re going to Alberta, the 

last person to leave Saskatchewan turn out the lights. You 

know, there was always never . . . Even though people that 

lived here were proud of the province, but they just didn’t have 

as much of that attitude that they have now. 

 

They always had that in Alberta. I know I had family that 

moved there, cousins that lived there, the same age as myself. 

And there was always just a little different attitude. They were 

just how, you know, the province has grown and things are 

moving and you can always get a job, you know. And in 

Saskatchewan, you know, it was always joke and kid: you guys 

have been the same size for population for years. And I’m 

talking through, you know, the ’70s when I was just 20 years 

old. And most of the people went to the oil fields to work from 

my area, the younger kids, kids my age, you know, and guys I 

went to school with. If you wanted work, that’s where you 

went. 

 

But we talked about how the attitude has changed now. That’s 

Saskatchewan now. When people, young people talk about, and 

even the older ones talk about the attitude in Saskatchewan now 

— how we’re the place to be, how we’re growing, how we’re 



5640 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

never going back, how this is, the opportunities here are 

endless. And I’ve noticed that over the last four or five years as 

I go to events. People come up to you and just say, you know, 

this is a great place to live and man, there’s the opportunities 

here. And you know, they’ve always been here. The 

opportunities have always been in this province, but it was the 

attitude. 

 

The member before me talked a bit about it, the history, and I 

want to touch a bit on that because it does, it speaks to this 

province, speaks to this Throne Speech. Because this Throne 

Speech is about the attitude. And all the throne speeches we’ve 

delivered talks about the attitude, how we have . . . How we 

expect this province to keep growing; how we’re working it to 

grow. You know, we went through probably . . . The last time 

that happened, my grandfather, both my grandfathers came to 

here through the ’20s. And that’s when we had that kind of 

attitude, that spirit: this is where you came. You know, you 

come to grow. This is where you’re going to expand.  

 

Then we went through probably the toughest times this country 

ever faced. That was the dirty thirties. I mean, I don’t remember 

it. Some of the members may very well that are here, but I’ve 

heard stories from the grandparents and my parents and read 

many stories, how this was probably the very toughest time that 

this country faced. And Saskatchewan in particular was very 

hard hit, you know, and it took a little bit of the hope and the 

long-range planning out of some of these people. They were 

just living day to day. 

 

And then from there we went into the war years. Same thing. 

Those were tough years. There were rations and, you know, you 

never knew what was coming the next day. And right behind 

that, the NDP came in. And they kind of worked on that attitude 

that, don’t want, don’t expect too much. Don’t, you know, next 

year could be always a little worse, so always the government 

should look after you. Don’t get too much into the entrepreneur 

spirit. Don’t spend too much. Don’t expand your business. You 

know, we will look after you. And they worked on that attitude, 

and that was a whole generation. 

 

I had a couple of older neighbours. I won’t mention their name, 

but they were, I know that they voted NDP — older gentlemen, 

two different farmers, retired, you know, rented their land out. 

And the one gentleman, I talked to him just a year or two ago. 

And I said, are you going to be able to have a farm auction? He 

goes, no, no. He goes, things are pretty good now, but he says, 

you know, I may have . . . Things could get tough again. I may 

have to go back farming. And I’m thinking, you’re, like, 80 

years old. And he actually believed that because he went though 

that. He went through the dirty thirties. He went through all the 

years the NDP were, you know, don’t expect these good times 

to last. And that’s what a generation that they formed 

government on, all through the ’40s and the ’50s and through 

the ’70s, when they basically tried to take over most of the 

businesses and just had that attitude. 

 

I remember growing up through the ’70s, and it was like, yes, 

government should be running things. And then through the 

’90s when I actually got involved in politics at the town council 

level when, you know, everything was planned for decline. I 

mean we can talk about closing the hospitals, and no talk about 

reopening. I mean, no talk of it at all. Just saying, no, we’re 

closing them. This is the way things are going. 

 

I can remember the year that they brought out, they were 

planning a decline of 3,100 students the next year. And just a 

decline of every year is when they . . . The projections was 

always decline and things are going to get tougher. And that 

was their attitude. They never looked at, like, how can we 

change that? How can we turn things around? That was never in 

them. It’s just the status quo. Never change. And that’s, you 

know, why they’re at where they are with nine members. 

 

And when I talk to the people — just not in my constituency, I 

talk to friends and relatives in the cities — and the attitude has 

changed. They don’t want to go back to that. They want a 

government that’s willing to look forward, that has an attitude 

that this province is going to grow, and that you’re going to 

work with the constituents and you’re going to work with 

business to make it grow. 

 

You know, you’re always going to have . . . Everything is never 

going to be all roses, but people want a government that’s 

looking forward, that has new ideas. And I’ve got that from a 

lot of my constituents, say, you know, I’ve listened to what they 

say and they’re just negative. They don’t have a policy yet. You 

know, sure, they just slam what you’re doing, talk about the 

Liquor Board stores. 

 

You know, constituents in each and of every stripe have said, 

yes, it’s probably not that smart to pour money into capital. I 

mean we’re always going to get the tax money. We’re going to 

regulate the industry, which we should. But why should we put 

out capital money when we’re short of capital dollars on 

hospitals, the long-term care facilities, and schools? Why would 

you lay out capital that you may not recover for a very, very 

long time? 

 

And also with that building, you have to remember you’re 

paying the heat and the insurance costs and the wages that go 

with it. Why would you even do that, you know, especially 

when times are a little tight, when we are short? We have a 

capital infrastructure deficit and we’re addressing it. And that’s 

one of the ways we can address it. 

 

When I talk to every constituent, I mean that’s what they talk 

about, is the hospitals and the schools and the long-term care 

facilities. Those are the ones you have to maintain with the 

capital dollars, not Liquor Board stores. And that has nothing to 

with ideological. That’s not political. That’s just common sense, 

when we talk to individuals saying, you know what? You have 

to make your priorities and you have to make them for the 

people. And that’s what we’ve been doing and that’s what this 

Throne Speech talks to. 

 

We have to, you know, maintaining the momentum. You know, 

oh yes, this is the first time we’ve had mine expansion on the 

edge of my constituency and my new constituency that’s going 

to be coming up, Arm River. We have K+S. You know, we 

haven’t had a mine expansion in this province since 40 years, 

never mind BHP in Jansen Lake mine going ahead. You know, 

that area of both provinces . . . I mean there’s people I know 

that are working both sites from a 40- to 50-mile radius. 

They’re back working back in Saskatchewan. They don’t have 

to leave the area for work.  



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5641 

There is lots and lots of work in this province, and there’s going 

to be as we go forward in the future. This is a growing, growing 

province, and it’s going to keep growing. And it’s some small 

part through some of the policies this government has brought 

forward because it speaks to the attitude. 

 

You know, naturally business is the one that has to drive the 

government, drive the economy, but they also need the attitude 

and they also need a government that’s willing to support them 

so they may create them jobs and turn that money back. And it 

all comes back to the people through taxes, through different 

initiatives. That’s how we can, you know, keep this province 

going. 

 

You know, agriculture naturally in my constituency is very 

huge. You know, this year the crops, there were some struggles. 

We had the wet spring, especially in the eastern part of my 

constituency. There was acres that didn’t get sowed. You know, 

many farmers had a lot of trouble getting the crop in, a lot of 

equipment getting stuck, you know, and that progressed through 

the summer, especially more in the eastern part again. 

 

[12:15] 

 

I know that crops are coming off. Most of the farmers I talked 

to are done. If there’s a little bit left, it’s some flax, maybe a 

couple hundred acres here and there, but the crop has finally, 

finally come off. We were lucky. We had some very good 

weather at the end of October. And the crops were average, in 

some places above average. You know, there wasn’t anything 

that was below. Prices aren’t as good as we’d like to see them, 

and there was some disease in the cereals. There was some 

concern out there, but the agricultural people, farmers are still 

very optimistic of the future as we move forward. 

 

And some of the, you know, initiatives that we’ve worked on 

with agriculture, which was providing 100 per cent on fowl 

damage and wildlife damage . . . Because it has been increasing 

in my area surprisingly because we’re not what you’d consider 

. . . And there is I guess a bit of wasteland. But I just know that 

this year all the hunters pretty well hit their limit every day on 

snow geese, so we’ve had a lot of, a lot of increase in waterfowl 

coming through more our area, plus moose. There’s usually, 

about every two or three weeks there’s always one killed on the 

highway, it seems like, between Davidson and Kenaston, at that 

end of it. So you know, we’re trying to offer some protection 

for the farmers through that and yet allow hunters to still hunt 

again, which there is a very good turnout, very good interest yet 

in people that still hunt and outfit in our area. 

 

You know, also talking about agricultural, one of the things we 

have and this government has promoted hugely is free trade and 

trade missions to other provinces and to other countries 

throughout the world because that’s a big part of our 

agricultural products. That’s where they go. 

 

I can remember when the lentil industry was just starting in this 

province. I mean there wasn’t hardly an export area for them. 

I’m talking about, you know, the ’70s and into the ’80s. And 

that market has grown huge. I can remember an odd neighbour 

growing 80 acres of lentils, and they develop on . . . where they 

were very short. There weren’t the technology and the seed 

advancement that there has been now, and there wasn’t much of 

a market for it. And now that’s a huge part of most farmers’ 

rotations are pulse crops, which are lentils — the price on them 

are not bad right now — and peas. 

 

And that’s all export. That’s all export, and that a big part to, 

you know, us, to our government and also the federal 

government that has been promoting many new markets. You 

know, Saskatchewan is just becoming known around the world 

for its exports. You know, we’re just starting there. The 

potential, like I’ve said before, is very huge for this province. 

 

And the innovation that’s come out of here in agriculture, in 

equipment — you know, the air seeders, air drills, all the smart 

technology — a lot of it has been, you know, either developed 

in this province or tested in this province. Farmers use the very, 

very top line of farm equipment out there. 

 

I can remember, as some of the members that used to farm, 

what we started with. And now the technology that’s out there 

when we run this equipment is very advanced, from GPS 

[Global Positioning System] to header height control to 

whatever. I mean you can sit in a piece of equipment, and if 

you’ve got a mile run, you basically don’t have to touch 

anything to get to the end of the mile. And then you just lift the 

header, turn around, and go back again. And with that, it is very 

good. But I can also can remember a neighbour of mine having 

that and having an accident with the sprayer, you know, 

because you do have a tendency to either doze off or to be 

distracted by other things in the machine, where you still have 

to run them. But anyways that’s kind of digressing with that. 

 

But just talking on agriculture and the technology that’s come 

and that’s coming forward, I have some short-line 

manufacturers in my constituency that are on the cutting edge 

of developing, always, new equipment as we move forward. 

And that’s one thing that I commend this government for is 

what we have. 

 

You know, I’ve been involved with SARL [State Agriculture 

and Rural Leaders]. I’ve gone to it many years, where we’ve 

always been working on COOL [country of origin labelling] 

resolutions which we actually got passed at one SARL which is 

State Ag and Rural Leaders down in the States. 

 

You know, it’s more on their state level not on their federal 

level, but still when we talk to . . . The more time we spend 

down there talking to their senators and their legislators and 

telling them that, you know, telling them how things work and 

how if they implement COOL, how it will also hurt their 

industry, not only ours, how it will hurt their packing industry. 

And I think the message is coming through. I know that I’m 

hoping in the following trade dispute that the US federal 

government doesn’t appeal it, but it looks like they’re going to. 

But still I think we’re still winning that war on the trade end of 

it, and we have to keep getting that message to them. 

 

Because the previous government — I can remember; I was 

opposition — even in the ’70s and ’80s and ’90s wasn’t that 

much on dealing with other provinces, even if they weren’t 

NDP, let alone another country, United States. Still they’re not. 

I’ve never heard them really talk a lot about how we need to 

promote trade with the United States, how we have to promote 

trade in Europe. They really don’t talk about it a lot. 



5642 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

I think they still like the old attitude: if it’s in Saskatchewan, it 

should be just done in Saskatchewan and the co-operative 

method. Everybody just lives kind of like a commune, and 

everybody just lives in their own little world in this province. 

Them days are long gone. We’re dealing with . . . When I talk 

to and work with constituents and business, that attitude is long 

gone. And they still talk about it, the NDP. They just don’t 

seem to have that. They just don’t grasp that we’re in a world 

market now. We have to deal with the world. We have to be 

open, and we have to work. And it’s work because I mean 

there’s other countries trying to sell the same products we are 

and trying to work into the same markets that we’re working 

with. And I think we’re, our government, is a leader in that. 

 

I mean we talk about, we’re working on, you know, lifting 

internal trade barriers that remain between the provinces. We 

have a New West Partnership. We’re working with Alberta and 

BC. 

 

And I’m hoping, you know, a province like Manitoba, which is 

NDP, will come on board. And I think they need to, and I think 

they’re going to start to realize as they go through . . . And I 

think they’re coming up to an election and, from what I 

understand, I think they’re running into a bit of trouble because 

they had a bit of an isolationist attitude in that province. And I 

think things are changing there. And I’m hoping that if they 

form a new government in Manitoba that they will be working 

with us as we try to eliminate barriers between each and every 

province because we should be able to move freely. Whether 

it’s a tradesperson certification or whether it’s a business or 

whatever, product should flow easily because I mean we’re so 

intertwined, provinces. I mean you hardly even know there’s 

borders there, you know. Well most places you don’t, you 

know, unless you see the sign when you cross. 

 

It makes economic sense as our universities and as our SIASTs 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] in 

each province works together to maybe . . . you know, working 

on a certification. It saves money, saves students money. You 

know, any way that we can work together and develop 

programs and work to save that because we need to build, you 

know, a skilled workforce as we move forward. Any businesses 

I talk to, that’s the main thing right now. They’re short in my 

constituency of skilled labourers. 

 

No. 11 Highway, which is getting to be one of the busiest 

highways in Saskatchewan, goes through my constituency, and 

I can see the businesses springing up on it, especially coming 

out of Saskatoon but even around the town of Davidson. You 

know, I can remember when the first A & W went in. Now 

there’s a Dairy Queen. Now there’s a mall coming in, and I’m 

hoping that there’s going to be some more businesses being 

built there. 

 

But even all the towns up and down the No. 11, they’re all 

talking growth. They’re all doing subdivisions. When I was up 

in Watrous, they just completed their last, worked on their last 

. . . on their subdivision. That’s done. They’re actually now 

planning for another one. Town of Kenaston is trying to 

develop more lots around the town. Davidson’s been in a 

growth mode, hugely. Dundurn, Hanley, I mean these towns are 

growing, and they’re going to keep growing. And they have the 

attitude that we have to keep. We’re moving forward. 

Because, you know, many of the towns, when I was first 

elected, it was about how are we going to deal with the empty 

houses in town and the people leaving? That was their biggest 

concern when I met with them, you know, when I was first 

elected — and that was under the NDP government — of the 

town shrinking. Now that’s completely changed as we move 

forward. 

 

Now I talk about highways, which I mentioned No. 11, but also 

No. 15 Highway. You know, we’ve developed that as a 

wide-load corridor as we realized that as we go through, as this 

province grows, we need to get the heavy and the wide loads off 

of No. 11 Highway. We have to move them on another route 

because there isn’t a day goes by No. 11 right now that you 

don’t see many wide loads going. Right now it would either be 

houses or bins or just stuff. I don’t even know what it’s being 

used for, mostly probably in the oil industry as it moves down 

south. 

 

We’ve been working on No. 15 Highway there. It’s a four-year 

plan, you know, in the 30 to $40 million range. You know, I’d 

like it to be built in one year, but I understand that it can’t be 

and so do the residents. But what they like at least, that there’s 

work being done and that we have a long-range plan. Because 

that’s one of the things the NDP never had and still don’t have 

is a long-range plan. We’re laying out, as the future’s growing 

up, where we’re going to need more infrastructure dollars. And 

that’s one of them is on Highway 15, as we make that a 

wide-load corridor, as we have to move . . . you know, as 

industry needs a good access route. And No. 11 is getting so 

busy that we need to start doing long-range planning, which we 

are. 

 

And that’s something that this government has always did. 

Even when we were in opposition we were making plans. I can 

remember our current leader actually, you know, put out a 

policy paper when he was in opposition. These NDPs still 

haven’t laid any policy just for the next year, not anything, let 

alone any long-range ideas. And you wonder why that they’re at 

where they’re at in the polling, and they’re going to stay that 

way. You know, they have no policy how to grow this province 

because that’s totally foreign to them. They were always used to 

being in the status quo, and I mean personally I hope they don’t 

change that attitude because if they never change it, that’s 

exactly where they’re going to stay, and that’s how most 

constituents like to see that. 

 

Another thing we tried to do is, you know, and that was one of 

the first principles we ran on in ’99, was a smaller, more 

efficient government, running on a smaller, more efficient 

government. And as our health care costs moved, and they did 

under the NDP, hugely — I can remember in opposition, 

budgets, health budgets growing 6, 7 per cent — well that’s 

unsustainable. And no long-range plan how to correct that. And 

that’s what we’re working to. That’s what lean addresses, and 

we need that. I think constituents understand that, that you can’t 

have a health care budget growing by 6, 7, 8 per cent per year. 

That’s just totally unsustainable. You’re going to lose your 

health care system and that’s what . . . We have a long-range 

plan how to address it, how to keep them costs manageable, 

how to keep our health care sustainable. That’s what lean is 

about. And that is what each and every constituent out there 

realizes. 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5643 

[12:30] 

 

And I know that this government, the opposition on the other 

side gets up every day and rallies on it, but you know, they have 

no idea that people realize that there has to be savings, that you 

have to try to run, you have to run each and every government, 

whether it be health care, whether highways, in the most 

efficient manner. You have to use each and every tax dollar as 

wisely as you can if you want to maintain this province. 

 

I’ve seen, you know, United States where there’s states that are 

almost declaring bankruptcy. There’s cities declaring 

bankruptcy in the United States. Manitoba is running, from 

what I understand, a huge deficit. There’s provinces in this . . . 

And that’s totally unsustainable. And that’s one of the things 

that we always ran on, was a balanced budget. And that’s one of 

the things I’m very proud of with this government and also the 

initiatives of doing a balanced budget. With it some days, yes, 

there’s some tough decisions, but constituents understand it if 

you’re making smart, tough decisions. And this government has 

been making very smart, tough, tough decisions as we move 

forward. 

 

You know, I could go on and on, but again I just want to thank 

the constituents of Arm River-Watrous for allowing me to get 

up again to represent their views in this House. And there is no 

way that I’ll be supporting the amendment brought forth by the 

opposition, but I know the constituents of Arm River-Watrous 

will want me to be supporting the Throne Speech of this 

government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to speak to the Throne Speech of this fall. I’ll take the sort of 

traditional approach that a lot of people have and first of all talk 

about their constituency. I’ve had the great pleasure of 

representing the Kindersley constituency for a long, long time. 

 

An Hon. Member: — 1962. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Not quite 1962, but 1991 with a few years 

where I was absent from the legislature. My good friend from 

Athabasca likes to say that I ran away from the legislature 

during that period of time. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think you know 

the truth with respect to that running away. The fact of the 

matter is, at that time my wife and I had a young family. Our 

son was still in high school. Our daughter had graduated and 

was in university at the time. And the fellow that had been the 

farm manager for us for I think it was eleven and a half years or 

12 years, somewhere in there, a guy by the name of Bob 

Steinbronn — Bob was more like a brother than he was an 

employee — but Bob passed away, and of course that was in 

the spring of 2002. Bob went down very, very quickly. 

 

I’ll never forget it, Mr. Speaker. I went home on the Easter 

weekend, Good Friday, and so of course the legislature recessed 

just prior to that. I had picked up a number of supplies for the 

farm, a bunch of bolts, a bolt pack and all of those kinds of 

things, and I went home. 

 

And this was a gentleman, Bob Steinbronn, that was extremely 

capable in terms of making things, building things, welding, 

cutting — all of those kinds of things, extremely, extremely 

capable. He knew all about the mechanics of a lot of things. He 

was a fantastic mechanic, fabricator, and all of those kinds of 

things. 

 

And I went home. And in the morning he came, that Thursday 

morning, I believe it was. And we were starting to unpack this 

package of stuff that I’d bought, a bolt pack and stuff, and Bob 

couldn’t read properly the bolt sizes. Well he would be, under 

normal circumstances, just able to look at them and know what 

the size of them was, let alone have to read from the package to 

put them away. And the other thing that was startling at that 

time was he looked like he had aged 10 years overnight. Well 

we buried Bob three weeks later. 

 

And you know, of course that resulted in me having to make a 

pretty big decision. And that of course was, the decision was I’d 

better return to home and manage the farm. And of course it’s 

worked out pretty well since then. But that was the 

circumstances. 

 

My good friend across the way, I hope he knows that that is the 

circumstance. I hope someone perhaps on the other side would 

present him with the facts around that because it just is . . . I 

find it a little bit unfortunate that the member would say those 

kinds of things knowing full well, or at least intimating that 

somehow or another, you know, people in these jobs, we run 

away from those kinds of things. Because that certainly wasn’t 

the case at the time. 

 

Of course then we, you know, got back into it. My good friend, 

the Premier of our province, was embarking upon the leadership 

at the time. And some folks, myself included, thought he might 

make a pretty darn good premier, and I think our assessment 

was right. That prompted my entrance back into the political 

world, and it’s been a, you know, a whirlwind of activity since 

then as a member of this government. And the privilege of 

serving in the Premier’s cabinet has been something that has 

been, you know, I’ve been richly blessed with and honoured 

with and certainly take those responsibilities very seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the Throne Speech I think lays out a 

continuing vision for our province that I think is very, very 

important. When I look around Saskatchewan today versus 

when I first started politics in this legislature in ’91, there’s 

some very, very stark differences between what was happening 

in 1991 and what we’re seeing happening in Saskatchewan 

today. I think that’s something that I think is very important, 

that we should all think about a little bit from time to time. In 

1991 our province was I think headed — and many people I 

think would agree with me — in a very, very bad direction 

where we were seeing hospitals being closed by the 

government, where we were seeing schools being closed by this 

government, by the NDP government of the day at that time. In 

addition to that, our highways were crumbling; we were losing 

population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us have had the experience. Some of the 

new members will have this experience, I think. At that time it 

was not unusual for MLAs to be invited to high school 

graduation ceremonies and it was both a celebration for the 

students in terms of, you know, them embarking upon the next 

phase of their life but it was also something that just tugged at 



5644 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

your heartstrings, Mr. Speaker, and it was sad because of the 

fact about what was happening with those students. It was 

almost to a person, student after student after student at that 

time were saying that they didn’t see the opportunities for 

themselves in our province. And that is sad, that they were 

going to go on to post-secondary education of some sort, 

whether it was university or technical training or they may enter 

the workforce right away, but what they were doing was they 

were going to enter into that workforce at some point in the 

future and it wasn’t going to be in Saskatchewan. And that was 

sad to say the least. 

 

Student after student, on one of the days that most of us 

remember as one of the most significant days of our lives, 

which was our graduation, they were saying those kinds of 

things to us. You know, I’m happy to be graduating. I’m 

looking forward to the next part of my life. And oh by the way, 

when I get my post-secondary education I can’t wait to get into 

the workforce and do it in Calgary or in Edmonton or in Red 

Deer or some other place, but not here in our province. That 

was sad, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now the good news is, we have been successful. When I 

say we, I say the people of Saskatchewan, the business leaders 

in our province, and I think in some small measure I think our 

government has made some things, put some things in place 

that have turned that around, Mr. Speaker. Now when we attend 

graduation ceremonies, it’s almost the exact reverse. 

 

And that is one of the things that continues to make me want to 

continue to be a member in this legislature, because of that 

transformation, because of the changes that we’ve seen here in 

Saskatchewan, because of the optimism and hope that people 

see now in our province that we have never seen in a long, long 

time. Throughout my entire political career, we have not seen 

that kind of optimism, that kind of hope in the people of 

Saskatchewan that we’ve seen in the last number of years that 

was absent, totally absent for almost generations in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that’s what motivated me, and I think a lot of our 

members here, to get involved in politics in the first place, that 

our province could do better and should do better. And if they 

had a government that actually supported the people, that put 

policies in place, that encouraged business development in our 

province, that encouraged entrepreneurs to invest their 

hard-earned dollars here in Saskatchewan, that we could turn it 

around. And all you had to do was send that message to people 

here in Saskatchewan and they would respond. And they did, 

Mr. Speaker, in an overwhelming fashion. 

 

We’ve seen that change here in our province that is incredible. 

And look around now. And I would encourage young people in 

this province to look around and see what has happened in 

Saskatchewan. You’d see community after community, city 

after city growing, new businesses, new infrastructure being put 

in place, new optimism that we’ve never seen — the kinds of 

things that I think are really important, where people have 

options in their life. They have the options that we haven’t seen 

in a long period of time, where there’s very, very good job 

prospects here in Saskatchewan. There’s very, very good kinds 

of things that are happening in terms of people entering into the 

business world. 

And that’s one of the other things that I think we should always 

keep in mind. And I try to do this on an occasional basis in my 

constituency, where you go in and meet with some of the young 

students, you know, sort of grades 10, 11, and 12, and I say to 

them a couple of things. First of all, you should be thinking 

about Saskatchewan. And I think they, you know, they kind of 

agree with that pretty easily. And I also say to them, you’re 

going to have a lot of people advising you as you move forward 

towards your career destinations, whatever it might be. You 

know, your parents maybe are saying, I think you should be 

thinking about post-secondary; I think you should be thinking 

about university. They may be saying as well, they may be 

saying, I think a technical education might be the way you can 

go. The trades are just booming in this province and there are 

tremendously good jobs. And there may be other people saying 

to them, you should enter the workforce and think about it for a 

little while before you make a decision around your future here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

I add to that one other thing. I say to them, just take a look 

around in your community for a moment. Take a look in small 

communities or larger communities. It doesn’t matter about the 

size. There’s business after business after business that are 

owned by people that are probably at the stage in their life 

where they’re thinking about moving on. They’re thinking 

about retiring. They’re thinking about making a change in their 

life. And in a lot of cases, they may have a succession plan in 

place, but there’s a ton of them, there is just hundreds of 

businesses out there that there really isn’t a succession plan in 

place. But there is a fantastic business opportunity that presents 

itself for someone that’s motivated to take it on. 

 

And I think and I say to people, whatever it is . . . I remember 

one in Unity, Saskatchewan here last fall, meeting with some 

students there. And there was a young lady there, she came up 

to me afterwards and said, I’ve never had anybody advise me of 

that; I’ve never had anybody say that to me. And she said she 

wanted to go into the hairdressing business but she wasn’t sure 

how to go about it. And she said, you know, actually it’s made 

me think, what you’ve said to me, because there’s a couple of 

businesses in this town that I think they’re pretty good, that are 

in that business. And I actually now am going to go and 

approach them and say to them, I would like to start working 

for you and maybe build towards the ownership of that business 

at some point in time. 

 

And I think that’s just one small example of business after 

business that are extremely good businesses, small businesses. 

They are clearly the engine of growth in our province that I 

think young people should be thinking about. You know, I tell 

people this as well: there’s a special place reserved for those 

who make those kinds of choices. There’s a special place in 

ownership in terms of being your own boss, in terms of being 

the person who makes the decisions about that business. I think 

society reserves a special place for them because they are the 

people who drive the economy. They are the people who 

employ people here in Saskatchewan. They are the people who 

pay the majority of taxes in Saskatchewan. They are the people 

who make those kinds of decisions that are right for our society, 

I think. 

 

And as I say, there is a special place reserved for them because 

we all understand that, generally speaking, most of the growth 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5645 

that we see in Saskatchewan is as a result of small-business 

owners expanding their business, making those kinds of good 

choices, hiring additional people, building on to their business, 

doing all of those things that result in the growth of our 

province. 

 

So I think this is something that’s very important. That kind of 

thing here in Saskatchewan that we see that’s taking place 

where we see our province growing — new houses being built, 

businesses being built all over Saskatchewan, fantastic 

opportunities here in our province to move forward. And I can’t 

help but think that we’re on the right track with respect to those 

decisions that have been made here in our province. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And to those young people that are out there, one of the other 

things is around the tuition that they pay here in Saskatchewan, 

and how our graduate retention plan can help them manage that 

tuition going forward where they will get their tuition back here 

in Saskatchewan — essentially a free education to be able to 

take up and move into the workforce here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So you know, we and all MLAs on both sides . . . I’m sure this 

happens on a regular basis. You have young people coming up 

to you, and they may ask for your help with respect to 

education. They’re thinking to themselves, I’m not sure that our 

family can afford to put me through an education. I want to do 

that though, whether it’s in technical institutions or whether it’s 

in the universities here in Saskatchewan. Well frankly, that’s 

one of our jobs. That’s one of the things that we are most proud 

of, is steering them in the right direction in terms of student 

loans and all of those kinds of things, so that they can embark 

upon an education and make a better life for themselves and 

eventually a better life for their family that I’m sure all of them 

aspire to have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re on the right track here in 

Saskatchewan. Is everything right? Of course it’s not. Of course 

it’s not. There’s always going to be challenges in Saskatchewan 

in terms of continuing to see our growth. There’s going to be 

mistakes made by people. There’s going to be mistakes made 

by governments. And Lord knows we’ve made some of them, 

and some of them have been on the floor of the legislature that 

I’ve been responding to in the last few days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes of course. I said this to the media when I was 

talking to them out there this afternoon in the scrum. Of course 

we would have done it different had we known and had the 

benefit of hindsight. Of course we would have. Any reasonable 

person can look at all of these progressions of events and say, 

well would you have done something different had you known? 

Yes, of course we would. But we don’t have the benefit of 

hindsight when you’re in the position where you have to make 

the decision now. You simply don’t have that luxury of saying, 

what if? You have to say, what are we going to do, is what the 

question is. 

 

And you look at this whole smart meter situation, and yes, there 

was a lot of mistakes made with respect to this. But we were 

constantly advised by people who are in the know, people who 

make these decisions on a daily basis, the people who keep the 

lights on in this very building. They made those kinds of 

decisions, and I don’t begrudge the fact that they are in those 

positions. They are there because they’ve got a good quality 

education. They’ve worked very, very hard. There’s a lot of 

very, very good people that work at SaskPower that make these 

decisions and keep these lights on, and we kind of forget about 

all of that. But the fact of the matter was is we rely on those 

judgments. We rely on that advice. 

 

We aren’t in a position to be able to be infallible. We are 

infallible. We’re human after all. And I would just say that, yes, 

there was problems associated with this, but I think the intent 

was good all the way along. I think that’s exactly the 

progression and good governance that I think people would 

want to see from a government here in Saskatchewan with 

respect to this program. And I think the facts speak for 

themselves with respect to this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government I think is on the right path. I think 

we’re seeing that here in Saskatchewan, I think, through a 

whole host of things that are important. In my portfolio, one of 

the responsibilities that we’re looking at is in terms of 

continuing to see growth here in Saskatchewan. We promote 

trade here in our province and we do it for some very, very 

good reasons. Mr. Speaker, you would know, and I think that all 

members of the legislature would know, that we are a trading 

province. We’re a resource-driven province here in 

Saskatchewan. And as a result of that, as a result of that, we 

have to think about what we do to continue to see that growth 

going forward here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I can’t remember the number — our ministry folks did it — I 

think it was 65 or 66 per cent of our GDP, of our gross domestic 

product here in Saskatchewan, is as a direct result of trade: of 

selling grain into the international markets, of selling potash 

into the international markets, of selling uranium and 

manufactured goods into the international markets. And we’re 

aware that prices go up and prices go down in Saskatchewan, 

but people on a daily basis take up that challenge and export 

into the international markets our product to the rest of Canada 

or into the United States or to the world, indeed. And we are the 

leader in area after area after area. 

 

But one of the things that was highlighted last year when we 

saw rail congestion here in Saskatchewan, it wasn’t just one 

commodity that suffered in terms of those exports. It was all of 

the commodities that we export that suffered in terms of 

moving those products out of Saskatchewan. So if we’re going 

to continue to see growth in Saskatchewan, and I think we will 

and I’m sure we will here in Saskatchewan, we’re going to 

continue to export potash, we’re going to continue to export a 

whole host of grains and uranium and all of those kinds of 

things from our great province here in Saskatchewan. If we’re 

going to continue to see that, we have to make sure that those 

transportation corridors are as efficient as possible. 

 

And so we may need to take a look at other options, Mr. 

Speaker. We have two rail carriers here in Saskatchewan. We 

also are supported by a network of short rail lines here in our 

province. I think they do a pretty darn good job of moving 

product, but there’s always improvements that are necessary to 

keep up with the growth. And when you go through commodity 

groupings one after another, and you talk to them about what 

kind of exports that they expect we will see in the future, all of 



5646 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2014 

them are universal in what they say to us. And that is, we expect 

continued and very, very significant growth going forward. So 

that’s something that we’re looking at as a priority. I think 

that’s why we are such strong supporters of free trade initiatives 

in Saskatchewan, because that is the very lifeblood of our 

province here in terms of the fortunes going forward here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And in addition to that, as a result of that, we need to continue 

to build a skilled workforce to be able to take up the challenges 

of new jobs, to be able to take up the challenges in terms of 

what businesses need to be successful here in Saskatchewan, 

and to see that growth going forward. And that’s why we are 

continuing to add to that complement of services and classes 

and, you know, adult basic education and additional seats for 

training at the technical institutes, apprenticeship training, and 

all of those kinds of things. That’s why we will continue to 

press forward on that. 

 

At this time we have historical highs in terms of the number of 

people who want to access those kinds of services. And we 

have a responsibility as a government and as a society to help 

our young people move into those and down those career paths, 

and we take that very seriously with respect to it, Mr. Speaker. 

So you will see that continue to be an emphasis of our 

government going forward. 

 

You know, infrastructure of course is one of the topics that is 

always on the minds of people here in Saskatchewan. We’ll 

continue to make investments in that here in Saskatchewan. But 

one of the things I’m most proud about our Throne Speech, and 

I think many of our members or all of our members would 

agree with us, when it comes to things like liquor stores. Why 

have we been building liquor stores with taxpayers’ dollars here 

in Saskatchewan when there’s so many other areas that should 

be considered priority areas for governments, successive 

governments? 

 

I look around and see some of these liquor stores that were built 

with taxpayers’ dollars in Saskatchewan and it makes you really 

wonder what was the thought pattern behind that. What was the 

thought process that was going into that type of development 

here in Saskatchewan? We don’t need to have all of these stores 

owned by the government. We don’t need to continue to invest 

in that. We have scarce dollars, scarce infrastructure dollars that 

should be put into areas that are a lot more of a priority for the 

people of Saskatchewan when it comes to things like health 

care, long-term care beds. You know, greater numbers of 

hospitals here in Saskatchewan, all of those kinds of things are 

our greater priority, I believe, than putting it into liquor stores, 

into the bricks and mortar of liquor stores. 

 

I think in every one of our constituencies you can look around 

at the highways. The Premier kind of chides me from time to 

time about all the highways that have been built in the 

Kindersley constituency. I can’t think of one, but there must be 

one out there somewhere that’s been upgraded because I’m not 

aware of it. But anyway, we’re putting a lot of dollars into 

highways here in Saskatchewan, but nevertheless there needs to 

be more. And we all know that. There was a system built of thin 

membrane highways that were for another era, frankly. What 

we’ve seen in terms of, what we’ve seen in terms of growth in 

that area is where we see a lot more heavy traffic on the road. 

We see a lot more traffic, period, on the road than we’ve ever 

seen before. And those highways were built for a different era. 

So we have to move forward in terms of upgrading that. 

 

But of course, with one of the largest networks, or I think the 

largest network of highways in Canada for the population base 

that we have, that’s widely distributed, that population base 

around our province, of course there’s going to be challenges in 

this area. But I think the Ministry of Highways is doing a good 

job in terms of identifying those priority areas that need to be 

addressed and moving forward. 

 

So we’ll continue to see that, and we’ll see those large projects 

as well like we see here in Regina right now, where we’re 

building a state-of-the-art bypass system here in Regina that’s 

going to be amazing when it’s completed and will certainly help 

the traffic flow. And when I’m in Saskatoon and you pull into 

Saskatoon on the west side which, you know, that’s the 

direction I come in from, from my constituency. You’re going 

to visit Saskatoon or do some business in Saskatoon and now 

you have the highway going around the south part of our 

province. Or the south part of the city, I should say, the south 

bridge. It’s just amazing how quickly you can move around the 

city on that side compared to what you used to face, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think clearly the city of Saskatoon has identified some 

other areas when you look at the north bridge, and it makes 

sense. I think anybody, when you look at that, understands the 

kind of traffic flow patterns that have changed, and how they’ve 

changed and how much more traffic there is in the industrial 

corridor, the northern part of the city, and in the housing 

developments that are in place there as well. So we need to 

think about those as well going forward. And I think that’s a 

very, very important consideration. 

 

As the time is starting to kind of wind down here, I’m going to 

move quickly through some of the other areas that I think are 

important in terms of Saskatchewan. 

 

When you look at health care in our province, again it’s an area 

that our government spends a tremendous amount of time 

thinking about and working in those areas trying to make them 

efficient, Mr. Speaker. And again I look at the kinds of 

discussion that we see in the legislature here around the whole 

lean process and does it make sense. And the opposition would 

say of course it doesn’t make sense and all of that kind of stuff. 

But I think the facts speak for themselves with respect to this. 

There has been savings. There has been a significant amount of 

savings. Yes, there’s been an investment to try and change 

behaviours and patterns of development and all of those kinds 

of things to try and bring our health care system up to a greater 

level of efficiency than we’ve seen before, and I think that’s 

important that we do those kinds of things. 

 

I think we should always be questioning, always be questioning 

the system. When I say the system, whether it’s in health care, 

whether it’s in education, or whether it’s in highways or any 

other part of government, we should always be questioning, are 

we getting the best bang for our buck out of these types of 

operations that we on a daily basis manage here in 

Saskatchewan? And I think that’s the hallmark in a lot of ways 

of this government, is that we are not going to be stuck in the 



October 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5647 

status quo of just saying nothing should ever change because 

it’s always been done that way; we shouldn’t think about 

change. Well I think that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. I think there’s 

always going to be efficiencies. 

 

If you look at the business world, anybody who comes up with 

the proverbial better mousetrap, they are incredibly rewarded by 

society for making that change that results in a product being 

better, faster delivery, services that are better, all of those kinds 

of things, Mr. Speaker. And that example should be applied to 

government in spades, Mr. Speaker. And I think it is being 

applied with respect to health care here in Saskatchewan to 

ensure that we have an efficient system going forward. We have 

to make sure that scarce tax dollars are being managed in an 

appropriate way, and I think we are doing the best we possibly 

can. And I commend the Minister of Health and the Minister of 

Rural and Remote Health as well for taking a look at the system 

and asking those very relevant questions about what we have to 

do to make sure that this is managed better in the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot has been said about the Throne Speech here 

in the legislature in the last while. Mr. Speaker, the opposition 

has made their amendment. I clearly, Mr. Speaker, will not be 

supporting the amendment going forward. And I will support 

wholeheartedly the efforts of this government and 

wholeheartedly will be voting in favour of the Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 1 o’clock, this 

House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5621 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5621 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5621 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5621 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5621 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5622 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5622 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Screening Program for Breast Cancer 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5622 

 Nuit Blanche Saskatoon 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5622 

 Official Opening of St. Louis Bridge 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5623 

 Prostate Cancer Awareness Month 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5623 

 Two Miles for Mary Radiothon 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5623 

 New Hip and Knee Treatment and Research Centre 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5623 

 Annual Roughrider to Rough Rider Regimental Dinner 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5624 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Coverage for Surgery 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5624 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5624 

 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5626 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5626 

 Smart Meter Program 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5626 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5626 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5628 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5628 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5628 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5629 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5633 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5636 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5639 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5643 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


