




















































Hansard: November 18, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 14A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5905 

 November 18, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce four members in your gallery here this afternoon. 

These individuals are with us today because they represent 

important stakeholder groups in regards to The Wildlife 

Amendment Act which will be given first reading later today. So 

gentlemen, if you could just please give us a wave when I call 

your name. First of all we have Darrell Crabbe from the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. We have Paul Legrand from 

the Regina Fish and Game League. We have Wayne Pepper 

from Nature Saskatchewan and Russ Becker from the South 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Wildlife Amendment Act will bring important 

changes to hunting legislation in Saskatchewan, and I look 

forward to introducing this legislation a little bit later today. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d again like to thank these individuals in the gallery 

for being with us here today, and I’d ask all members to join me 

in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thanks to the minister for providing the names of the folks that 

are here today in his opening comments. On behalf of the 

official opposition, we too would like to welcome you to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Certainly the work of the Wildlife Federation, the fish and game 

leagues, Nature Saskatchewan, those kinds of volunteer-based 

organizations and community-based organizations are central to 

the work of what goes on in the wildlife area in Saskatchewan. 

So many kudos to you and your volunteers for the work you do. 

And we’re certainly looking forward to the amendments that 

were going to be tabled later today, and we’ll be looking 

through them very carefully when the amendments come. So on 

behalf of the official opposition, thank you very much for 

joining us here today, and welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a fine group of students from the Yorkton Regional 

High School, 35 of them to be exact. Their teacher, Mr. Perry 

Ostapowich, is just an awesome teacher, bringing attention of 

the Assembly and government and the legislature to his 

students. They are very well-informed when they come here. 

 

With them is Grant Bjornerud. Mr. Grant Bjornerud of course a 

relation to my friend and the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 

As well is, staying on the bus again, is Mr. Pat Rawlick. He 

tends to stay out there looking after the bus, but he’s a good 

friend of mine, retired RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police], so I always like to bring a mention of his name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Ostapowich is very good at getting the 

students to engage with political leaders or just people in 

general, and they’re always very active and engaging. I know 

myself anyway, whether it’s Twitter or Facebook or emails or 

just getting a hold of me just to know that they’re able to 

contact their local politicians as well, and when they do that, I 

always give them special mention. 

 

So I have three that I want to mention here today, Mr. Speaker. 

Cole Esquash is up there. Give us a wave, Cole. And he had a 

lot of the hard questions for me down in the gallery earlier. 

Isaak Genovy is the son of a very good friend of mine, Brian . 

So welcome, Isaak, to the Assembly. And Colin MacDonald is 

also the son of a good friend of mine, Ms. Sherry MacDonald, 

who is one of the leads at the Yorkton Chamber of Commerce. 

So I’d ask all members to welcome these fine young people to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce a dear friend of mine, Mr. Carl H. 

Swenson. Carl is in your east gallery. And Carl is a contract 

lawyer for Aboriginal and northern affairs Canada. He’s done a 

tremendous amount of work with the IAP [independent 

assessment process] program for the residential school issue, 

Mr. Speaker. He’s been a lawyer since 2010, lives in Saskatoon, 

but grew up in the northern community of Prince Albert. And I 

would ask all of my colleagues in the Assembly to welcome this 

fine young lawyer that’s up and coming, and I would recognize 

Mr. Carl H. Swenson today. Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition that calls for greater protection for Saskatchewan 

citizens from developers who default on fixed-price contracts 

with the Saskatchewan government. 

 

We know that in September this year, this government walked 

away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable housing 

project in Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take 

control of and then rent the units at full market price. When 

explaining how the government could allow this to happen, 

allowing a private developer to back out of a fixed-price 

contract without any penalties, the Minister of Social Services 

said, and I quote, “You’re assuming that there’s these desperate 

homeless people” — showing how disconnected this 

government is from the realities within our communities. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 



5906 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 

in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 

now allowing private developers with whom the 

government has close relationships to default on 

fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 

petitions as it relates to the unacceptable danger created by that 

government on Dewdney Avenue. That government didn’t plan 

properly for the heavy-haul truck traffic flow and have 

endangered users and residents and property up along Dewdney 

Avenue, and petitioners call on that government to act to get 

those heavy-haul trucks off of Dewdney Avenue. And the 

prayers read as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residence. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents from across 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of Creighton and Denare Beach and area. Many 

residents in these communities are struggling with disabilities 

and currently do not have the supports and services they need 

and deserve. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

Government of Saskatchewan to establish and build a 

residential and day program in the Creighton and Denare 

region to support the immediate and ongoing needs of the 

community, and in so that persons with intellectual 

disabilities thrive in their respective communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people from 

Creighton and Denare Beach. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today 

to present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in 

long-term care. And, Mr. Speaker, the folks who’ve signed this 

petition point out that many aspects of long-term care are 

deteriorating under this government, that the Government of 

Saskatchewan actually recognize the need for safe staffing 

levels to provide hands-on care to residents. 

 

They point out that the government is failing to fix the basics in 

long-term care, including rejecting the further urgent request 

from long-term care facilities for increased and needed staffing 

levels. And they also point out that chronic understaffing in 

long-term care facilities results in unacceptable conditions, 

including unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, as we 

heard about two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, and a rise in physical 

violence among residents. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 

members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 

numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 

number of residents under their care in long-term care 

facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents in Saskatoon. I 

so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition condemning this government’s dangerous 

smart meter program. In the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the provincial government to take responsibility for 

its failure to act on readily available information about 

safety concerns with its smart meter program, including 

through the immediate resignation of the Minister 

Responsible for SaskPower, and a fully independent 

inquiry into the concerning chain of events that severely 

compromised the safety of Saskatchewan families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Indian 

Head, Melville, and Glenavon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising this 

afternoon to present a petition in support of better health care in 

Saskatchewan. The people who have signed this petition want 

to bring to the attention of the Assembly the following. We 

know that emergency room wait times have doubled since 

2010. The government’s own statistics show that patient safety 

is getting worse. We know that chronic short-staffing is a 

problem throughout our health care system and the government 

is spending untold millions of dollars on its lean project, 

including a $40 million contract with an American consultant 

and flying in Japanese senseis for $3,500 per day. So in the 

prayer that reads as follows, these individuals are: 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5907 

Requesting that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

provincial government to recognize health care is getting 

worse under its watch and begin fixing the basics by 

listening to health care workers, patients, and their 

families; properly maintaining hospitals and care facilities; 

and focusing its resources on front-line care instead of 

spending millions on its lean pet project. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from my 

constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 

 

Statement of Thanks 

 

Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This marks my first 

member’s statement, and I would like to take this opportunity to 

thank all those who helped me become the elected 

representative for the good people of the Lloydminster 

constituency. A very special and heartfelt thanks goes first to 

my husband, Kim, and all my eight children: Nevada; Casey 

and his wife, Jessica; Chester, Riley, Fraser, Percy, Duke, and 

Ace for their support, help, inspiration, and love from the 

beginning of my commitment to run in the nomination and 

throughout the by-election. And to my own mom and dad and 

11 siblings who provided help, encouragement, and prayers, 

they always had my back and I know I can continue to count on 

them as I embark on this journey. 

 

I’d also like to thank my nomination and campaign teams. Their 

dedication, drive, and wise decisions led to well-run campaigns 

throughout. 

 

Our success on election day is owed to all those volunteers who 

stepped up in whatever capacity they could. The work they did 

on the phones and at the doorsteps demonstrated the optimism 

and strength that defines the people of Saskatchewan and 

Lloydminster. I can’t thank them enough. 

 

I’d like to thank the other candidates for their efforts. By 

contesting this by-election, they showed that democracy is alive 

and well in this province. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the good people of the 

Lloydminster riding for giving me the opportunity to represent 

them in the legislature. I am humbled and honoured by the trust 

and confidence they have placed in me as their MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly]. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Treaty 6 Document Comes Home 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on October 22nd I was 

honoured to attend an important event for the people in the 

Cumberland constituency. It was a celebration of an agreement 

that brings an important treaty document home to 

Saskatchewan. At the event there were representatives from 

Montreal Lake Cree Nation, Lac La Ronge Indian Band, and 

the University of Saskatchewan library. Everyone was gathered 

together to celebrate a new permanent loan agreement that will 

have the university house a treaty adhesion document from 

1889. This is a true handwritten copy of the original document, 

and it was also signed at the time of treaty. 

 

The Montreal Lake Cree Nation, Lac La Ronge Indian Band, 

once collectively known as Green Lake Indians, signed the 

adhesion to Treaty 6 in 1889. This agreement with the Crown 

led to the creation of two reserves of Montreal Lake Cree 

Nation and the Little Red River Reserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the treaties are sacred documents between First 

Nations and the Crown. Bringing this adhesion document back 

under the ownership of Montreal Lake Cree Nation is an 

important moment in our history. I hope that all members will 

join me in congratulating leaders and community members of 

Treaty 6 territory. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Awards Presented at Francophone Gala 

 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 

8th the member from Saskatoon Greystone and myself had the 

opportunity to bring greetings to the Gala de la fransasque 

2014. The gala was organized by the francophone community 

and held at the Park Town Hotel in Saskatoon on November 

7th, 8th, and 9th. This event brought close together 200 

participants and acts as an annual convention for the 

francophone community in Saskatchewan. The theme this year 

was The Continuum of Education: Early Learning and Child 

Care to Post-secondary Education. 

 

This event recognizes the work and volunteerism of people in 

the francophone community in Saskatchewan. Awards are 

handed out at the gala in five categories including young leader, 

promoter of the Fransaskois, agent of change, model 

Fransaskois, and friend of the Fransaskois. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year Dr. Wilfrid Denis was honoured by being 

awarded membership in the Company of One Hundred 

Associates. The company is a national organization which 

recognizes extraordinary Canadians who have made 

outstanding contributions to the promotion and development of 

the Canadian francophone. Dr. Denis joins a handful of 

well-respected francophones from Saskatchewan to receive this 

honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 

the award recipients in the francophone community on another 

successful event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Good Wishes for Hockey Hero 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 

to bring attention to two things: the unfortunate poor health of a 

former Saskatoon west side boy, and the heartwarming 



5908 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

campaign by students of that resident’s alma mater. 

 

I’m speaking of course about Gordie Howe. Unfortunately, Mr. 

Hockey is recovering from a stroke and is with his family in 

Texas, who have told the media that he is not doing well. 

 

Gordie Howe’s career in the NHL [National Hockey League] 

spanned four decades and even after all these years he is still 

right near the top of the scoring statistics. He is still third in 

career points and second in career goals, only bested by Wayne 

Gretzky. 

 

Gordie Howe went to King George School in my constituency 

when he was a boy and learned to play hockey in the 

neighbourhood rinks. The current students of King George 

School have come together to send get well cards down to 

Gordie Howe and his family. 

 

Dustin Millar, who teaches at King George and also coaches in 

the Kinsmen Hockey League, has organized a gift of two KHL 

[Kinsmen Hockey League] jerseys with Mr. Hockey’s famous 

no. 9. I hope that all members will join me in wishing Gordie 

Howe and his family all the best in this difficult time, and we’ll 

also recognize the students and staff at King George for their 

thoughtful and caring actions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Habitat for Humanity Build in Weyburn 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to inform members about a Habitat for Humanity 

home dedication that took place in Weyburn on November 

14th. Not only is this Weyburn’s first Habitat build, but it’s also 

a celebration of another Saskatchewan family achieving their 

dream of home ownership. And, Mr. Speaker, I know it’s extra 

special for the build committee that new homeowners, Angie 

and her children Teagan and Stuey, are in before Christmas. 

 

As we all know, a house is more than bricks and mortar. It’s a 

place to come home to at the end of the day, a place to be with 

family and friends. However, the cost of building new homes 

has increased and some families need assistance to find that 

safe place to live. Mr. Speaker, we want to help move 

Saskatchewan families forward. That’s why we’ve contributed 

$65,000 towards this home. It’s one example of how we’re 

facilitating home ownership opportunities for Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

In the 2014-15 budget, the government committed an additional 

$750,000 to help build 12 new Habitat for Humanity homes 

throughout Saskatchewan. That brings this government’s 

commitment to Habitat to $7.85 million since March of 2009. 

We now provide $65,000 per home in funding, an increase of 

50,000 per home which was provided up to March of 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, partnerships are essential if we’re going to 

continue this momentum, and I’m pleased that the Royal Bank 

of Canada Foundation and Prairie Sky Co-op supported this 

project, as well as many numerous fundraising donations from 

businesses and organizations. Together we are working to keep 

Saskatchewan strong. So I would ask all members to join with 

me in congratulating Habitat for Humanity on their first build in 

Weyburn. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Regina Sikh Community Hosts Supper Night 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 

Saturday I had the honour and privilege of attending the Sikh 

Society of Regina supper night. This very successful event was 

held at the Queensbury Centre here in Regina. Over 350 people 

had the chance to enjoy delicious food and take in the great 

cultural and music events. 

 

Some highlights of the evening include performance by local 

Punjabi singers and local Bollywood band called Konfused 

Karma and the DJ [disc jockey] V2. This event was also a great 

opportunity for members of the Regina Sikh community to 

gather and celebrate their shared religion, culture, and heritage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan population has grown, so too has 

our province’s Sikh community. Some long-time Sikh residents 

of Regina estimated that the city’s Sikh population has grown 

from 25 to 35 families in the 1970s to more than 300 families 

today. The growing Sikh community in Saskatchewan is 

actively adding to Saskatchewan’s proud tradition of 

multiculturalism and helping Saskatchewan live up to our 

motto, “from many peoples, strength.” 

 

I would like to thank the members of the Regina Sikh 

community who have made me feel so welcome by inviting me 

into their homes, to their temple, and to this wonderful dinner. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to congratulate 

the Sikh community in Regina for hosting such a successful 

event, and thank them for their many contributions to this 

province. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Small Business Receives Entrepreneurial 

Resiliency Award 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on October 23rd, Scott Hodson, the president and the CEO 

[chief executive officer] of Superior Cabinets, accepted the first 

ever Business Development Bank of Canada’s Entrepreneurial 

Resiliency Award. The award was handed out at the BDC’s 

[Business Development Bank of Canada] small-business lunch 

held right here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Superior Cabinets was selected by BDC and the 

Turnaround Management Association as the winner of this 

award for emerging stronger from a 2009 slowdown, thereby 

marking a remarkable business turnaround.  

 

After experiencing this slowdown, Superior Cabinets decided to 

go back to the basics. As the MLA for Moose Jaw North and 

myself witnessed during a recent tour, this recovery included 

new strategies, new capital investments, and the fostering of a 

strong team environment. And the results are impressive and 

they’re important. As Scott Hodson stated, 2012 was a good 

year. 2013 was the best year in the history of the company, and 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5909 

2014 is going to be better than 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we all know, small businesses are the heart and 

soul of our provincial economy. We are so fortunate to have a 

lot of dedicated and hard-working entrepreneurs right here in 

the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members of this Assembly to join me 

in congratulating Superior Cabinets on winning the 

Entrepreneurial Resiliency Award and in wishing this 

Saskatchewan company every future success. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Patient Care and the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Only 1 out of every 

10 nurses in our province say they have seen any improvement 

to patient safety as a result of lean. The rest, Mr. Speaker, 9 out 

of 10, either say they haven’t seen any improvement as a result 

of lean or it has actually made things worse. Almost a third of 

nurses, Mr. Speaker, say lean has actually made patient safety 

worse. My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: how can 

he explain this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of 

the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly as we embark upon lean within 

Saskatchewan’s health care system, we are seeing early, 

positive results in terms of improvements that have been made 

within the system, Mr. Speaker. But we know that we have over 

40,000 employees. Not every one of them will have been 

involved in lean, will have been involved in a lean project. 

 

But I can share, Mr. Speaker, for example in Prairie North 

Health Region prior to undergoing a lean event, there was 

missing information on 84 per cent of medications that were 

ordered, Mr. Speaker. Eighty-four per cent of times were 

missing information from the patient when medication was 

ordered. Through a mistake-proofing event, that number has 

been reduced down to zero, Mr. Speaker. For those patients, 

that means improved quality. It removes errors and the chance 

of an error for a patient that could have detrimental effects for 

that patient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s just one example in Prairie North Health 

Region, but there are many more examples that I would be 

pleased to share with the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister just dismisses the 

fact that only 1 out of 10 nurses say lean has improved patient 

safety here in the province. That’s incredibly worrying. 

 

The government’s own statistics show that there were 195 

critical incidents in our hospitals and care facilities last year, the 

highest ever recorded in a single year. And that fits, Mr. 

Speaker, with what the Health Quality Council survey data 

shows. There has been an increase, Mr. Speaker, in the number 

of hospital patients that report suffering a medical error, Mr. 

Speaker. And they can heckle, they can try to dismiss this, but 

these are the own numbers reported by the Ministry of Health. 

 

So nurses are saying, Mr. Speaker, that patient safety is getting 

worse. The Ministry of Health annual report shows that patient 

safety is getting worse, and patients themselves, Mr. Speaker, 

are reporting that patient safety is getting worse.  

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: how can he 

dismiss these concerns, dismiss what nurses are seeing, dismiss 

what the Ministry of Health is saying, dismiss what patients 

themselves are saying, Mr. Speaker, that patient safety is 

getting worse? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again in the absence of the 

Premier, I will take that question on behalf of the government. 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly know through literature reviews that 

have taken place all across health systems in North America 

that it’s very likely that errors and patient safety issues and 

critical incidences are in fact under-reported within the health 

care system, Mr. Speaker. We have embarked upon some 

improvement work. For example, Saskatoon Health Region, in 

one of their hospitals, is piloting a stop-the-line safety alert 

system where any person in that hospital — whether they be 

staff, a patient, a family member, Mr. Speaker, a member of the 

general public — can call one phone number to report an issue 

that may be related to patient safety or to staff safety or even 

safety issues to the general public. 

 

We’re not shying away from this issue. We know that there is 

far too much harm done within the system to our patients, and 

that’s why we need to learn best practices from organizations 

that have seen success using lean methodology and other tools 

to improve the services that we provide to our patients and 

decrease the errors that are caused within the health care 

system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a convenient answer for the 

minister to say that they’re now reporting critical incidents, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses], when 

they surveyed the members, Mr. Speaker, 1 out of 10 say that 

lean is actually improving patient safety. 

 

When the Health Quality Council surveys patients, Mr. 

Speaker, and they say that patient safety is actually getting 

worse, those are numbers coming from nurses, coming from 

patients. And they tell the true and accurate story of what’s 

happening under this government’s leadership, notwithstanding 

the spin and the rhetoric we see from this minister, Mr. Speaker, 

and notwithstanding the spin that we see from the minister’s 

lean go-team. All indications are that patient safety is actually 

getting worse, and that John Black’s version of lean is at least 

partially responsible. 

 

But it’s not just patient safety that’s getting worse, Mr. Speaker, 



5910 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

as a result of John Black’s version of lean. The time available 

for direct patient care is also declining. Get this — just 1 out of 

every 10 nurses in our province say that lean has improved the 

time available for direct patient care. Just 1 out of 10, Mr. 

Speaker. Meanwhile 4 out of 10 nurses say that the time 

available for patients has actually gotten worse as a result of 

John Black’s version of lean. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, for the Premier: how is any of this 

acceptable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again in the absence of the 

Premier, I will be answering on behalf of the government, Mr. 

Speaker. Well get this — there’s 2,400 more nurses working in 

Saskatchewan compared to when the members opposite were 

the government. Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, not 

only are we seeing improved services to patients that we 

provide through lean and other tools, including having more 

front-line staff, but it is also saving us money. 

 

For example, prior to using lean, Mr. Speaker, at Saskatoon 

City Hospital, there was a problem when it came to notifying 

when a patient was discharged because we weren’t at that time 

notifying the diet clerk when a patient had been discharged, Mr. 

Speaker, which meant that at Saskatoon City Hospital a food 

tray was being prepared for patients that had already been 

discharged. Since we’ve implemented lean and changed that 

process, City Hospital alone, with one small change, will save 

$42,000 a year by not serving food to patients that no longer are 

in the system. That’s just one example of where we’re saving 

money. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this minister can dismiss and keep 

his head in the sand, but when nurses are saying that patient 

safety is getting worse, when patients through the Health 

Quality Council are saying that patient safety is getting worse, 

Mr. Speaker, this minister ought to take note and this 

government ought to take note. 

 

Patient safety, Mr. Speaker, and direct available time for patient 

care are absolutely critical to high quality of health care. And 

both of these, patient safety and the time available for patient 

care, are getting worse under this government. And it ought to 

be a huge wake-up call for each and every member over there. 

 

John Black’s version of lean is not helping, Mr. Speaker. In fact 

it is hurting patient care and the quality of health care here in 

Saskatchewan. Nearly 50 per cent of nurses say John Black’s 

version of lean has made their workload and their stress levels 

worse. Mr. Speaker, 50 per cent. And just 8 per cent, only 8 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker, say lean has improved their workload. That 

is scathing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: how much of this does he need to 

hear, how much does he need to hear before he realizes that 

John Black’s version of lean is having disastrous consequences 

for the front lines of health care? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what we have embarked 

upon in this province is to embed lean throughout the entire 

health care system, Mr. Speaker. We are learning from other 

organizations that have had some tremendous results in a fairly 

short amount of time, Mr. Speaker. And I can again point to 

other examples of how lean has improved patient care, how it 

will improve patient outcomes, how it will drive efficiencies 

within the system. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the point is, Mr. Speaker, when the members 

opposite were confronted with problems in the health care 

system . . . For example, it wasn’t that long ago when an 

elective MRI [magnetic resonance imaging], patients waited up 

to 22 months for an elective MRI. And the reaction from the 

members opposite, and the reaction from the member from 

Lakeview when he was the Minister of Health was, this is just 

the way it is in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we take a different view on this side: that that’s 

not the way it has to be, that we can improve the system in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what we are dedicated to do 

on behalf of the people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can choose to ignore 

critical incidents that are being reported, the highest ever on 

record. He can choose to ignore the nurses that come forward 

and say that lean, John Black’s lean is actually hurting patient 

care. He can refuse to listen to the concerns that come forward 

from all sorts of people throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what he should be doing is listening to those on the front 

line and not simply regurgitating the speaking notes from his 

lean go-team. That’s what this minister should be doing. Nearly 

60 per cent of nurses, nearly 60 per cent of nurses say morale 

and engagement have plummeted as a result of John Black’s 

lean, and I guess it’s no surprise Mr. Speaker, for someone who 

is known to tattle on anyone who would question his authority 

and his direction. 

 

And that fits, fits completely with the government’s own survey 

of physicians and front-line health care workers who say that 

morale and engagement is incredibly low. And it’s clear for 

anyone who’s actually listening to those on the front lines, the 

vast majority of front-line workers — of nurses, of doctors — 

do not think that their concerns are listened to, Mr. Speaker, and 

they do not feel as though their opinions matter in any way. 

And that’s under this government’s lean pet project through 

John Black. That’s a huge problem. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: instead of flying 

in Japanese senseis at $3,500 a day, instead of flying in the 

American consultant at $40 million a day, why doesn’t this 

government properly listen and properly engage with those on 

the front lines of health care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Premier, I will 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5911 

take that question on behalf of the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I receive a report on the critical incidents within 

the system and, Mr. Speaker, they’re troubling. That is why we 

are dedicated to improving patient safety, staff safety, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why we’re working to eliminate waste and 

errors in the system. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite think that 

this is acceptable pre-lean, then I would hope that they would 

stand up and say that this is acceptable. But prior to 

implementing lean, Mr. Speaker, very severe patients in Sunrise 

Health Region would wait 24 hours before seeing mental health 

services. We have reduced that time by 50 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, for very severe mental health cases, Mr. Speaker. That 

is why we’re doing this: to improve the care that we’re 

providing, Mr. Speaker, because we take the attitude on this 

side of the House that good enough is just not good enough for 

the people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not acceptable, and that is 

why this government needs to pay attention and needs to 

change course. Mr. Speaker, when the government’s very own 

statistics through the Ministry of Health show a record number 

of critical incidents, when the Health Quality’s numbers about 

reports from patients show more errors, Mr. Speaker, when we 

have nurses showing that only 1 out of 10 show that lean has 

improved patient care, that ought to be concerning. 

 

That minister ought to care. That government ought to pay 

attention and ought to change course, Mr. Speaker. But we see 

the opposite. We see them doubling down on John Black’s 

version of lean, all at a time when all the indicators show that 

the quality of health care, the safety of health care is going in 

the wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. What this government needs 

to do is fire John Black. My question to the Premier: when will 

John Black be fired? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

again in the absence of the Premier, I’ll be answering the 

question on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, prior to making changes to the way that we 

operate by looking at best practices from some very 

high-performing organizations that deliver health care and other 

organizations, Mr. Speaker, in Five Hills Health Region in the 

mental health unit they had an average, a record of 17 

medication errors a year, Mr. Speaker. Now if the members 

opposite are okay with that, that 17 medication errors a year is 

okay, that we can live with that kind of record in this province, 

then that is a position that they should be able to stand on. But, 

Mr. Speaker, this side of the House, we think that that is 

unacceptable. And that’s why we’ve changed processes, due to 

what we’ve learned from lean, and reduced that from 17 per 

year to, last year, one per year. And one is still too many. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Estevan hospital there was only 20 per cent 

of the time where patients that were being discharged were 

given a blood clot screening tool. Now that’s 100 per cent, and 

we should be doing that in every hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Long-Term Care for Seniors 

 

Ms. Chartier: — This summer the opposition exposed the case 

of Roy Armstrong, a 95-year-old veteran with three types of 

cancer, two heart attacks, and 10 ambulance trips to the hospital 

in the last year. This government said Mr. Armstrong was too 

fit to qualify for a seniors’ care placement, and a high-ranking 

senior health administrator said the threshold for admission to 

long-term care is “quite high.” 

 

If three types of cancer, two heart attacks, and 10 ambulance 

trips to the hospital aren’t enough to meet the threshold to 

qualify for care, then my question to the Health minister is this: 

exactly how high is that threshold? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not quite as high as it once was before 100 new 

beds were added to the city of Saskatoon, which the members 

opposite opposed every single step of the way, Mr. Speaker. 

But, Mr. Speaker, certainly there is an assessment process 

throughout the entire health care system. Families have the 

opportunity to appeal that assessment, Mr. Speaker. In the case 

that the member raised, my understanding is that they did 

appeal that process. They were successful and placement was 

found. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the number of seniors that are 

qualifying for long-term care placement is dropping. In 2011, 

655 seniors qualified for long-term care placement; last year 

just 435 qualified. So far this year, just 398 have qualified. To 

the minister: is this significant decline because the thresholds 

are so much higher? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Well certainly we have been working over the last number of 

years to ensure that, for as much as possible, seniors have an 

opportunity to live in their home or in other types of locations 

more appropriately in the community. Certainly through Home 

First/Quick Response we’re seeing a 5 per cent increase in the 

number of people that are referred into home care which will 

hopefully delay placement into long-term care. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should know this. 

Certainly they can only ask a couple of members opposite when 

they were the Government of Saskatchewan, that under their 

watch 19 long-term care facilities closed in this province. They 

know how many beds that took out of the system, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve had a long way to go in terms of not only replacing those 

beds but replacing existing facilities that were aging and needed 

to be replaced, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’ve invested over $1 



5912 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

billion in health capital, much of that into long-term care, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to fix a problem if you 

don’t even recognize there’s one staring you in the face. Here’s 

what the recently terminated CEO of the Saskatoon Health 

Region said: “If we had . . .” Maybe the members opposite 

should listen to this, Mr. Speaker. “If we had more long-term 

care as an . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It’s the middle of the week, and it seems 

members are quite excited. I wonder if we could have it a little 

bit lower tone so we can hear the questions and the answers. I 

recognize the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Here’s what the recently terminated CEO of 

the Saskatoon Health Region said: 

 

If we had more long-term care as an option or more 

community resources as well, then perhaps more people 

would be able to access that care. But right now we’re 

really rationing the resources that we’ve got. 

 

We know that rationing of care meant that a 95-year-old veteran 

with three types of cancer, two heart attacks, and 10 trips to the 

hospital by ambulance had to fight for a placement in a care 

facility. To the Minister: is that rationing of care also behind the 

35 per cent drop in the number of seniors that are qualifying for 

long-term care placements? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly a recent survey of RHAs [regional health authority] 

indicates that about, it’s about 27-day wait for people to get in 

long-term care in terms of being on the wait-list. That is 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, a little bit lower than it was just a couple 

of years ago. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk about rationing care, what 

do you think 19 long-term care beds, long-term care facilities 

being closed did to rationing care when it comes to long-term 

care at a time when the population in this province, and others, 

was increasing, Mr. Speaker? That is why, Mr. Speaker, this 

government has . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I had asked members to tone it down a 

little, and I expect that to happen. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, that is why under this 

government we have invested over $1 billion in health capital, 

much of that into long-term care, including, Mr. Speaker, 24 

additional beds in the Pineview Terrace in Prince Albert, which 

opened of June of this year; 100 beds at Samaritan Place, Mr. 

Speaker; as well as, Mr. Speaker, planning dollars for La Ronge 

which is, Mr. Speaker, going to be an important project; as well 

as, Mr. Speaker, replacement dollars, $1 million, to plan for the 

replacement here in the city of Regina. 

 

We’re not only building long-term care facilities, building 

additional bed capacity in the system, Mr. Speaker, today, but 

also planning for into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — The recently terminated CEO of the 

Saskatoon Health Region also said this: 

 

Do we have enough resources for long-term care in our 

health region? I would say the answer is no. There are lots 

of unmet needs in this province, so we do not have 

adequate resources and programs to meet the needs of our 

seniors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has no end of cash for its toxic 

American lean consultant, no end of cash for that pet project. 

Yet it has neglected seniors’ care so badly that the thresholds to 

get into care are now so high that most seniors just don’t 

qualify. To the minister: how can he possibly justify these 

mixed-up priorities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly the member will know, and I’ve mentioned already, 

100 beds at Samaritan Place long-term care facility as well as 

63 additional beds at Oliver Lodge increased the capacity in 

Saskatoon, just in the city of Saskatoon alone by 163 beds 

under this government, Mr. Speaker. I’ve also mentioned the 24 

beds at Pineview, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert as well as the 

15 long-term care facilities that we’re building all across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you think about it, in about seven years time as government, 

Mr. Speaker, we have replaced about 10 per cent of the 

long-term care facilities in this province, which is in stark 

contrast, Mr. Speaker, the 15 facilities on this side of the House 

comparison to the 19 facilities that closed under that 

government, Mr. Speaker, nearly 1,500 long-term care beds that 

were cut under the members opposite. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Food Bank Usage and Social Programs 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Social 

Services minister. How can she possibly explain that food bank 

usage in our province has jumped 20 per cent over the last year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work 

with the community-based organizations on examining why 

those numbers have increased. Of course we don’t want to see 

increased usage in food bank usage. We have the second-lowest 

poverty rate in Canada, Mr. Speaker, which is very positive, 

and we are excited about that for our province. But we know 

that more work needs to be done, and that is why we are 

embarking on a poverty strategy, working with the stakeholders 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5913 

in our communities. And we’re sure that there will be a lot of 

good recommendations that come out of that report. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, many of the organizations 

that serve our province’s most vulnerable are struggling. We 

saw that SWITCH [student wellness initiative toward 

community health] in Saskatoon is having to cut back its hours. 

And now we’re hearing that in Prince Albert the food bank will 

be shutting down its hot meal program because of a significant 

lack of capacity. 

 

To the minister: when the needs are increasing so much, how 

can she defend the fact that services are being cut for our 

province’s most vulnerable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we have doubled the 

number of emergency shelters that are available within our 

province as well as increased the amount of money that we give 

to emergency shelters. We have invested $475 million to 

develop over 8,300 units across our province. 

 

What was the NDP [New Democratic Party] record, by the way, 

on housing, Mr. Speaker? Well from, let me see, from 1990 to 

2007 they only increased shelter allowances twice, Mr. Speaker. 

We have increased it a number of times. Mr. Speaker, we have 

increased the amount of money that we put into social services 

by a substantial amount. The Social Services budget has been 

increased by 54 per cent. 

 

We are seeing some positive results. We are now the second 

lowest incident of poverty within Canada. However, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that more work needs to be done. We’re 

going to work with the community-based organizations, but we 

have a number of initiatives that we’ve already undertaken. And 

we’re seeing some positive results. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, these are the facts that are 

happening in Saskatchewan today. We know that food bank 

usage has jumped by 20 per cent in this province in the last 

year. And we know that the manager of the Prince Albert Food 

Bank says that food bank usage in that city has nearly doubled 

— doubled in the last two years. And we know that almost half 

the people served by the P.A. [Prince Albert] Food Bank are 

children. 

 

The rising cost of living is putting a squeeze on too many 

families here in Saskatchewan, but this government has untold 

millions for American lean consultants and Japanese senseis, 

yet it sits on its hands when organizations that serve our most 

vulnerable people are forced to cut back on important services, 

Mr. Speaker. To the minister: how can she justify such 

misplaced priorities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — So I suppose the member opposite is 

suggesting that increasing the Social Services budget by 54 per 

cent is a misplaced priority. Or is he suggesting by increasing 

the funding for housing by over 100 per cent a misplaced 

priority? Is increasing the funding for child and family services 

provided to our most vulnerable children a misplaced priority? 

Obviously, because when he sat in cabinet he didn’t prioritize 

any of those initiatives. We have increased those budgets year 

over year over year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And going to the food bank, Mr. Speaker, the quote from Steve 

Compton in response to the report on food bank usage, he said, 

and I quote, “We’ve actually seen a decrease and, you know, a 

few months has gone by. We’re encouraged that that points to 

employment opportunities and some relief in vacancy rates.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, he recognizes more work needs to be done, but he 

also recognizes that work is being done. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 

2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Environment has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 

my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will move second reading of The 

Family Farm Credit Repeal Act, 2014. 

 

The Family Farm Credit Act needs to be repealed. This Act has 

long since become redundant. The Family Farm Credit Act was 

enacted in February of 1979. Its purpose was to make long-term 

credit available for the establishment and development of 

family farms. It also provided the basis for the intergenerational 



5914 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

transfer of farms. At the time the Act enabled Co-operative 

Trust Company of Canada or CTCC to make loans to farmers. 

It also enabled CTCC to issue securities and raise money to 

lend to farmers. Furthermore the Ministry of Finance was able 

to purchase and guarantee those securities under this Act. 

 

In April 2012 and December 2013, the Ministry of Finance 

indicated that they were not aware of any present securities 

under this Act. Nor were they aware of any securities purchased 

by the Minister of Finance in recent years under this Act. 

During our review of this Act, agencies were consulted and no 

issues were identified. The CTCC was the only lending 

institution that was an approved agency under this Act. They 

have since restructured into Concentra Trust and Concentra 

Financial. No other associated agencies exist under this Act, 

and loan guarantees have not been offered for many years. 

 

Initially the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative 

Development administered this Act. This was followed by a 

period when Consumer and Commercial Affairs took 

responsibility for it. Following that, the Ministry of Justice was 

responsible for The Family Farm Credit Act, and finally the Act 

was transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture in 2007-2008 

fiscal year. 

 

Also in 1994 the last outstanding payments under this Act came 

due. Mr. Speaker, there are no outstanding actions on file in 

regards to this Act. There are no outstanding securities or 

guarantees remaining under this Act. The programming under 

this Act is no longer offered, and all of the payments under this 

Act have come due and have been settled. 

 

Financing options are now available to producers through 

regular lending institutions. These include banks, credit unions, 

and Farm Credit Canada. Therefore any action regarding this 

Act should have no effect on the agricultural community in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I propose that this redundant Act be repealed from 

the records of the legislature. As far as is possible, records 

should be kept clear of redundancies. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

move that The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act, 2014, be read a 

second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture the second reading of Bill No. 159, The Family 

Farm Credit Repeal Act. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m pleased to stand on behalf of the opposition to give 

the initial comments on this particular bill, The Family Farm 

Credit Act, Mr. Speaker. And according to the notes that we 

have viewed, Mr. Speaker, this Act was established in 1979, 

and its primary function at the time was to . . . It allowed the 

government . . . Or The Family Farm Credit Act empowered the 

Co-operative Trust Company of Canada to lend money to farm 

families. And I understand that the total amount at the time was 

not more than $25,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at this particular Act, we see that all 

the bills have been paid, so to speak, and there has been no 

outstanding loans and there certainly hasn’t been any new loans 

that have been given under this particular Act. And I 

understand, Mr. Speaker, that, at the time, this particular family 

farm credit Act was a tool that many families took advantage 

of. And over time, Mr. Speaker, obviously you want to make 

sure you keep up with the times with the appropriate players 

involved, and in this instance, as the minister spoke about, 

having the regular institutions of today, whether it be a bank or 

whether it be a credit union, take over this particular role, Mr. 

Speaker. And certainly we’re seeing evidence of that. There are 

many family farms and many corporations that operate farms in 

the province now go through the regular process of borrowing 

money from either the banks that are in the province, and of 

course the credit unions as well. I understand that in the 

previous time that Concentra Financial did actually act as a 

lending agency for this particular Act. I understand that they 

have now morphed into a different role, that Concentra 

Financial now simply manages the dollars from the credit union 

movement within Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So they don’t 

even lend any money directly to the families that operate farms 

in our province. 

 

So really every different player or aspect involved with this 

particular bill, whether it’s the family farms that are borrowing 

money or Concentra that’s actually lending the money, some of 

the players have moved on to different venues. And obviously, 

as I said at the outset, the family farms are primarily now going 

to their regular institutions to borrow their money. And whereas 

Concentra is no longer in a position to lend money, they’re 

actually managing some of the monies on behalf of the credit 

union movement throughout the province. 

 

So when you have an Act that is no longer necessary, Mr. 

Speaker — and we’ve obviously seen evidence of that from 

time to time, that this Act is no longer needed by a number of 

families nor the financial institutions — it’s really important 

that we not hinder the process to do away with this Act. It’s 

important that we recognize that the players have changed their 

rules and it’s important to know that this Act from 1979 really 

does not apply. So there is no need for this particular Act to be 

in force. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is that we would 

encourage the government to continue looking at improving and 

supporting family farms out throughout Saskatchewan in terms 

of assisting when the assistance is needed. One of the things 

that’s really important is that when you look at some of the 

financial literacy . . . I spoke about that yesterday when it comes 

to the pension plans. But you look at the financial literacy 

needed by many of the family farms that are out there, and 

those that operate these farms. It’s really important that we 

continually build on that knowledge base, to strengthen their 

understanding of the different avenues of borrowing, the 

importance of credit, and of course the importance of keeping 

the agricultural sector alive and vibrant throughout the whole 

entire province. So it’s important that we understand, they 

understand these issues as we all should understand these 

issues. 

 

And that’s why it was with a bit of concern that we looked at, 

when we heard at the Sask Party convention there was a motion 

that there was an encouragement to have more financial literacy 

available to students. And I’m not sure where the opposition 

came from at the convention, the Sask Party convention, but 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5915 

they were . . . One voice basically said that they were concerned 

that the students might be subjected to the learnings and 

teaching associated with our co-operatives movement or our 

credit union movement. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we had a little smile on that one because 

obviously one of the most important things around the notion of 

understanding our finances a lot better is to ensure that we don’t 

have biases that would be an infringement on the opportunity 

for people to learn more and more about the financial matters 

that affect their family or, in this case, the family farm. 

 

So we shouldn’t have those biases that are anti co-operative 

movement, that are anti credit union movement. And we see a 

bit of that, those issues that are surfacing with the Saskatchewan 

Party from time to time, Mr. Speaker. And they should embrace 

the credit union movement. As indicated in the bill itself, the 

credit union movement is very, very strong. They’re very, very 

active in our communities. The employment attached to the 

credit union model is just phenomenal in the sense of all the 

services, the employment, and the donations they make to a 

central community. So the credit union movement itself is very, 

very strong. The co-operative movement in Saskatchewan is 

very, very solid in terms of benefits and support services to all 

of the communities that they serve. 

 

So whether it’s a credit union or whether it’s a co-operative 

model or a co-operative store, as a good example, then we need 

to make sure you keep an open mind to some of these 

opportunities for Saskatchewan and, not like the Saskatchewan 

Party, have certain camps that are biased towards the 

co-operative movement or the credit union movements overall, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So I think it’s important that we view the Saskatchewan Party 

government to make sure that they don’t bring some of those 

hindered views to this whole process when you talk about 

supporting the family farms, Mr. Speaker. It’s really, really 

important that they come to the process and come to the table, 

when dealing with their family farms, to make sure they’re not 

bringing any of those unneeded biases to the table. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, not only is the co-operative model a very solid 

model for many family farms and many communities that serve 

a lot of the family farms. They are really an important part of 

the equation for success in terms of making sure that there’s 

enough resources out there and enough options for families and 

farm families to go find the necessary financing for some of 

their needs to ensure that our agricultural sector continues to 

build and continues to be very strong. 

 

So it’s really important, Mr. Speaker, we watch those biases by 

the Saskatchewan Party government, we watch very carefully 

how they view the movement, whether it’s a co-operative 

movement or whether it’s a credit union movement, that those 

options and viability or viable services not be hindered in any 

way, shape, or form. And that’s what’s really important, Mr. 

Speaker, is to make sure that we do provide an array of services 

and of course an array of bank services to many of the farm 

families that no longer come to the family farm credit option as 

the bill would indicate. 

 

So it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we look at the bill for its 

importance in the past, 1979. It’s quite some time ago. And we 

obviously concur that if this particular bill was not being used 

anymore and that the actual books are clean in terms of all the 

debts being repaid and there’s no more activity attached to the 

farm credit Act itself, that we can certainly see that there 

probably isn’t any need to have this bill on the record. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more people that 

want to offer some opinions. We have a lot more people we 

want to consult on this particular bill. We want to see how the 

trends are for other institutions that are now fulfilling the role 

that was originally planned under The Family Farm Credit Act 

to see where the debt is going and who is borrowing. We 

wouldn’t mind some of that information. We need to know who 

asked for this family farm credit Act to be de-established, so to 

speak. And all this information that we certainly do need to 

have, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue researching this bill. But 

certainly from our perspective at the outset, if it’s simply doing 

away with the bill that is no longer needed to serve the purpose 

of giving the family farm some financial help, then obviously 

we want to make sure that’s what the bill is all about. 

 

So on that notion, I move that we adjourn debate on this 

particular bill, Bill 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. I 

so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 153 — The Statute 

Law Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

my pleasure to rise today to join in the debate on the Bill No. 

153, An Act to amend the Statute Law. Interesting name for this 

type of Act, and I guess there’s all kinds of statute laws. But 

what the minister explained in the second reading speech was 

that there’s a number of things that are being cleaned up, that 

our good folks over at the legislative drafting section are going 

through carefully all of the statutes and just sort of refreshing 

some of the language and modernizing some of the terms that 

have been, the usage of which have become maybe archaic. 

 

So a number of the things that we see that are being changed is 

instead of using words like lunatic or insane or mentally 

incompetent, we are now using language such as a lack of 

capacity or lacking capacity. We’ve modernized the word 



5916 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

facsimile to become fax, f-a-x, and certainly Mr. Speaker would 

remember the days when facsimiles were brand new and fresh 

but now we call them faxes and that’s what it is. Electronic mail 

is now referred to as email, which has become a proper word in 

our lexicon, and a number of other things like that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know, in terms of the types of bills that we’re seeing 

introduced this session, there’s a lot of lacklustre policy bills, in 

fact I would say very few bills that deal with actual policy or 

the Throne Speech. This is an example of just a housekeeping 

type of statute where our civil servants are working hard to 

make sure that our laws are reflective of the current usage in 

language. 

 

Interesting to note that the explanatory notes for this one bill are 

141 pages long, which is a lot of trees, Mr. Speaker, when you 

look at printing something like this. But because the changes 

cover so many different bills and, for example, on page 14 of 

the Act there is a schedule where we are changing the word 

chairman to the word chairperson, and I think there’s two 

pages, three, four pages on that schedule where we have so 

many statutes that refer to chairman instead of chairperson. So 

the modern usage of course is not to have a gender-specific 

term but a gender-neutral term. And these kinds of revisions 

again reflect sort of the evolution of our society and things that 

we consider to be appropriate. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, there is not much more to be said 

about this bill. Certainly we want to commend the work of the 

public servants that take care of these types of things. But in 

terms of policy and debate, there’s very little that can be said 

about, well a lot of the bills in this session. But this is certainly 

one of them that just reflects the housekeeping activity that our 

public servants are responsible for. At that point I’d like to 

move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 153, The Statute Law 

Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 154 — The Statute 

Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant 

le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Merci beaucoup, monsieur le Deputé . . . Je 

vais parler un peu de cette loi . . . or pardon. Monsieur le 

Président. Oui. Je m’excuse. 

 

[Translation: Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy . . . I’m going 

to speak a bit on this bill . . . or pardon. Mr. Speaker. Yes. I’m 

sorry.] 

 

This bill is just a continuation of the previous Bill 153, but in 

this case we are dealing with les lois qui sont dans les deux 

langues officielles. Alors, il devrait être une loi séparée. 

[Translation: the laws that are in both official languages. 

Therefore, it must be a separate law.] 

 

And that’s probably the extent of French I need to try at this 

point, Mr. Speaker. The whole point being that this is just a 

carry-on of Bill 153, in which case we’re dealing with particular 

bills that happen to have been translated into both official 

languages. For example, The Administration of Estates Act, Loi 

de 1996 sur les coopératives [Translation: The Co-operatives 

Act, 1996], The Education Act, the English version of The 

Family Maintenance Act, and then The Non-profit Corporations 

Act or Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif. 

 

So there’s about eight pages of different sections that have to be 

corrected. Extra-provincial, for example, is being corrected with 

a hyphen . . . to remove the hyphen. Not really high stakes here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Stop the press. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — And yes, not exactly something we need to 

stop the press, as my colleague is indicating. But there you go. 

It’s there and our good folks over at Justice are doing the good 

work that they’ve been put there to do. 

 

And at this point I think that’s it. I’ll move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2). 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 155 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en 

matière de soins de santé be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 155, An Act respecting Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers and to 

make a consequential amendment to The Powers of Attorney 

Act, 2002. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated on this particular bill 

that what is happening here is that this legislation is part of the 

settlement of the Supreme Court of Canada decision in Regina 

versus Mercure from 1988 where the Government of 

Saskatchewan was obligated to prepare a number of bilingual 

Acts and make sure that that process of providing bilingual 

legislation was an ongoing process. 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5917 

And so up until this time the existing legislation, which is The 

Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision 

Makers Act, has only been in the English language. And so 

what has happened here is that we have Bill No. 155 which 

takes that legislation from a number of years ago — 1997, in 

fact, and I have a clear recollection of introducing this bill when 

I was the minister of Justice, and at that point though the bill 

was only in the English language — and now what we have 

before us is the bilingual version. 

 

Clearly there’s some updating of the language in both French 

and English to reflect some of the changes in usage and changes 

in legislative drafting style, but the minister assures us that 

there’s not much change or no change in the substance of the 

legislation. But it still raises the question of, what is the purpose 

of this legislation? The minister didn’t take the chance I guess, 

17 years later, to restate that in his comments. 

 

And so I think what I . . . It’s important that we talk a bit about 

why we have legislation around health care directives. And 

practically the legislation relates to the ability of people to make 

decisions about their health care while they’re in a competent 

state to make those decisions, and then have some assurance 

that those decisions will be followed if they’re in the situations 

where they’re no longer capable of participating in the decisions 

about their health. 

 

And there are a number of ways that we do that. One, 

obviously, you do it in the health care directive, which is a 

written document, but that document obviously appoints people 

to make decisions and maybe sets out some of the rationale for 

having a health care director. And it relates to things like 

consent to various procedures, refusal of consent to procedures 

or probably one that’s, you know, sometimes the toughest 

which is the withdrawal of consent to treatment, and the 

legislation goes out and to set out in detail how some of these 

processes are done. And so practically what happens obviously 

. . . and most of the time these kinds of documents are prepared 

by lawyers who have read the legislation, who have developed 

precedents that can be used to make sure that the intent of the 

individual who is signing the health care directive knows what 

they’re doing. 

 

I think it’s also important to emphasize, as the legislation does, 

that there’s no possibility that a health care directive can be 

used as a way to consent to active euthanasia or assisted 

suicide. And that’s quite clearly stated in the legislation in both, 

obviously, the English version and the French version. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So what also is set out in this legislation is the sort of pecking 

order, if I can put it that way, as to who makes decisions if there 

hasn’t been a health directive appointing somebody other than 

the statutory list that’s in the legislation. And what we have is a 

list in the legislation which sets out who will serve as a relative 

who would make a decision. And that’s set out in section 15 of 

the legislation. And basically it says, subject to provisions in 

subsections (2) of section 15 and subsection (3) of section 15 

there are . . . sort of an order of who will make the health care 

decision if the person who is requiring the treatment or is 

involved in the consent issue is not capable of making that 

decision. 

And so I think sometimes it’s worth talking about how this 

order goes. I mean practically, what this legislation says is that 

the first person that you would turn to is the spouse or the 

person with whom the person requiring treatment cohabits and 

has cohabited as a spouse in a relationship of some permanence. 

And in that definition of the spouse also includes obviously 

same-sex situations and any of the other related relationships. 

 

So if there isn’t a spouse or a person with whom the person is 

cohabited, then it becomes an adult son or daughter that makes 

the decision, and practically that goes into a whole number of 

areas. And then following that is a parent, so it flips back to the 

parents of the child. If there’s no parent or son or daughter, it 

goes to the adult brother or sister. If it’s not there, then it goes 

into the grandparent and ultimately to the adult grandchild . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, I know that the 

member from Indian Head always has lots of advice on various 

pieces of legislation when he doesn’t have to get up there and 

speak about it himself. But practically, what we’re looking at 

here is an important issue for people as to how decisions are 

made. 

 

And so what we also have in this legislation is the recognition 

that this order of proxy or of this proxy decision making also 

has within it questions around adoptions, and basically confirms 

that those children are part of the process and also as it relates 

to sort of a half-brother or half-sister or other relationships that 

way. But it’s important that there is clarity on all of these 

points, because there can be disputes that arise within the 

situation that’s a relationship. 

 

There is one further section around this basic decision-making 

process that relates to substitute health care decision making 

that I want to specifically talk about, and that’s section 17. And 

the title of this section is called, “Substitute health care 

decision-making for members of religious orders.” And I think 

it’s important to recognize that this provision is the same 

provision that was in the 1997 legislation which was the 

original legislation, and this allows for a person who is a 

professed member of a religious order prescribed in the 

regulations. 

 

And if we look at the regulations, there are various religious 

orders in the province that are prescribed. What happens in that 

situation is often a priest or a nun has been living within the 

context of a religious order pretty well their whole life, so they 

might be 80 or 90 years old and they’ve lived in that 

community since they were 18, 19, or 20 years old. And the old 

provision meant that when some decisions were needed to be 

made about the health care of an aging person within a religious 

order, that those decisions would then have to flip over to the 

family members in the order that I talked about earlier, without 

taking into account the religious order and the people who were 

really the family for this priest or a nun, or in that situation. 

 

And so what happened in 1996 and ’97 is that we met with the 

various leaders of the religious orders in Saskatchewan about 

this particular issue and talked about different ways that we 

could sort out or resolve this particular issue. And after quite a 

bit of discussion, we came up with the clause that we have here 

which says and which recognizes that the family of the priest or 

nun who is part of a religious order really are the other 

members of that religious order, and that the health care 



5918 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

decisions, the substitute health care decisions for those 

particular people, could be made in relation to that community 

and that they would actually step in then in the role of making 

these decisions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that over the 17 years, this provision 

has been well received. I know that I have received comments 

from various of the religious leaders that they appreciate this. It 

hasn’t had to be used that often, but it’s always there as a 

recognition of the family, if I can put it that way, of the 

individuals involved. So I think it’s important to see that it’s 

here in this legislation and that it now becomes part of the 

bilingual legislation. 

 

So part of what this legislation is intended to do is to provide 

clarity in a time when people are under great stress. And it 

includes obviously the individual involved and includes their 

family, but it also includes all of the health care providers 

because it can be very difficult for people when the line of 

authority around decisions is not clear. And I think that the 

legislation does meet that need of providing the clarity in the 

longer term, and I appreciate the fact that this particular draft 

has updated some of the language to be applicable in the year 

2014 but that it still retains the original purpose, the original 

intention of the legislation from 1997. 

 

Now there will be a few consequential amendments as a result 

of this legislation that are set out in this particular Act, but I 

know there will be another bill that’s coming that will look at 

some more of the consequential amendments. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is good legislation. It’s important 

legislation. It’s also important that the preparation of the 

legislation and of the terms of the legislation are clear and that 

it will continue to provide clarity in the decisions that are made 

around the health care of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know some of my other colleagues will have 

some comments about this legislation because most everybody 

has been in some difficult family situation or situation with 

friends where health care decisions have to be made. And I 

think this will provide some clarity for that process. But at this 

point, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn this debate. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 156 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 156 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise to 

speak to Bill No. 156, An Act to make consequential 

amendments resulting from the enactment of The Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 

2014. 

 

There are some changes that are required to some other 

legislation as the result of Bill No. 155, the bill that I was just 

making comments about. I know that the importance of making 

sure that the title of this legislation is in some other Acts is part 

of that, and practically what it does is it makes changes to three 

pieces of legislation: The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Act, The Electronic Information and 

Documents Act, and also The Health Information Protection 

Act. 

 

Those pieces of legislation, I think, and their importance, 

emphasize the fact that The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 does go to 

change some important areas of how our decisions are made, 

especially at the end of life of our people. It also talks about, 

there’s a change that’s required in The Public Guardian and 

Trustee Act, and I think that also then reflects that there are very 

specific changes that do affect these other pieces of legislation. 

 

When the legislation is changed, there will have to be a review 

by the legal profession in the province to make sure that any of 

the documents that they use now to provide health care or as 

they create health care directives will reflect these new pieces of 

legislation. I think the way the legislation is drafted though, that 

it will not cause a problem to a specific health care directive, as 

it basically is a continuation of the legislation from before. And 

so when this legislation is enacted, both Bill 155 and 156, it will 

probably take a little while until the legislation is proclaimed, 

but I think it will give all of the lawyers in the province a 

chance to prepare that legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any further comments on this 

legislation, so I would move that we adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 157 — The 

Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 157, An Act to Facilitate the Donation 

of Certain Tissues from One Living Person to Another for 

Transplantation and to Facilitate the Donation, after Death, of 

Tissues, Bodies or Body Parts for Transplantation, Medical or 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5919 

Scientific Purposes and to make a consequential amendment to 

The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s quite a long title for this particular piece of 

legislation, but I think it’s important that we look at this 

legislation and understand what has been the traditional use of 

this type of legislation in Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:00] 

 

I think the media recently, in commenting on this bill when it 

was introduced by the minister, identified the fact that one of 

the things that this change in legislation will do is allow for the 

purchase of human tissue. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a change, 

and it’s something that we need to look at quite carefully 

because it does have many consequences for our community. 

 

Now practically, as each year has gone on, we’ve seen the value 

of transplants and how they’ve been used in many areas to 

allow for people to have a better life and an extended life. And 

one of the big challenges in our province has been the fact that 

we don’t end up with very many donors of tissue to use. 

 

Now I think it’s important to note that the donations are coming 

from people who are deceased and so it does . . . That’s the 

primary place. This particular legislation though also deals with 

the gifts for transplant during life, and so any transplanting in 

Canada. And that’s often where people will for example share a 

kidney with a relative or even with a complete stranger. This 

legislation governs those kinds of gifts as well and sets out the 

rules. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this area is quite an interesting one, and one 

of the discussions that comes is, why do so few people opt on 

their driver’s licence or health card or some other place to not 

allow for the transplant or the use of some of their body tissues 

for transplant? So what we have in Saskatchewan is a situation 

where you sign a card or you put a sticker or you let your 

family members know that that’s what you want. But many of 

us don’t like to think about it, so we just sort of push it away. I 

know that I have my personal card signed and ready for 

whatever part of my body might be useful when I’m no longer 

needing it, but for many people this is a very difficult subject. 

 

In one jurisdiction that I know of in the world, they have made 

a decision for the public, and that’s in the country of Spain. In 

Spain they basically say if a person is killed in an accident or is 

in a situation where it’s not clear what their intention is about 

the use of their body, the rule is that a transplant of some of 

their body tissue can take place unless they have specifically 

opted not to allow that. 

 

And we have some of that kind of discussion happening in 

Canada. I know in Ontario they’re debating whether there 

should be an opt-in process or an opt-out-of process. In 

Saskatchewan we have an opt-in. So if you want to allow for 

transplant of part of your body after your death, you specifically 

opt in to do that. But as I say, in Spain they have an opt-out 

policy which says everybody’s body at death is subject to 

harvesting of body parts unless you state otherwise. And what 

that means is they have many more parts of bodies available for 

transplantation than most other countries in the world. And it 

becomes an interesting discussion about that issue. 

 

If anybody who has had somebody in their family waiting for a 

transplant, it sometimes changes your mind around whether we 

should have our system or whether we should have a system 

like Spain because it can be a long, difficult wait for somebody 

to get a proper match for a kidney for example, if they’ve got 

kidney disease. And so I think that this particular legislation, 

there was an opportunity to look at that particular issue, but the 

ministers opted not to go ahead with that type of a provision. 

 

Now what this legislation did do though was open up the 

possibility for the purchase of body parts from outside of the 

province for use in Saskatchewan. And the example given by 

the minister relates to the transplantation of corneas, of part of 

your eye. And there are people in our province who are waiting 

for corneal transplants that have been waiting a long time. And 

the sense is that this legislation allowing for that purchase may 

increase the options for these corneal transplants. 

 

And this once again becomes a difficult issue because in some 

ways it’s a bit of a thin, you know, edge of the wedge as it 

relates to all kinds of body parts. Now the question comes, 

where would these corneas be purchased? And you could look 

at that very narrow issue. But a bigger issue relates to the world 

market for human body parts for use in transplantation. We 

know that there’s what I suppose what we’d call a black market 

where people can go to some countries in the world and 

purchase a kidney or purchase whatever kind of part they would 

need and have the surgery done in that country where the donor, 

and usually it’s a live donor, would transfer, or would be paid a 

specific sum. 

 

We don’t allow that type of thing to happen in Canada or in 

Saskatchewan right now. But the question becomes, well if we 

allow for the purchase of corneas, will we in a few years allow 

for purchase of another particular type of tissue, and will this in 

fact expand and create some kind of a market there? 

 

I know that some of us who are a little older will remember a 

book by the author Robin Cook called Coma, and Coma was 

subsequently made into a movie. But it was about, a fictional 

account of a hospital in Boston where a young medical student 

starting asking questions about where certain transplant tissues 

came from that were being used in the hospital. And this young 

person and some of her friends eventually found out that there 

were young, healthy people who were brain dead but who had 

been kept alive so that their body parts could be harvested. 

 

So it’s kind of a gruesome story in one way but it relates, and 

relates to this whole question about, when various body parts 

for transplantation are for sale, where do they come from? What 

kinds of methods are used? And that particular book by Robin 

Cook raised many ethical questions about the sale of tissues for 

transplantation. 

 

Now you’ll note that our bill states very clearly that it’s about 

the donation of certain tissues, and so it’s about a gift or about a 

sharing that way. But when we put into this legislation the 

provision that allows for the sale or purchase of tissues, we start 

opening that door. Now the particular section in this bill that 

relates to this is section 17, and I think I’ll read it for us. 

 

Subject to the regulations, no person shall buy, sell or 

otherwise deal in, directly or indirectly, for a valuable 



5920 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

consideration, any tissue for a transplant, or any body or 

part of a body other than blood or a blood constituent, for 

the purposes of transplant, medical education or scientific 

research. 

 

So on the face of that section 17, it allows for the buying and 

selling of blood or plasma but subject to the regulation. So then 

you have to go and look, well are there any regulations here that 

will change this particular prohibition against the buying, 

selling, or otherwise dealing in tissue for a transplant or 

research? And in fact when you go to the regulations, section 22 

and you look at regulation (f), so it’s section 22(f) and it states: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 

regulations: 

 

(f) for the purposes of section 17: 

 

(i) prescribing exemptions from the prohibition against 

the purchase, sale or other dealings with respect to: 

(A) tissue; and 

(B) bodies or parts of bodies. 

 

And then (ii) of that (f) is: 

 

(ii) prescribing persons or classes of persons that are 

exempt from that section and prescribing any terms and 

conditions to which the exemption may be subject; and 

 

(iii) prescribing circumstances of a purchase, sale or 

other dealing with respect to tissue, bodies or parts of 

bodies that make the purchase, sale or other dealing 

exempt from that section. 

 

So what we have in section 17 combined together with the 

regulatory power, we have the right, the cabinet has the right to 

make decisions around the buying, selling, and dealing in body 

parts other than blood and blood plasma or blood constituents. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a serious choice that is being brought 

forward by the minister. He gives the example of the corneas as 

why they’re wanting to do this but the power . . . It doesn’t state 

here and he didn’t make an amendment to section 17 that would 

just say other than blood or a blood constituent or a cornea. He 

goes on to give the power to the cabinet in regulation to allow 

for the purchase or sale of any part of a human body for the 

purposes of transplant or for medical education or for scientific 

research. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a little bit of information from the 

minister in the second reading speech around what the 

intentions are as it relates to this legislation, but we don’t have 

very much detail about how some of these things will be done. 

And I think if you look at what the Minister of Health has said 

on November 17th, it says basically that: 

 

This legislation will allow the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to make regulations that establish standards, 

practices, and procedures that improve access to 

transplantation. With this increased flexibility, 

Saskatchewan’s transplant services can better reflect 

current practices in organ and tissue donations and can 

take advantage of opportunities to improve care for 

patients. 

 

[15:15] 

 

That’s what’s stated. Then it goes on to explain some of the 

things that are going to happen, and then there’s this emphasis 

on the cornea. But the power that’s given in this particular 

legislation, that we as the legislators are going to give to the 

cabinet, is to set up a process of buying, selling, or otherwise 

dealing directly or indirectly for a valuable consideration any 

tissue for a transplant or any body or part of a body other than a 

blood or blood constituent for the purpose of transplant, 

medical education, and scientific research. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we know and 

understand what the limits are going to be on this, and how, if 

there are going to be changes, how the decisions will be made. 

As we know now, regulatory consultation is quite limited. We 

usually don’t actually even know about regulations that are 

coming until the cabinet’s made a decision and it’s showed up 

in the community. 

 

I think that in this particular area it would be very helpful if the 

Minister of Health or the Premier or someone would say how 

decisions will be made to expand this power within our 

province because it is an area where there can be some 

difficulties. It is an area where we want to protect our citizens, 

both from being the source of sale of tissue, but also if tissues 

are purchased around the world and brought back to 

Saskatchewan, what are the standards? How are they going to 

be . . . Who is going to set those standards? What kind of public 

discussion are we going to have about that? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the legislation gives more power 

clearly to the minister, to the Premier, to the cabinet. And I 

think what we will need to know is how they intend to use this 

power in a way that will protect the public when basically it’s 

going to be dealt with by regulations. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that sometimes in areas like this 

where there are some strong ethical questions, where there are 

issues that are of concern to the whole community, that it may 

be better that we actually spell out in legislation what we’re 

doing rather than having it dealt with in regulation. And so I 

think that as this bill proceeds through the legislature, we’ll all 

need to ask some very specific questions about how the 

legislation is going to be used, how the decisions are going to 

be made, how this expanded, almost open power about the 

purchase and sale of tissue and body, the human body, will be 

governed. 

 

It may be the type of legislation which should have included 

right in the Act itself some kind of ethics board or an ethical 

system. I mean a system for making some of these decisions. 

And I’m not totally certain what some of the solutions are, but I 

think that there are some very direct questions about this and we 

can’t take it lightly that we have this type of legislation being 

brought forward in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that that specific question about this 

expansion of the power to buy and sell or deal in tissue and 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5921 

human body parts is the core of what changes are being made 

here. It goes away from the concept of donation to maybe the 

dealing or market for certain kinds of things, and that’s one that 

I think troubles all of us. 

 

But, Mr. .Speaker, I have no further comments today other than 

to raise these alerts and ask that all of us be diligent in 

following what this legislation may and can do in the province 

of Saskatchewan. At this point I will move to adjourn debate. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 157, The Human 

Tissue Gift Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 158 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 158 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 

debate on Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2014. And I know pension plans and this one 

for instance that we’re looking at was established I believe in 

May of 1986, giving individuals out there, residents of this 

province an opportunity to save some dollars for their pension, 

retirement, and have an opportunity . . . We know we have a 

government pension. Many organizations have a pension plan. I 

know the government one, our government employees have a 

pension plan. A lot of different ones belong to certain plans. 

Some of the big corporations have certain pension plans. Some 

individuals put away RRSPs [registered retirement savings 

plan] and they do what they can. Some can afford to it, some 

can’t because of the cost of living. There might be different 

reasons. 

 

But the idea of a retirement plan is to make sure that you hope 

you have enough put away to, you know, have an opportunity to 

live, you know, with the respect and dignity that most people 

want. And this plan is an opportunity for individuals who don’t 

belong to a government pension plan or an organization, giving 

them an opportunity to save some dollars and put away for their 

retirement so the day when they need those dollars, they’re 

there. 

 

I guess like I’ve said, some people have an opportunity, and 

their position, and where they are they can put a little bit away 

and put into a plan that they want to be . . . It’s a plan that’s 

managed by I guess trustees. It’s put in place to manage those. 

And I think this plan currently, it has about $401 million in it 

that, you know . . . And there is a process that explains those 

dollars are protected and how those dollars are protected. You 

know, you have trustees in there. You make sure that you have 

trustees, trustees in there that take care of this money, and they 

provide, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they provide for the opportunity 

to save for the day when they need those dollars. 

 

And they’re making some changes in here, and they’re 

repealing some of them. And in May of last year, 2013, they 

came forward, and I don’t know if government was ready or 

not. Or you know, did they do the homework that needed to be 

done to introduce the legislation and the changes that they 

wanted to make? They amended it in 2013. May, I believe is 

what the date is, if I have it right. 

 

But they’ve brought forward now . . . It’s being repealed. 

They’ve come in with some changes, and maybe for some 

reasons the homework wasn’t done. They didn’t do the job that 

they were supposed to do. But I know from our point, the 

members on this side of the House and the other members out 

there in this House have a right to go back to constituents and 

ask, is this kind of a plan going to work for you? 

 

You have about 33,000 members I believe that belong to this 

current plan that have, like I said, about 401 million in assets. 

So when we go through this and, you know, you change and 

you bring in changes, amendments, there’s some questions that 

need to be clarified, whether it’s the critic, whether it’s 

individual members. 

 

You want to make sure that people’s retirement are being 

protected, the way they’re handled, and they want to be 

reassured. Saskatchewan residents, they work hard for their 

dollars. They want to make sure that whatever they put into 

those plans, they’re protected. And government has an 

obligation to make sure that it goes through a process, you 

know, that protects those assets because those individuals didn’t 

have a lot of money and at times don’t have that opportunity, 

like I had said earlier. 

 

So there have been some changes, and they’re repealing some 

of it. They’re changing some of it. They’re giving some 

opportunities. And I just want to kind of comment a little bit 

about one area, and I’ve already talked about coming in line. 

And some of them might be wording changes, but some of them 

will come in line with other pension plans, whether it’s 

government pensions, other pensions that are out there. 

 

When it comes to spouse’s allowance, making sure that there’s 

a provision, from my understanding in here, that there’s a 

provision in there to name the spouse to make sure the spouse 

gets opportunities, the pension, should their loved one pass 

away, that there’s a provision in there to make sure that the 

couple, the married couple, the partner, the spouse, has an 

opportunity to those dollars that have been put in trust. 

 

And like I’ve said, they want to make sure that they have access 

to that and that it just doesn’t end up going into the government 

coffers and the government takes it, as there are some 

provisions in here where, if the government can’t find someone 

that’s . . . [inaudible] . . . has opportunity to these dollars, that 

then somebody might come later on and they’d say, well those 

dollars were mine. And if government has those, there’s a 

provision in here I believe, from my understanding, for the 

minister to look at it and make a provision to say, yes those 

dollars are entitled to this person. This person has shown that 



5922 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

they have the right to those dollars, whether it be a spouse. So 

they don’t have to prove to the Minister of Finance that that 

individual has a right to those retirement pension dollars that 

are putting into that plan. 

 

There is a lot of different things that are in this plan. And I 

know when we go through our opportunity, and a lot of my 

colleagues have commented about it, making sure we’re doing 

the due diligence that we’re supposed to do, whether it’s in 

committee, and I know our critic will put those questions to the 

minister and ask those tough questions in committee. I mean 

we’re going through the process. We’ll debate it. I know we’ll 

do a little bit of checking on it, making sure that the changes 

that are being proposed, you know, who asked for them? 

 

And there might be, you know, name changes. There might be 

some good changes that help Saskatchewan residents, and those 

individuals are members of this pension plan. Like I said, 

there’s about 33,000 members that belong to this pension, but 

$401 million in assets that trustees are looking after. But if 

those provisions aren’t there and something should happen that 

those assets aren’t being protected and the spouse has those, 

whether it’s 60 per cent — and I believe that’s the number — I 

know there’s going to be some questions being asked. Sixty per 

cent is what they’re going to give. And if I have it correctly, 

you know, as we go through committee and we talk with 

community members and we talk with people that are in the 

plan, I have the opportunity for those individuals to come 

forward and express their concern. 

 

And like I said, sometimes this stuff, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

housecleaning. Sometimes there’s some changes that need to be 

addressed. So we have to make sure that at the end of the day 

we’ve done the due diligence that we’re supposed to do, and we 

will do that. So at this time, I know in committee, when it gets 

there, I know my colleagues have more questions and, you 

know, more discussions that they want to discuss on this bill. 

But at this point I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 158, 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 158. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 149 — The 

Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And as always I’m honoured to be able to rise in this Assembly 

and have the opportunity to speak to the bills that have been 

tabled by the government here for our consideration. 

The bill I’m speaking about today is Bill No. 149, which is An 

Act to amend The Health Administration Act. In this case, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this is where the Minister of Health has told us 

that there is a few changes needed to be able to allow eHealth, 

which is a Crown corporation, to do the job that it needs to do 

in relation to, I guess in this case, health cards. And he 

reminded us all that if we got the sticker, we should be putting 

it on our card. And I did, Mr. Speaker, and I certainly 

encourage everyone else to do the same. 

 

Just as an aside and before I forget, I’m wondering. One of the 

things I would love to see changed in terms of our health cards 

is the fact that we only have the month and year of our birth 

date. We don’t have the day. And I don’t know if you’ve had 

this problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but every time I go to my 

doctor, to massage or chiropractor or the pharmacy, they want 

to know what day of the month I was born in. And I get asked 

that question every time I’m engaging with health professionals. 

 

And I’m just not sure why we don’t put it on the darn card and 

just have it there rather than having to answer that question 

every time. I don’t know why they need it, why they need my 

date of birth, the day of the month I was born in, but I don’t 

have a problem with it being added to my card. So hopefully 

. . . That’s just a complete aside, but it occurred to me when the 

minister was providing his second reading comments last week 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I guess the Minister of 

Finance is concerned about those born on leap day which 

happens occasionally. I did know somebody that was born on 

leap day. But you know, just something to think about, and I’m 

curious. Maybe the minister has some suggestions for that. 

 

[15:30] 

 

At any rate, what he’s telling us about in this bill is there’s a 

new section in here in order to allow delegation of the 

minister’s authority to eHealth Saskatchewan. And so what it’s 

doing is just allowing the ministry and the minister to pass on 

. . . Because eHealth is now operating the health registration 

program, he’s asking that the bill for health administration be 

amended to reflect that transfer of authority. 

 

So the section that we’re talking about here, section 6.5 of The 

Health Administration Act, that’s probably the most critical 

section in the bill or in the entire Act, and it deals with all about 

cards: what happens when you get a health card, who’s allowed 

to issue it, what happens if you fake a health card or use a card 

that’s not yours. And there’s all kinds of penalties and, you 

know, you can get a fine for $50,000 if you contravene any of 

these provisions in terms of you being issued a health card. So 

it’s a serious, serious piece of administration. It’s important. 

 

And I guess as a citizen of Saskatchewan, it’s something I’m 

really proud to have is a health card because it tells me I am a 

citizen of a province that believes in universal health care and 

that I have access to the health system equally with every other 

person in the province. And that’s something that’s really 

important to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

At any rate, the new clause that they’re inserting is the clause, 

it’s going to be called clause 2.1. And what clause 2.1 . . . 

That’s the only section in this Act, this Act to amend The 

Health Administration Act. And basically what it says is that the 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5923 

minister can now designate his powers to the Crown 

corporation or an agency of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

And in this case it would be eHealth is the Crown corporation 

that the minister’s indicated will have this designation. And if 

he does do that, which he will do with eHealth, then anything 

that he could do will now be . . . eHealth will be able to do in 

his place. So that’s really the whole amendment Act in a 

nutshell. 

 

I want to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the numbering in the H 

statutes . . . This might be for the Minister of Justice more so 

than the Minister of Health. But this particular bill is now 

H-0.0001, because we now have an H-0.001 and we have an 

H-0.01. So we’re getting into an H numbering problem here 

that can be very confusing and certainly even our own binders 

here are quite confused. So that might be something. I don’t 

know if you can renumber bills in a better way. Obviously 

that’s one that makes sense in terms of the Dewey decimal 

system, but it was really confusing to try and figure out which 

bill we’re talking about here. 

 

The other thing that’s somewhat interesting is that this 

government actually made amendments to The Health 

Administration Act just this year and why . . . Earlier this spring 

we passed a bill to amend this Act and now we’re amending it 

again in the fall. And I just kind of wonder sometimes if there 

couldn’t be better coordination of all these amendments. And 

I’m not sure. Maybe eHealth wasn’t ready to be, take over this 

responsibility. But it’s just kind of strange though we see this, 

The Health Administration Act, having four clauses repealed 

earlier this year, and now we’re dealing with an amendment to 

section 6.5. 

 

And even the numbering of this bill is quite interesting. You’ve 

got section 1. You’ve got section 5, 6, and then you’ve got 

section 6.1, section 6.2, section 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, and then we 

go on with 7, 8, 9, and 10. So just kind of strange little things 

that are creeping up. But I think when you amend bills as 

frequently as we have been with this one, you see these kind of 

strange anomalies popping up. But that’s merely an observation 

on the part of a lowly backbencher on the opposition side, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I feel fortunate to have the opportunity to 

make these kinds of observations, but really in the whole 

scheme of the universe it’s probably neither here nor there. 

 

And that’s the extent to my comments on this particular bill. It’s 

a short little bill, a housekeeping bill to allow eHealth to do 

what it needs to do to look after our health cards. And again, 

you know, in terms of scintillating legislative debate, I’m afraid 

it’s not available in this particular bill because there isn’t 

enough there. But maybe, maybe there are bills coming that we 

will be able to really get our teeth into. 

 

So without further ado, I’d like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

149, An Act to amend The Health Administration Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 149. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 144 — The 

Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — House Leader. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Always good to be recognized, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, especially by your good self. Thanks for the 

introduction into what is a fairly . . . In stark contrast to my 

colleague from Saskatoon Nutana’s remarks around the 

character of the legislation previously under consideration, this 

one, this bill under consideration, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 144, 

The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014, I think 

is fairly substantial, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I have to say off the top I’m glad to see this bill coming 

forward here today. I’ll get into the particulars of the legislation 

and discussion of the objectives as laid out by the Minister of 

Justice in his second reading speech. But I want to say off the 

top, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that again I’m glad to see this come 

forward because Saskatchewan’s got a problem and it’s got a 

big problem. It’s got, by the statistics, a nation-leading problem 

when it comes to domestic violence. 

 

And it takes a lot of different efforts to address the kind of 

statistics that we see presented on a fairly consistent basis, Mr. 

Speaker. It takes a legislative approach. It takes a programmatic 

approach, but it also takes men and women, communities 

standing up and saying that this is unacceptable and this is 

something that we need to address as a society. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, it gives me no great pleasure to say that. But the 

numbers speak, and they say some pretty terrible things about 

the situation here in Saskatchewan. And there’s too much 

domestic violence certainly across the country, Mr. Speaker, but 

again, as of the last in-depth study by Statistics Canada that I 

believe used 2011 data, Saskatchewan leads the country in 

terms of domestic violence. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that makes sense when you talk to 

people that run the transition houses in this province, if you 

listen to people that are associated with the Provincial 

Association of Transition Houses, if you listen to those in law 

enforcement, if you listen to those that do research in this 

regard, Mr. Speaker. And it also presents in other sort of ways 

that are related but not necessarily top of mind. But certainly 

the way that Saskatchewan figures into the broader discussion 

around murdered and missing Aboriginal women is something 

that’s very much part of this conversation. 

 

And again there are some good things that are being done, have 

been done by past governments. And certainly the work that 

this provincial government has carried on in terms of the task 

force around addressing murdered and missing Aboriginal 



5924 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

women is important, and the support that this government and 

certainly members of our bench have lent to the call for a Royal 

Commission on the wildly unacceptable waste of life and 

potential that is inherent in the situation for missing and 

murdered Aboriginal women in this province and in this 

country. We support that call, and we’re glad to see it being 

called for by the government opposite.  

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, it goes to the reminder of just how big 

the task is in front of us and how big the challenge is in terms of 

the real damage and waste that is laid to too many lives in terms 

of domestic violence but the broader question of violence in our 

society and interpersonal violence in general.  

 

And it’s from the statistics, which tell a terrible story in and of 

themselves. I know that a lot of members in this Assembly have 

got faces and perhaps family and perhaps individuals that are 

near and dear to them that tell the whole story in terms of what I 

think this legislation is setting out to accomplish in terms of 

trying to address the situation around domestic violence in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just one piece of legislation. 

It’s not just one program. It’s not just one set of attitudes being 

changed. It’s that broad front of actions that need to be 

addressed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so again I’m glad to see this legislation 

coming forward here today. And it just begs the question, is this 

enough? And when we talk to people in the transition houses 

and try to reckon with the kind of wait-lists and the kind of 

demands that are on that capacity in that part of the system, Mr. 

Speaker, it again begs the question, is it enough in terms of a 

response? 

 

When we think about our own attitudes and the way that society 

is reflected back at us in different things, either through, you 

know, leading personalities in the field of sports or in culture 

and indeed in politics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve all got to ask 

ourselves, are we doing enough to address interpersonal 

violence and domestic violence in this country? So to the bill 

itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again we’re glad to see it coming 

forward and, you know, again it’s a mixed bag in terms of it’s 

good to see it coming forward but, you know, does it address 

the challenge that is there in the community? 

 

We’ll be interested to see . . . again, to do the due diligence that 

is there to be undertaken, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of, has 

the consultation on this been broad enough and does this fit the 

bill? I think on the face of it, it holds out a good chance for that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But again, things such as, to quote from the minister’s second 

reading speech: 

 

. . . to provide an additional tool to a responding police 

officer to separate individuals who represent an imminent 

risk of injury to each other. It’s critical to the functionality 

of the Act that police and victims are able to immediately 

seek an emergency intervention order by telephone. 

 

I certainly agree with that, Mr. Speaker. There’s an urgency to 

these things that is undeniable. And if this Act aids in an 

appropriate response to those situations, we’re glad to see it. 

 

Carrying on through the second reading speech, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in terms of the Act attempting to: 

 

. . . [strike] a balance between the risk to an individual 

who fears violence and the procedural rights of the 

respondent. The operational success of this legislation has 

been in providing a tool to the police and to shelter 

workers that allow them to provide an immediate response 

to calls for assistance without permanently affecting any 

status or legal rights of the respondent. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, there is a balance to be struck there. But 

that one set of rights should feed into a situation that is in too 

many cases literally lethal for one of the parties involved, again 

that balance has to be reckoned with very carefully. 

 

In terms of the other aspects of the legislation following 

different developments, both in terms of the application or the 

initial Act back to 1994 and to other jurisdictions in trying to 

glean the lessons that are there to be learned from, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re glad to see that. 

 

In terms of the more technical aspects of the legislation, again 

how this relates for peace officers, for law enforcement, for 

justices of the peace, for the granting of emergency intervention 

orders, these are all things that we’ll have more questions about, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So to wrap up my comments at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this would certainly seem to be a worthwhile piece of 

legislation. We’ve got some definite questions as to how the 

different . . . of the finer details contained therein, where they 

arise from, and whether or not they’ll have the desired impact. 

But certainly we’re glad to see any kind of, you know, 

additional efforts being made in addressing the situation with 

domestic violence in Saskatchewan and that Saskatchewan 

might do its part in taking on this thing and provide leadership 

not just in the incidence of domestic violence, Mr. Speaker, but 

in the work to address this terrible situation. With that, I’d move 

to adjourn debate on Bill No. 144, The Victims of Domestic 

Violence Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

144, The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 152 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 152 — The 

Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 

2014/Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi 

intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5925 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Certainly various of my comments just delivered in the debate 

around Bill No. 144 would attach to the work being sought to 

be accomplished here in Bill No. 152. 

 

I guess the one thing I would add here, Mr. Speaker, and it 

would be interesting to see how either this or the previous Act 

help out this cause, but earlier this fall we had a terrible 

situation up around Unity, Saskatchewan, where, in terms of the 

reporting of the incident, it was a murder-suicide, a man and a 

wife, a terrible situation, Mr. Speaker. It speaks to a number of 

mental health questions, but it also speaks to the way that we, as 

a society, acknowledge a problem. 

 

And if you’re going to take on a problem, Mr. Speaker, you first 

have to know the details. You have to acknowledge that there’s 

a problem, and then you have to find out what’s going on. And 

certainly the confusion that existed around the reporting out of 

this circumstance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think leaves a number 

of questions that certainly attach to this broader debate. 

 

And again the RCMP’s initial response was that there were two 

people that had died suddenly, and then of course the details 

gradually emerged. And again the RCMP was working out of a 

concern for privacy, and that’s certainly fair enough. But if 

society is going to know what the problem is, Mr. Speaker, 

there has to be a way that this is accurately reflected in the 

reporting. 

 

And again there’s certainly indication enough in the statistics as 

they exist, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for people in Saskatchewan to 

know that we’ve got a big challenge on our hands in terms of 

addressing domestic violence and interpersonal violence. But as 

regards this circumstance, it just I think raises a number of 

questions that might be better addressed under different pieces 

of legislation. But that this wasn’t reported for what it was 

straightaway, obviously raises some questions about the 

adequacy of that balance that needs to be struck between 

privacy and proper reporting these situations under the different 

pieces of legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, perhaps that’s a set of 

questions that’s better addressed in committee. 

 

But with that, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 152, 

The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2014. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 152. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 145 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 145 — The Fee 

Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise and enter into the debate on Bill No. 145, 

An Act respecting the Waiver of Fees and making consequential 

amendments to other Acts. 

 

And so it’s an interesting piece of legislation and part of a suite 

of things that we’re seeing from the Justice branch. And of 

course, you know, we were talking about class action lawsuits 

and different things last night and got to talking about waiver of 

fees. And I find that an interesting discussion because in terms 

of, especially, the minister alluded to folks who may not be able 

to afford the fees, and what can we do to make sure people have 

appropriate and fair access to justice in a timely manner? 

 

And this is an important aspect of how we value that in our 

society, in our province, and our country. Everyone has access 

to justice. And it’s not just a matter of those who can afford it, 

who can pay for it. And of course sometimes we wonder and we 

have raised questions, but why are there such high fees for, for 

example, residential tenancies claims? Why is there a fee at all? 

You know, we have a situation where these are renters who are 

making complaints. 

 

And I’d be curious to know, but I’m sure Justice doesn’t keep 

track of this, who actually comes in and makes the complaints. 

Is it the folks in the high-end rentals that are complaining about 

the fairness of their concerns? Now who knows? And it would 

be interesting to have some background on this. 

 

I mean, it is interesting this government is taking, and we’re 

glad to hear this after much urging on our behalf, that they are 

going to take a look at an anti-poverty strategy. But it has to be 

complete and full and look at all the costs that somehow people 

who are in vulnerable circumstances find themselves in. And 

one of those is as tenants, and what are the concerns that they 

have. And one of them we often hear is a barrier is the cost to 

. . . Cost is a barrier when they have concerns about what’s 

happening in terms of their rental accommodations, and 

whether it’s getting their deposits back, some unfairness in 

terms of the rent increases, that type of thing. 

 

So we have a concern about, first, why the fee in the first place 

when we’re really thinking that everyone should have access to 

those arenas for concerns and complaints. But they do happen, 

and I’m just . . . I would be curious to see that if this would and 

if this has been brought up by Justice to Social Services to say, 

so what are people coming in and what are their concerns about 

justice? And where are the main ones that people are talking 

about? 

 

And so we’ll have that, we’ll have that question for the 

minister, you know, that it’s just not people on low income, but 

people who are the working poor or people who feel that 

they’re caught up in circumstances where they may or may not 

be able to pay for a fee. But because they can’t pay for their fee, 

then they’re really denied access to justice. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to review the minister’s 

comments because they’re always informative, and they should 

be. But they do leave some gaps, as often we have questions. 



5926 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

For example the minister talks a bit about consultation but 

doesn’t really mention who they consulted, how they conducted 

that. And we know that for this government, that is a spotty 

record at best because of the way that they do their 

consultations. It’s not really accessible, and they don’t really 

dig down deep to find out what are the barriers to getting 

fairness and getting fair access to justice. 

 

So he talks about “. . . allowing for the waiver of administrative 

fees at courts and tribunals for lower income litigants,” and that 

implements “. . . various enhancements to the existing fee 

waiver program.” And so it talks about there’s no fee waiver 

program for small claims court, talks about the Court of Appeal, 

Court of Queen’s Bench, and “. . . there’s no process to obtain a 

new waiver at the Court of . . .” So this will allow individuals to 

apply for a fee waiver at all three levels of court. So fair 

enough. That sounds like a good, good process. 

 

It also talks about applying to tribunals that regularly adjudicate 

matters for members of the public and that’s the Automobile 

Injury Appeal Commission and the Office of Residential 

Tenancies that are specifically named under this Act. But I’m 

not sure if there’s others; he doesn’t name others. But “. . . there 

will be a power to subscribe additional tribunals and 

government bodies where they may be appropriate.” And that’s 

why I’m thinking the consultation that may happen about the 

anti-poverty strategy, you know, as well as bringing up people’s 

incomes, it’s what are the barriers they’re finding to fair 

treatment? And I think this would be one where Justice should 

be listening, finding out where are people feeling that they’re 

being denied access to justice because of costs, where costs are 

a barrier. 

 

And then it talks about transferring “. . . administration of the 

fee waiver applications from the Saskatchewan Legal Aid 

Commission to individual courts and tribunals.” And so that’s 

relatively straightforward. 

 

It talks about the “. . . processes will be kept simplified in order 

to ensure eligible individuals as well as courts . . . are not 

negatively impacted by administrative processes or delays.” 

And the simplified criteria will be set out in regulations and that 

“. . . there will be discretionary authority to grant fee waivers in 

special circumstances to individuals who do not meet the 

regular qualifications.” So he wants to make sure that it’s “. . . 

flexible enough to respond to unique circumstances of 

individual litigants.” 

 

Now he doesn’t talk about any kind of time frame that they 

must be dealt with in two weeks or a month. So the question is 

. . . So you can apply and it doesn’t talk about how you can 

apply and how the process will be. Will it be electronic? Can 

you do it on a website, or is it going to be done in person? Is it a 

paper process? How will that be done? How will we take into 

account different language barriers? Will it be done in a whole 

host of languages? 

 

I know if you check out the Human Rights Commission’s 

website, you’ll notice that they have many, many different 

brochures and information in all sorts of different languages. 

And so I’m wondering if this is going to be the case. So while 

it’ll be simplified, will it be more . . . Will it be quicker? That’s 

often an issue. You know, if fines have to be paid or different 

things have to be dealt with, you want to make sure that it’s 

done in a relatively expedient manner. And so this is something 

that we really need to deal with. And so, you know, I think this 

an important issue. 

 

He goes on to talk about: 

 

. . . under current rules, a litigant must apply for a fee 

waiver for the Court of Queen’s Bench prior to taking any 

other steps in a proceeding. As a result, individuals who 

are unable to apply for a fee waiver prior to issuing a 

claim are prevented from receiving a fee waiver even if 

that individual does not have the means to pay the court 

fees. 

 

So that will take care of that and that’s very important. And it 

will also allow for self-represented litigants to apply for these 

fee waiver certificates. So that’s consistent with Ontario and 

British Columbia, so that’s important. And notes that currently 

only if individuals are represented by legal counsel are fee 

waivers available. So this is really, really important. 

 

So I think there are some interesting things here that we’ll be 

looking for. It talks about how this: 

 

. . . has been informed by the work of the Law Reform 

Commission of Saskatchewan and the recent decision of 

the Supreme Court of Canada in Trial Lawyers of British 

Columbia v. Attorney General of British Columbia. The 

Ministry of Justice has . . . consulted with the 

Saskatchewan legal community and has found widespread 

support . . . 

 

[16:00] 

 

So I’m wondering if he has consulted with the Regina 

Anti-Poverty Ministry. They might have some insight into, 

what are the other tribunals that might be impacted by this? 

What are some of the real cost barriers that people are facing? 

So I think this is important. 

 

My colleague from Riversdale talked about CLASSIC 

[Community Legal Assistance Services For Saskatoon Inner 

City Inc.] and how CLASSIC has identified several 

circumstances where costs have been a barrier and how we need 

to do more to make sure those barriers are taken away so people 

do have access to justice. But I’m also wondering if he had 

consulted with the Saskatoon Anti-Poverty Coalition. They 

might have an opinion on this as well. 

 

And I think of Equal Justice For All, if this government has 

consulted with Equal Justice For All. Of course this is a 

government that really would hope that Equal Justice would go 

away. They took the funding away for Equal Justice For All, 

and I think it’s really . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, I’ve hit 

a nerve. I’ve hit a nerve, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t think people 

were listening. 

 

But just to be clear, I know this government is no friend of 

Equal Justice For All. They’ve taken the funding away. And yet 

this is a group that does really good advocacy work. And I’m 

not sure . . . and we need to find out more. We’ll have questions 

about, how does this impact on the Social Services Appeal 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5927 

Board, you know, where we know, and we know this 

government, we’ve asked questions of this government. They 

set aside a certain amount of money that people can pay Equal 

Justice For All a small amount as an individual basis to help 

them as advocates when they go before, you know, the Social 

Services Appeal Board. 

 

But when we asked for the stats, about how many times was it 

used, this government didn’t know. Didn’t know; it couldn’t 

provide those answers in estimates. You would think, you 

would think when we’re in estimates, that the government 

would have access to that information. Couldn’t provide that 

information. 

 

We were just curious because, you know, the government had 

taken away a small global grant to Equal Justice for All. And as 

well they got rid of Welfare Rights in Regina just a few years 

prior to that who were doing good work representing 

low-income and people on social services before the appeal 

board and other areas such as the Residential Tenancies office. 

But got rid of that advocacy group. And with Equal Justice for 

All, they’re getting a small, token fee as an individual, per 

individual, but they’re not sure how many times it’s actually 

being used. And I know those folks are on a shoestring budget 

but are doing really, really good work. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just find it interesting, this government in 

their convoluted way of raising fees, if you have a concern 

about rent, if you want to go to the Rentalsman and make a 

concern, you have to raise the rent. But now they’re . . . raise 

the fee. But they’re going to waive that fee for certain people. 

But we’re not sure how long it’s going to take and what the 

process is. And you know, I think we needed more clarity from 

the minister on this piece of legislation that he has before us. 

 

While on first blush it looks like a good piece of legislation, 

there are certain gaps and inconsistencies. And as I say, 

particularly around the consultations, did they talk to the people 

who actually are impacted, impacted by these situations where 

they cannot access justice, and whether it’s in the courts, the 

three levels as the minister talked about, or whether it’s these 

two tribunals that he mentioned and that there may be more 

coming. 

 

But at the end of the day if this government really was 

interested in supporting people, low-income people, there were 

a couple of major tells, if I can use that word, where they got rid 

of welfare for Welfare Rights in Regina. And Equal Justice For 

All, they put into a very dire strait by removing their funding. 

And while the government can’t say, we’re good friends, when 

you have good friends like that, holy smokes. I don’t know, 

when you have problems, that’s an odd way of expressing 

support by taking away major, major funding. That’s really an 

odd way of showing it. 

 

So we have some concerns about this, but we will raise them. 

And I know my colleagues will want to talk further about this. 

We will have lots of questions in committee. And I will go 

back, I will go back to these groups and say, what do you think 

about The Fee Waiver Act? Are there some amendments we 

should be talking about? Is this a complete Act? You know 

because quite often we will see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

amendments. We may see an amendment to The Fee Waiver 

Act in the new year because the government has not completely 

done all its work, and it’s now realized maybe there’s some 

things that we should have added to this. 

 

So I think that we need to take some time and really fully 

consider what the impacts are of this piece of legislation, what 

are the unintended consequences. And I mean, is it really hitting 

the mark that the minister wanted to accomplish? You know, 

I’m just curious about that. Is it going to really hit the mark that 

he wanted to do? And what is it really based on? What is it 

really based on? So we will have lots of questions about this 

piece of legislation. But at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would like to adjourn debate on Bill 145, The Fee Waiver Act. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 145, the fee waiver 

amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 146 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 146 — The Fee 

Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 

portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee 

Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I have a lot to say about this bill, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that it’s 

important we have these kinds of opportunities to really review 

the legislation and take a look at what are the implications of 

the legislation. And I think when we have an opportunity to 

debate Bill No. 146, An Act to make consequential amendments 

resulting from the enactment of The Fee Waiver Act, I’m just 

curious if the members opposite have taken time to read this 

piece of legislation. I think it’s important that we take some 

time and really review what this really means. What are the 

implications? Who have they consulted? This is probably where 

we’re going to see lots of action in the new year where the 

group . . . where the minister will come back with amendments, 

and we’ll see yet another Act that makes consequential 

amendments resulting from The Fee Waiver Act. 

 

But at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it is related to 

the other one, I will just simply move adjournment of Bill No. 

146, An Act to make consequential amendments resulting from 

the enactment of The Fee Waiver Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 146. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 



5928 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 150 — The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

You keep that up, you’ll be calling me honourable next or 

something. I’m sure maybe the member from Estevan would 

want in on that action as well. But anyway as ever, always good 

to be recognized by your good self, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

good to take my place in this Chamber and join debate on Bill 

No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

First off, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting piece of legislation and 

certainly as problems arise both for tenants and for landlords in 

the question of residential tenancies, this is the pre-eminent 

piece of legislation that adjudicates those conflicts, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s important that legislation such as this be fair 

and balanced and recognizes that this is very much a two-way 

street, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When it comes to questions of, you 

know, making sure that there’s fairness for tenants, making sure 

that there’s fairness for landlords, again, Mr. Speaker, this is the 

legislation. 

 

And there are a fair number of renters, there are a fair number 

of rental properties in the fair riding of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, and we certainly have occasion in the work 

that our office does on behalf of the good people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre to interact with both sides of that street, 

talking to both landlords on the one side of the equation, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly with renters that have concerns about the 

way in which they’ve been dealt with under the legislation, and 

then in turn how these things are dealt with by the Office of 

Residential Tenancies, the current successor to the Rentalsman, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again in terms of recognizing that balance that is critical in 

questions such as these, in terms of recognizing that there are 

very much two interests to be recognized and addressed and 

sometimes those interests are conflicting, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important that the legislation recognize that right off the top. 

And so I was glad to see the Minister of Justice in his second 

reading speech make mention of that right from the get-go. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, how this particular piece of amending 

legislation either lives up to that or does not, we’ll certainly be 

doing our own due diligence as the official opposition, talking 

to those on the tenants’ side of the equation and those that have 

opportunity to experience those, the problems that might arise 

from that perspective, and those on the landlords’ side of the 

equation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the changes in this particular bundle of legislation 

that are referenced off the top, there’s a . . . to quote from the 

minister’s second reading speech, “Some proposals benefit 

tenants specifically, such as the amendment expanding the time 

for claiming the return of a security deposit from 120 days to 

two years.” 

Carrying on in the quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Although I do not expect there will be many claims that 

are made beyond 120 days, there certainly may be some. 

Two years is the general limitations period for claims in 

court pursuant to The Limitations Act, so that will be 

consistent. 

 

We’ll be interested to see the number of incidences, what the 

current lay of the land is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and how that 

might have application with the current situation as it presents 

to the Office of Residential Tenancies. 

 

In terms of again carrying on through the information that was 

presented by the minister: 

 

Another proposal for the benefit of tenants is found in the 

amendment to section 60, which allows landlords to evict 

tenants if the landlord wishes to demolish or renovate the 

premises or has other uses for property. Currently the 

notice period is one month. The proposal is to extend it to 

two. It’s reasonable that landlords plan far enough in 

advance when evicting tenants for their own purposes. In 

addition, in the situations of demolition or renovation, the 

landlord must always return the entire security deposit. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be interested to see how this has 

played out to date. We know that there has been very urgent 

conversations over the past years as regards to the question of 

conversion from rental suites to condominiums. This certainly 

relates to that discussion, Mr. Speaker. So we’ll be interested to 

see how that has evidenced itself in the experience again as 

related by the Office of Residential Tenancies. 

 

Again, carrying on with the information presented by the 

minister: 

 

Some proposals alleviate problems for landlords. In 

particular the bill expressly permits landlords to make and 

enforce reasonable rules in their residential premises. 

These rules may concern the tenants’ use, occupancy, or 

maintenance of the premises or the tenants’ use of 

services. Some examples may be rules concerning 

smoking or pets. If the rules are not reasonable, the tenant 

may challenge them with an application to a hearing 

officer. If the tenant repeatedly violates the rules, the 

tenant can be evicted. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be very interested to see how that 

particular proposal lines up alongside the experience as lived 

daily by the good folks at the Office of Residential Tenancies 

and certainly other stakeholders throughout the community. 

 

Carrying on, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Other proposals include the ability for landlords to evict a 

tenant who has violated municipal bylaws or failed to pay 

municipal charges. In all these situations the tenant must 

be given the opportunity to correct the transgression. 

 

On the face of it, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to be a reasonable 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5929 

proposition. Again, moving on through the information 

presented: 

 

Parties have the opportunity under the Act to appeal the 

decision of a hearing officer to the Court of Queen’s 

Bench on a question of law or jurisdiction. A new 

provision helps to guard against frivolous appeals that are 

used to extend the occupancy of the premises after an 

eviction order has been made. In those cases, in order to 

appeal, the tenant must prove good faith by depositing 

with the court one-half of one month’s rent or establish 

that the rent has been paid. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we will be very interested to not just take 

the government’s word for it, but to see how that stacks up 

alongside the experience of the Office of Residential Tenancies 

in adjudicating these matters and what sort of cases are calling 

forth this particular prescription under law. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, referring to the minister’s second reading 

speech: 

 

Housing programs do not always fit nicely within the rules 

of The Residential Tenancies Act. For example, when a 

unit is part of a housing program and the tenant no longer 

qualifies for the housing program or for the particular unit, 

there are no grounds to remove the tenant from the rental 

unit. These amendments will address those issues. 

 

We’ll see how that plays out, Mr. Speaker, and see what, again, 

sort of circumstances are being brought forward to address that 

situation. 

 

And again, so to conclude my examination of the information 

presented by the minister in the second reading speech, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Finally there are amendments to make hearings more 

efficient, service of documents easier, appeals more 

expeditious, and provisions easier to understand. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking for a more detailed 

substantiation of that particular claim as we get further into the 

discussion of this piece of legislation. 

 

So to close out, there seems to be some pretty . . . There’s 

certainly some interesting measures provided in this legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. We know that the question of housing more 

broadly put in this province is one that causes an awful lot of 

folks an awful lot of concern, and whether or not this piece of 

legislation is helpful or hurtful to that situation remains to be 

seen. 

 

It remains to be seen how situations wherein the damage 

deposit and the way that the Ministry of Social Services has had 

some questionable interactions with landlords throughout the 

province and how that is either working itself out or not, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll be interested to see how this piece of legislation 

impacts that situation. And I guess generally this raises a 

number of questions about the approach of this government 

when it comes to housing questions in general. 

 

But certainly, Mr. Speaker, I know that we’ve got a lot more 

due diligence to be done on this particular piece of legislation, 

and a lot more consultation. And so with that, I would move 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 150, The Residential 

Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 

Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 151 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 151 — The 

Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Glad to 

join debate today on Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment 

Act, 2014. It’s always interesting to see questions of scope of 

practice being brought forward in legislation. Of course it’s 

with the law that we find the edges and the powers by which 

that scope of practice is exercised in the health sector, Mr. 

Speaker. So be it nurse practitioners or in this case pharmacists, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s always interesting to see particular pieces of 

legislation brought forward. 

 

Again we’ve got our due diligence to be done here, Mr. 

Speaker, but in terms of expanding the “. . . scope of practice 

for pharmacists, and . . . [benefiting] patients through health 

care services that are more efficient and accessible,” as 

contended by the Minister of Health in the second reading 

speech for this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that 

would seem to be a great thing. 

 

And certainly we know that there’s a lot of proud pharmacists 

in this province, both those that are on the front lines delivering 

health care and those that are on the regulatory side or on the 

training and education side, Mr. Speaker. We know that it’s a 

pretty thoughtful group of people and a very highly skilled and 

effective component in the health care team, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in terms of the specific changes being anticipated around 

scope of practice by the minister in this particular legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, I quote: 

 

Due to their accessibility, pharmacists are frequently 

patients’ first point of contact in the health care system. 

This is particularly true in rural areas where pharmacies 

may be open longer hours than medical clinics or may be 

more easily accessed than the clinic. 

 

That’s certainly true. There’s a cousin of mine that has done a 

fair amount of pharmacy work over the years in the Grenfell 

and Wolseley neck of the woods in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

And certainly you’ve got someone out there on the front lines of 

the health care delivery in this province — I know that it’s 

certainly true in her circumstance — that there’s a better use to 



5930 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

be made of all the skills and knowledge and health care wisdom 

that she possesses. 

 

And so again, if this enables better care in that regard and a 

better use of existing resources and a better sort of alignment of 

existing opportunities to deliver health care, we’ll see how that 

works out. But it would seem to be a reasonable proposition, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of “the amendments . . . will allow pharmacists to 

administer vaccines and drugs such as a flu shot and vitamin 

B12 shots,” again, going to scope of practice and better use 

thereof should be not a bad thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

. . . the amendments will enable pharmacists to order, 

access, and use laboratory tests, working in collaboration 

with a physician. As pharmacists move into a more 

clinical role, pharmacy technicians will assume more of 

the technical duties such as dispensing. To support this 

move, amendments will also regulate pharmacy 

technicians to ensure that they are able to independently 

assume many of these duties in a safe and effective 

manner. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to be a fair set of moves by 

this government. Certainly with that expanded scope of 

practice, there has to come an expanded oversight. So we’re 

interested to see how that works out. 

 

But I guess the other changes in the legislation as presented by 

the minister are very much in a housekeeping vein: changing 

the names of the legislation; clarifying the two separate 

pharmacy professions, pharmacists and pharmacy technicians; 

clarifying terminology concerning pharmacy ownership. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, these things would seem to be fairly 

straightforward. But as ever, we’ll be looking to do our 

homework and get our due diligence in on this to ensure that the 

good potential that seems to be evident here in the legislation is 

borne out in fact. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 143 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 143 — The 

Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today on Bill No. 143, An Act to amend The 

Degree Authorization Act. And this is relatively a short, 

straightforward piece of legislation. 

 

And I’ll talk a bit about it, but I do have to say, you know, 

sometimes you hear us on this side of the House talk about how 

the minister’s comments aren’t that long, but in this case they 

were quite extensive. I was wondering if he wanted to go, if he 

was working for our side that night with his speech. It was quite 

lengthy. What’s that? 

 

An Hon. Member: — New minister. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — New minister, yes. It was quite thorough and it 

provided quite a review of the degree authorization process. He 

was really doing his job. And so for that I do want to say 

thanks. And he does talk about the five or six circumstances 

where the grandfathering provision for allowing the new 

post-secondary institutions to get up to speed, be able to be in 

the right place to grant degrees, and it seemed each one had 

kind of a unique circumstance that was not allowing them to be 

in the place they wanted to be. But I found it very interesting. 

 

I mean the Act is straightforward. We actually do want to see 

. . . In many ways, we have a really well-educated population in 

many ways in Saskatchewan. In fact actually I think Saskatoon 

. . . I could be corrected by the folks but I think that Saskatoon 

at one time boasted the highest per capita degree-holding city in 

Canada. And it was quite something that we were very proud 

of. 

 

But it’s interesting to have other degree institutions come 

online, become available to our students in Saskatchewan 

throughout the province. And that’s an important thing. And of 

course, as we know, post-secondary learning is expanding in so 

many different ways that it’s very important that we make sure 

everything is done appropriately. 

 

Now the minister referenced the Saskatchewan Higher 

Education Quality Assurance Board and of course we haven’t 

heard much about that board since it was established a few 

years ago. And we’ll have questions about that: who is on the 

board, the kind of work they’re doing, the costs that are 

involved. But it’s an important board to have because their role 

is to make sure that when people do receive degrees and they do 

receive post-secondary education, a higher education in 

Saskatchewan, that there are assurances that it is the best 

possible, that it’s working at the level it should be. And it’s 

arm’s length, and that’s very, very important. And so we’ll have 

questions about that because we just want to be brought up to 

speed on that. 

 

It does talk about that they were part of the groups that were 

consulted with. The ministerial staff discussed the consultations 

with the stakeholders, including the quality assurance board, the 

institutions, and the broader Saskatchewan post-secondary 

sector. You know, I remember a few years ago when we were 

first talking about this, some of the groups that they hadn’t 

consulted with were students. And I don’t know if in this case 

they did talk to the students, particularly those who have been 

enrolled in these institutions that the government minister 

references, whether it’d be Briercrest College, Cape Breton 

University, Great Plains College, Athabasca University, and 

Lakeland College. 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5931 

What exactly has been their experience at these post-secondary 

institutions? Are they meeting the expectations of students? Are 

students experiencing success in terms of quality of learning 

and the outcomes that they were expecting to have, and then 

leading on to further training or leading on to a career? Is it 

really meeting the goals and objectives that we had heard this 

government set out a few years ago? 

 

[16:30] 

 

So I would be curious to know from the minister: did they 

consult with students and the student organizations that might 

be involved? I think that’s an important stakeholder group that’s 

important to hear from. As well we know that, and we’ve seen 

this and we saw this happen in the spring with another 

post-secondary bill that came forward, the one group that hadn’t 

been consulted were the faculties. Have the faculties been 

consulted with? The teachers, the instructors, were they part of 

the discussions at all in terms of these amendments? 

 

You know, they do seem relatively straightforward and we do 

want to be able to see these institutions succeed. And if we can 

make that happen, that’s a good thing. But we do not want to 

see a delay or . . . Well students are paying fees and having 

expectations. And if these institutions are in any way 

representing themselves in a way that they shouldn’t be, then 

it’s important that we don’t let this go on and on and on. Either 

they will be able to, you know, grant degrees or they will not be 

able to. So we need to have clarity around that. That’s why it’ll 

be interesting and it would be interesting to hear from the 

Saskatchewan Higher Education Quality Assurance Board. 

They’re not a very high-profile organization, and I don’t know 

if they need to be. I’m not demanding that they do much more 

than what they’re doing now, but I don’t know whether they 

have an annual report. How do they report out? How many 

times do they meet a year? What are their costs? What are the 

kind of questions that they’re dealing with? 

 

And so I think that it’s important that we know much more 

about that because I understand . . . And I don’t know what the 

role is when the minister talks about that they’ve been having 

discussions and consulted with stakeholders, including the 

quality assurance board. Were there other concerns that they 

brought forward? What were all the concerns, all the 

suggestions from the stakeholders? Was this the only one? Is 

this the only issue that they had was the fact that they weren’t 

going to meet their deadlines in terms of meeting the 

requirements around degrees? Were there other concerns that 

they had? We don’t know. I mean in terms of a lengthy speech 

like this, you would think maybe the minister would have 

identified them, but he clearly hadn’t, and I think that it’s 

important that we hear the full discussion. 

 

So if there is an annual report, we may be taking a look to see 

what they actually have been identifying. Or do they only report 

out to the minister? While being arm’s length, that’s very 

important, but do they only report out to the minister? I’m not 

sure about that. So is this something that cabinet is the only 

group that has access to this information? I’m not sure. 

 

So we have those kind of questions for the minister and it 

would be great, it’s always timely to have a full discussion 

about the state of affairs for, the state of affairs in terms of the 

quality of post-secondary education here in Saskatchewan. And 

if it can be informed by this board as it’s supposed to be, then 

that would be great to hear. And how do they keep in touch? 

How do people access, how do students access the quality 

assurance board? 

 

I don’t know if many students are aware that there is a 

Saskatchewan Higher Education Quality Assurance Board. Is it 

one that often has a presence at post-secondary facilities in our 

province? I have not heard many students talk about raising 

concerns to them. Do they meet on a regular basis with 

faculties, administration, and students? I’m not sure about that. 

 

So I have some questions about that. But as I say, this is a time 

these things get profiled. It gets profiled and we really have 

some interest in this because, as I say, you know, we take a lot 

of pride in our institutions here in Saskatchewan. And we know 

the University of Saskatchewan went through a major challenge 

last spring with TransformUS. And it would be interesting to 

know what the quality assurance board had to say about that, 

you know. And were they part of the discussions around 

TransformUS, or is this only for the smaller post-secondary 

organizations? Or do they have any thoughts, any comments 

around what’s happening at the University of Saskatchewan? 

 

Now the University of Regina, we always feel like we’ve got to 

give equal time. If we talk about University of Saskatchewan, 

you’ve got to definitely talk about University of Regina. Do 

they have any comments about University of Regina? I’d be 

curious to know about that as well. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think this is an interesting 

piece of legislation that allows us to ask further questions about 

how things are going in the post-secondary world, and I know 

that we will have those questions in committee. But at this 

point, I know many of my colleagues will want to get in on the 

debate on this piece of legislation, Bill No. 143, The Degree 

Authorization Act. Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment 

Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 148 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 148 — The Vital 

Statistics Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, and I believe thanks to the member from Regina South 

for the congratulations there, sir, whatever that was passing for. 

But, Mr. Speaker, vital statistics, certainly a vital debate before 

the House, and this is certainly something that again continues 



5932 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

to evolve as the situation presents in the province. 

 

Now in terms of what’s being presented here, Mr. Speaker, it 

would seem to, in the main, try to keep up with the proper 

delineation of powers, for example, properly identifying what is 

available to nurse practitioners for example as regards their 

abilities to sign off on medical certificates of those dead and 

stillborn, enabling the in-future addition of prescribed 

practitioners, enabling the minister to disclose vital statistics 

information in unique circumstances for circumstances not 

provided for in the legislation. 

 

I put a pin in that one, Mr. Speaker, and add parenthetically and 

gently, we’ll be interested to see what sort of unique 

circumstances not provided for in the legislation are actually 

anticipated by the minister. Again it provides a fairly big blank 

cheque in terms of what the minister may or may not approve 

of. And again, where you move these things out of the actual 

legislative and the prescribed authority into more of a notional 

and let the minister do what they will, it’s always pretty critical 

to make sure that you’ve got a very precise idea of what’s being 

anticipated to get this government on the record in terms of how 

they see that going forward and then of course measuring that 

up against the actual practice thereof. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of vital statistics, this is about as 

. . . information, you know, in terms of the developments 

around information technology. Certainly there are a lot of 

ramifications in that regard for vital statistics. 

 

As regards the sharing of information and the proper sharing of 

that information, Mr. Speaker, the minister in the second 

reading speech referenced: 

 

. . . the missing children’s project of the Truth and 

Reconciliation Commission of Canada requested death 

information for Aboriginal children who attended 

residential schools in Saskatchewan. [And stated that] . . . 

under the current legislation . . . [being] unable to provide 

information after the year 1945. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, there are some things that we’d like to 

see facilitated, and in terms of the important work of that — the 

TRC, or the Truth and Reconciliation Commission — we’ll be 

interested to see how this actually facilitates that. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that, you know, 

certainly is always evolving, be it on the technology side of the 

equation, but also questions of identity and how identities are 

properly recorded and put down on that official record. I know 

that even in the past decade, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had changes 

made to the legislation, and I think positive changes to 

accommodate the fact that you have same-sex couples, and the 

fact that the parents of a given child and how their authority 

relates to that child under the law is recorded by vital statistics 

or not, and making sure that the legislation keeps up with the 

realities of today’s families, Mr. Speaker. It’s important to see 

how the legislation either helps that or hinders. 

 

So in many regards, Mr. Speaker, this is information. It’s very 

interesting information presented by the minister concerning the 

changes being brought forward here. Again on the face of it, a 

lot of this would seem to be fairly straightforward or common 

sense. But, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly take our time to do the 

due diligence, to do the consultation, to make sure that things 

are as they seem, for one, and also, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

how this law might impact the law of unintended consequences 

and certainly what impacts this legislation might have. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know other of my colleagues have 

interest in the debate. And certainly we will pursue that through 

second readings, and it should be an interesting exchange come 

committee time. But for the meantime, I’d move to adjourn Bill 

No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 141 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 141 — The 

Archives and Public Records Management Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As an old 

and increasingly aged history student, it’s always with great 

interest to see things related to the archives come forward. And 

certainly the new Act around incorporating the amendments of 

what’s proposed here under The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act, it’s an interesting piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again archives, they’re sort of fundamental to what constitutes 

free and informed debate in our democratic society. They let us 

know our history and therefore let us know where we’ve been, 

where we might want to be going in the future, and where we 

might not want to be going in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the archives, it’s always pretty interesting to see things 

coming forward around the archives. But this consolidates 

existing legislation, that it seems to make a better recognition of 

the increasingly electronic nature of communications on the 

part of governments and the way that that translates into the 

public record. 

 

In terms of being more precise in terms of what is expected of 

different public officials in securing records and the deposit 

thereof with the archives, it’s an interesting piece of legislation 

and certainly, Mr. Speaker, we will have a great number of 

questions about how this relates to the stated intent of the 

legislation. 

 

And I know that other of my colleagues have questions about 

this legislation as well. We’ve got more consultation to 

undertake certainly, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll engage in that. But 

for the time being, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

141, The Archives and Public Records Management Act. 

 



November 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5933 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 141, The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Bill No. 142 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 142 — The 

Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve spoken about 

this before in the past, but sometimes consequential 

amendments are seemingly less than consequential in the way 

that they are presented. But of course this relates to changes 

ushering forth from to a couple of different pieces of legislation 

necessitated by the changes to The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act. 

 

So in terms of the word changes anticipated by this in The 

Evidence Act and The Education Act, it would seem to be fairly 

straightforward, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll be following up to 

ensure that that is in fact the case. But for the time being, I 

would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 142, The Archives 

and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 142, The Archives and Public Records 

Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 147 — The Class 

Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 

pleasure to rise and join debate on Bill No. 147, The Class 

Actions Act, and certainly it’s a fairly succinct piece of 

legislation. And again as regards certain of these things, Mr. 

Speaker, it will be interesting to see how what is a relatively 

succinct piece of legislation might have broader impact. And 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, I’d draw your attention to the proposed 

section 40(4) under costs, and this is again from the draft 

legislation. Quote. This is, again, section 40(4): “This section 

applies to proceedings commenced and costs incurred before, 

on or after this section comes into force.” 

 

This is a retroactive piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 

be interested to gain a more precise understanding from the 

minister as to why this is necessary, for one, and then two, what 

other sort of applications this will have across the piece in terms 

of either suits currently joined or in the legal environment 

already. But why the need for this to be retroactive? It would be 

one question we’ll have for the minister. 

 

And certainly it’s, I don’t know if it’s terribly well addressed in 

the minister’s second reading remarks. Certainly with those 

second reading remarks, Mr. Speaker, there are some good 

insights to the other aspects of the legislation, a bit of an 

overview of the history of the legislation itself. But as regards 

the burning need for retroactivity, well we’ve got the questions 

ongoing for that. 

 

But certainly as ever, Mr. Speaker, the second reading speeches 

of ministers are interesting things and I’d refer today again to 

that second reading speech, the legislation itself being fairly 

short — one page long and a few subsections to go. But again 

that one particular aspect of retroactivity, Mr. Speaker, one 

clause, but huge, potentially huge impacts. 

 

As regards the . . . [inaudible] . . . the minister’s comments, 

quote: 

 

. . . when class action legislation was first introduced in 

Saskatchewan, the court’s normal discretion to award 

costs in the regular course of proceedings was removed. 

This was done out of concern that the threat of large cost 

awards could deter legitimate claimants from participating 

in class action matters. Albert and Nova Scotia’s class 

action legislation has demonstrated that a more balanced 

approach can be taken rather than prohibiting cost awards 

outright in class action litigation. This bill is based on the 

approach taken in those jurisdictions. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking to gain better 

understanding of what has that experience been from those 

other jurisdictions. The minister is correct. That was certainly 

one of the cautions that was flagged when class action 

legislation was first brought in, I believe, about a decade ago. 

My colleague from Lakeview refreshed my memory. But 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, in terms of being a legitimate concern, 

the minister has got that right, but we’ll be interested to see how 

that has played out in Alberta and Nova Scotia and again how 

that impacts the legislation under consideration here today. 

 

Again the minister related that: 

 

. . . this bill will provide courts authority to award costs in 

class actions in appropriate circumstances. In allowing 

costs to be assessed, the bill will also provide the judge 

discretion to take into consideration the following factors 

when deciding . . . to award costs: the public interest, 

whether the action involves a novel point of law, whether 

the action is a test case, access to justice for members of 

the public using class action proceedings, and any other 



5934 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2014 

factors that the court considers appropriate. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be interested to see how the current 

experience of the practice of the class action legislation, how 

that has related to those various categories iterated by the 

minister. And it will be interesting to see again if there are 

specific cases that are prompting the action in this legislation. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, quoting from the minister’s second reading 

speech: 

 

. . . these amendments to The Class Actions Act will 

restore the discretion to courts to control their own 

processes, as in regular litigation matters, while still 

addressing the unique access-to-justice concerns that arise 

with class action litigation. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of it having been a relatively new 

legislation . . . and there’s certainly been a desire to gain the 

experience. That would seem to be a fair point. And again, 

we’ll be interested to see just what the contours of that reboot of 

the authority of the courts looks like as regards to this piece of 

legislation, and we’ll be following that closely. 

 

But lastly, Mr. Speaker, I return to the question of retroactivity, 

and again this is a fairly unique characteristic of legislation. The 

section 40(4), we will be interested to know if there’s a specific 

case anticipated by this particular clause. We’ll be interested to 

know what cases might be impacted by this particular clause. 

We’ll be interested to note just what is bringing this 

retroactivity forward. Because again, Mr. Speaker, retroactivity 

in legislation is a fairly remarkable occurrence and usually, to 

borrow a phrase, usually legislation’s on a go-forward basis. 

But the way that this reaches into the past, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 

be interested to see what in particular it might be reaching for or 

what’s prompting that retroactivity. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a lot more questions to ask 

about this legislation. Certainly my colleagues are interested in 

this debate as well and will be looking to participate in these 

adjourned debate proceedings. But for the time being, I’d move 

to adjourn debate on Bill No. 147, An Act to amend The Class 

Actions Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:55.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5905 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5905 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5905 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5905 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5905 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5906 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5906 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5906 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5906 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5906 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Statement of Thanks 

  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5907 

 Treaty 6 Document Comes Home 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5907 

 Awards Presented at Francophone Gala 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5907 

 Good Wishes for Hockey Hero 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5907 

 Habitat for Humanity Build in Weyburn 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5908 

 Regina Sikh Community Hosts Supper Night 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5908 

 Small Business Receives Entrepreneurial Resiliency Award 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5908 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Patient Care and the Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5909 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5909 

 Long-Term Care for Seniors 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5911 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5911 

 Food Bank Usage and Social Programs 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5912 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5912 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5913 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5913 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5914 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5915 

 Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

 Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5916 

 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5916 

 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5918 

 Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5918 

 



 

 Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5921 

 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5922 

 Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5923 

 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence 

 Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5925 

 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5925 

 Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5927 

 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5928 

 Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5929 

 Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5930 

 Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5931 

 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5932 

 Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5933 

 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5933 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


