
























































Hansard: November 13, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 12A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5829 
 November 13, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour for me to introduce to you and through you, seated in 
your gallery, John McGettigan who is the president of the 
Saskatoon Teachers’ Association. John spent 21 years as a 
teacher. He taught at Holy Cross for 12 years and he has been 
president of the STA [Saskatoon Teachers’ Association] for 
four years, doing very good work on behalf of teachers in 
Saskatoon. He is a graduate of the University of Saskatchewan, 
resides in Saskatoon with his wife who is a principal and his 
nine-year-old daughter Grace and their 12-year-old son Seamus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that he is a passionate believer in 
education best practices. He was instrumental in getting Pasi 
Sahlberg to come to the province, an education leader who also 
stresses the importance of measurement in student achievement. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education also tells me that 
from time to time when he’s not working, when he’s not 
leading in education, he may enjoy the occasional Guinness. 
But this is a reference from the Minister of Education, so I’ll 
actually rely on John to provide us the truth a little bit later on. 
Maybe he’ll share some stories about the Minister of Education 
that are more based in reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the House to please 
join with me in welcoming John to his Legislative Assembly 
and thanking him for his leadership in education in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly a 
pleasure to join with the Premier and introduce John 
McGettigan to his legislature — a good friend, a fantastic 
teacher, an educational leader and community leader in this 
province. Certainly his wife is an exceptional principal as well, 
and certainly their whole family gives a whole lot back to our 
province. Thankful for John’s leadership in education and 
particularly thankful for his work directly with Pasi Sahlberg 
and in bringing Pasi to do some work here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I know that John recently had the opportunity to also go down 
and do a little teaching down in Harvard and assist with one of 
Pasi’s programs, which is certainly pretty special. So not only is 
John a great leader in the community but I too have enjoyed a 
pint or two with John McGettigan, Mr. Speaker. I ask all to 
welcome to John to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, sitting in the west gallery we’ve got a group of 22 

students — grades 11’s and 12’s, I believe — that are in the law 
30 class. And accompanying them is Mr. Clayton Ford, a good 
friend of a couple of people on this side of the House. I’m 
looking forward to their questions later, knowing full well that 
I’m going to inevitably be stumped. So I look forward to being 
stumped. I’d like to have all members join me in welcoming the 
group from O’Neill High School today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member, Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, just briefly I’d 
like to join with the member from Coronation Park to welcome 
a friend and a fine teacher as well sitting in the west gallery. 
And that would be Mr. Clayton Ford who’s here with the 
O’Neill class that’s here today. And it’s a pleasure to have 
Clayton here today as well as these students from O’Neill. I was 
speaking to them a little bit before about the battle of Argyle 
Street which I knew well as a Thom Trojan, just up the street 
from O’Neill, growing up. It’s a pleasure to have these students 
in their Assembly here today, along with Mr. Ford. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. 
 
We know that in September this year this government walked 
away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable housing 
project in Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take 
control of and then rent the units at full market price. When 
asked to explain how the government could allow a private 
developer to back out of a fixed-price contract without any 
penalties, the Minister of Social Services said, and I quote, 
“You’re assuming there’s these desperate homeless people,” 
showing how disconnected this government is from the realities 
within our communities. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our province 
and to immediately reverse its policy of now allowing 
private developers with whom the government has close 
relationships to default on fixed-price contracts for 
affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan people concerned 
with the dangerous conditions created on Dewdney Avenue by 
that government and the fact that they’re calling on this 
government to address the unsafe conditions and move this 
heavy-haul truck traffic off of Dewdney Avenue to ensure that 
families, residents, users are safe, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer 



5830 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 
across Regina including directly on Dewdney Avenue. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to rise 
to present a petition regarding the dangerous smart meter 
program introduced by this government. The individuals that 
have signed this are concerned about a number of things. The 
government knew about major safety concerns related to the 
smart meter project. The government ignored those safety 
concerns and plowed ahead with the program, and where the 
safety of families has been put at significant risk. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, these individuals 
request that this Legislative Assembly take the following 
action: to cause the provincial government to take 
responsibility for its failure to act on readily available 
information about safety concerns with its smart meter 
program, including through the immediate resignation of 
the Minister Responsible for SaskPower, and a fully 
independent inquiry into the concerning chain of events 
that severely compromised the safety of Saskatchewan 
families. 

 
I so submit this petition, Mr. Speaker, and it’s signed by folks 
from Regina, Saskatoon, and Martensville. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

New Housing for Recovering Addicts 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the 
House to talk about a wonderful new home for five individuals 
recovering from addictions that is opening in Regina later 
today. 
 
As residents of Saskatchewan, many people know that our 
provincial motto is “from many peoples, strength.” The creation 
of a fourth Oxford House Society home in Regina illustrates the 
meaning of this motto. Its formation has been a truly 
collaborative process. It’s been about caring for others by 
helping five people to move forward in a safe and stable 

environment. Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted that our government, 
along with the Government of Canada through the Investment 
in Affordable Housing Agreement, jointly contributed more 
than $260,000 to this project. 
 
Since November 2007 we have contributed to the development 
of 2,238 new rental units in Regina that are completed or under 
construction. Mr. Speaker, these initiatives and the partnerships 
behind them demonstrate the strength and ingenuity that is 
required if we are to support those in need of housing and 
addiction treatment. 
 
By working with community-based organizations such as 
Oxford House Society, we are on the right track. Mr. Speaker, 
our goal is to keep Regina moving forward and Saskatchewan 
strong. Our government will always do what it can to achieve 
that mark. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Power of Humanity Gala 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday I had the 
distinct pleasure to attend the Canadian Red Cross Power of 
Humanity Gala. The event was spectacular as ever, and I was 
thrilled to see such a strong turnout for an organization so 
important for so many families in our province. 
 
There were two remarkable people who received awards at last 
week’s event: Ms. Ashlee Longmoore and Ms. Kellie Garrett. 
Ashlee was the recipient of the Young Humanitarian of the 
Year Award. She contributes to her community through her 
work with the families of children with disabilities at the 
Planned Lifetime Advocacy Network, the survivors of sexual 
assault at the Regina Sexual Assault Centre, and with literacy 
programs at the Next Chapter Book Club. Her community spirit 
and volunteerism are truly admirable.  
 
Kellie Garrett was awarded the Humanitarian of the Year 
Award for her many years of community service. Her work 
with the families of children living with autism and also in 
coaching has touched many lives, and she shows no signs of 
stopping any time soon. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank everyone on the Red 
Cross board who helped to make this event a success. And I 
would ask all members to join me in congratulating Kellie and 
Ashlee on their well-deserved awards and in thanks for the 
differences they make in the lives of many every day. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Canadian Feed Research Centre Opens 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 24th I had 
the pleasure of attending the grand opening of the University of 
Saskatchewan Canadian Feed Research Centre in North 
Battleford. 
 
This $13.9 million feed research centre is a major Canada 
Foundation for Innovation-led project in partnership with the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Western Economic 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5831 

Diversification, and Cargill’s animal nutrition business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Feed Research Centre is very 
unique. Its possibilities range from laboratory to pilot plant to 
larger industrial-scale research capabilities. Mr. Speaker, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is pleased to have invested $5 
million into the establishment of the Canadian Feed Research 
Centre. This centre will help support the Saskatchewan plan for 
growth and, with that, the livestock strategy developed by our 
government to assist producers to increase livestock farm cash 
receipts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the equipment in this research centre is at the 
leading edge of technology and innovation. For example, the 
research centre in North Battleford will be home to the BoMill 
TriQ seed sorter. This is the first time this sorter will be tested 
and used in North America. Only one of four in the world, the 
seed sorter is able to process three metric tonnes per hour and 
has a high-volume sorting capacity that can be ramped up to 
30,000 seeds per second. One of the diseases it is able to detect 
is fusarium, which has been an issue with our cereal crops this 
year. By being able to sort kernel by kernel, they are able to 
take a grain sample that graded as feed and turn it into malt 
barley or good milling wheat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
the University of Saskatchewan and its partners on the grand 
opening of the Canadian Feed Research Centre in North 
Battleford. And we look forward to the value it adds to our 
agriculture economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Family Physician of the Year and Family Doctor Week 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in this 
Assembly today in recognition of Family Doctor Week. Every 
year the College of Family Physicians of Canada chooses this 
week in November to celebrate the important contributions of 
family doctors in our country. These professionals work 
tirelessly to make our communities better and healthier places. 
 
One such person is Dr. Nora McKee, a physician from 
Saskatoon. She has been recognized by the College of Family 
Physicians of Canada with a Reg L. Perkin Award as 
Saskatchewan’s Family Physician of the Year. She has worked 
for many years to give her patients the best possible care, all the 
while working as an associate professor at the College of 
Medicine to help guide our province’s next generation of 
physicians. 
 
Family Doctor Week is also a time for all of us to reflect upon 
how much needs to be done to fix health care in our province. A 
family physician should be the first place a person turns to 
when they fall ill, but far too many families don’t have family 
doctors and wait for hours in emergency rooms and walk-in 
clinics. Too many rural communities have to scrape by without 
the care they deserve. 
 
I hope that all members will join me in congratulating Dr. 
McKee on her award and will fight for things that matter in 
health care. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Managing Agricultural Drainage 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today our 
government released the results of online consultations related 
to the issue of agricultural drainage. The most comprehensive 
public consultation ever undertaken in the province on this issue 
was conducted by the Water Security Agency through an online 
forum between the fall of 2013 to the spring of 2014. We 
received nearly 500 submissions from participants who 
discussed various options for managing drainage in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in last month’s Throne Speech, our government 
committed to undertake further consultations with stakeholders 
to move forward with updating and improving drainage 
regulations in Saskatchewan that have been in place for 
decades. 
 
It is not just our government that knows that this is an important 
initiative. Mark Wartman, regional vice-president of Nature 
Conservancy Canada for the Saskatchewan region said: 
 

Wetlands are important to the biodiversity of 
Saskatchewan and we are pleased to hear that 
[Saskatchewan] . . . is developing new regulations which 
will protect and improve the health of Saskatchewan’s 
wetlands. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the results of our online consultations will 
complement further work with our stakeholders in the coming 
months. The input from Saskatchewan people will be crucial as 
we develop new regulations that will present a modern, 
sensible, and sustainable approach to agricultural drainage. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Happy Memories of Danceland 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure every member here 
today is familiar with the Danceland hall located in Manitou 
Beach. Perhaps a few members have even been there and 
danced on their unique and famous dance floor which was built 
on top of horsehair. 
 
Millie and Arnie Strueby have played a major part in the 
fascinating history of Danceland. After 14 years of owning and 
operating the facility, the Struebys are ready to retire and have 
sold the famous dance hall. The Strueby’s history with 
Danceland started back in the ’70s when Millie, a musician, 
was part of a swing band from the Watrous area. In 2001 they 
purchased the facility.  
 
Millie states that buying the building just made sense. They 
were both musicians, and Arnie knew many people in the music 
field. Running the business has not always been easy. Millie 
compared it to farming, saying that there were good years and 



5832 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

bad years. 
 
The hall was built in 1930 for big band music. Over time the 
music has changed. The Struebys have experimented with rock 
concerts and even rented Danceland out for special events such 
as weddings, but they feel they also need to keep the traditional, 
old-time music like square dancing, polka, and swing. 
 
Many famous musicians have come from all over Canada and 
the United States to Danceland. There’s a legend that Elvis 
himself played at Danceland when he came alongside a 
headlining act before he was famous. Strueby recalls they have 
quite a few people declare, I was here when Elvis was here. 
 
The Struebys will miss the people and the happy memories that 
have been the past 14 years. Millie does hope the new owners 
will keep Danceland in an original state. She has no idea what it 
is going to be like, but in her mind would like to see it stay a 
dance hall. 
 
I ask all members of the House to help me in thanking Millie 
and Arnie Strueby for all their hard work in keeping Danceland 
the iconic place it has been. We wish them all the best in the 
future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Diabetes Awareness 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, November is 
diabetes month, and tomorrow, November the 14th, is World 
Diabetes Day. I want to express our gratitude to all those who 
work in the field of diabetic detection, prevention, and 
managing this disease. In particular I want to express thanks to 
the Moose Jaw Early Bird Lions Club for their initiative to raise 
awareness of diabetes. 
 
Earlier this month, I along with the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow attended the free risk assessment clinic organized by 
the Early Bird Lions Club. The clinic, held in the Town ‘n’ 
Country Mall, encouraged residents to participate by taking a 
simple blood pressure test and answering a few questions 
regarding lifestyle which could determine the risk factor of 
diabetes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, diabetes is a terrible disease. And although it is 
manageable, it takes a tremendous toll on our health, and a great 
cost to our health care system. It’s estimated that 90,000 people 
in Saskatchewan are currently living with diabetes. We know 
there is a growing number of Saskatchewan people who are 
considered to be at high risk. Type 2 diabetes is particularly 
challenging, as it is preventable. By better understanding type 2 
diabetes, we can do our part to successfully manage it and 
ideally avoid it altogether by living healthier and more active 
lifestyles. 
 
Thank you to the Moose Jaw Early Bird Lions Club and all 
participants at the risk management program for playing an 
important role in the health and well-being of the people of the 
province and in our community. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Costs, Benefits, and Contract Terms 
for the Lean Initiative 

 
Mr. Broten: — My question is for the Premier. When will this 
government stop shovelling tens of millions of dollars to its 
toxic American lean consultant? When will we be free of John 
Black? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, lean initiatives across the 
Government of Saskatchewan have already afforded savings of 
$57 million. Moreover, moreover, Mr. Speaker, we can point 
out to members opposite and people across the province that 
there have been significant improvements in terms of care 
because of lean events and continuous improvement in the 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen cancellations of appointments, in 
terms of mental health appointments, eliminated. We’ve seen 
the streamlining of wait times in terms of pediatric care on an 
emergency basis. 
 
I’m sure we’ll have an opportunity to go over a number of very 
specific examples of where lean is affording Saskatchewan 
people better care and saving money. The answer to the 
member’s question is, we will continue doing those things. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — The question was, when will we be free of John 
Black? When will the contract with John Black end? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The answer is found in the contract as in a 
matter of the public record. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — What we’ve seen with this government, Mr. 
Speaker, is that it’s all about optics. We have seen, Mr. 
Speaker, this government claim that they are having the 
contract end in the end of June with John Black. But we know, 
Mr. Speaker, that this government’s approach is simply about 
optics and the truth is something different. 
 
Here’s what John Black says: “The primary package of work 
will end June 30th, 2015, with the remainder of work to be 
completed July and September, 2015.” It almost sounds like the 
go-forward truth basis nonsense that the Premier dreamed up a 
couple of weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. It’s like, okay, it ends in 
June. But in reality then, all the other work carries on in the 
following months. It’s ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is to the Premier. When will this government 
finally cut all ties with John Black? What is the date? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5833 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve already gone over the 
many improvements in terms of patient care in the province, 
outcomes for Saskatchewan people, and savings afforded by 
lean. 
 
The answer to the . . . We’ve already answered this question 
from the member opposite and the other members that are now 
chirping from their seat, and the answer of course is prescribed 
in the contract. There’s an option for renewal through 
September, Mr. Speaker. We have every expectation it’ll 
conclude at the end of June. This is all a matter of the public 
record and hidden carefully away on the Internet. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier can pretend this is a 
joke, but this government has been leading people to believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that the contract would be ending in June. Internal 
documents show a very different story. They show that this 
government is planning to continue having John Black run 
North American tours, kanban, kaizen events, and rapid and 
process improvement workshops in July, August, and 
September, all of which are after the June deadline that has been 
touted by the minister and by the Premier. I suppose that’s what 
John Black means when he says the primary work will end in 
June and then all the other work will go forward in the 
following months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the Premier: how much more money will be spent on John 
Black and Associates after the primary package of work? What 
is the cost for the remaining work that will be done? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is no cost. But we will 
continue with lean across government. We’re going to continue 
with partnerships such as the one that we’ll have with the 
Virginia Mason Medical Centre that also uses John Black and 
Associates, that has also undertaken continuous improvement, 
that is also doing lean, as is the Children’s Hospital of Seattle; 
as is ThedaCare in Wisconsin; as is, Mr. Speaker, 
Massachusetts General Hospital; Johns Hopkins; the Cleveland 
Clinic; University of California, Los Angeles Medical Center; 
the New York-Presbyterian; University of Pennsylvania; and 
Mr. Speaker, the Mayo Clinic who this minister will soon visit 
in Rochester, because why, Mr. Speaker? The Mayo Clinic has 
started down the road of lean but they’re interested in learning 
from Saskatchewan. 
 
The Mayo Clinic seems to think we might be doing the right 
thing in the province of Saskatchewan, and so now we’re left to 
choose. We’re left to choose in terms of who we will take our 
medical advice from — the Leader of the Opposition and his 
pet project, his pet obsession with lean or the Mayo Clinic. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, internal documents show that 
John Black won’t even be done coming to Saskatchewan after 
September. And, Mr. Speaker, according to John Black’s very 
own pay schedule, he is certainly not doing it for free as the 
Premier just suggested. No, he is going to keep milking this 
cash cow for every last drop, and this Premier, this government 

just keeps offering it up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The North American tours, the North American tours where 
people are taken from their jobs and travel around the United 
States, Mr. Speaker, with John Black as their tour guide, you 
know how much John Black’s being paid for that? Almost 
$200,000 according to the pay schedule from the internal 
documents, Mr. Speaker. It looks like there is no end, no end to 
the cheques that this Premier and this government will sign 
when it comes to John Black and this lean pet project. 
 
My question to the Premier: is it actually true that health care 
workers from Saskatchewan will be sent on costly North 
American tours with John Black as their guide? And if it’s not 
true, when will those tours end? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the question of 
the hon. member is yes. People in the health care system will 
continue to travel to other localities in our country and in the 
United States to learn more about continuous improvement. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to go to places like the 
Virginia Mason Medical Centre. They’re going to go to places 
like the Children’s Hospital of Seattle. They’re going to go to 
many, many other institutions including the Mayo Clinic 
perhaps. I’m not sure if they’ll go to the Mayo. The Mayo’s 
coming here to find out a little bit more about lean and to 
develop a fellowship with the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP [New Democratic Party] were in 
power, I’m sure officials travelled to other places and accepted 
visits from other places, accepted visits from other places to 
learn more, to share best practices. And once again we have to 
watch our hon. friend, because he likes to torque things a little 
bit. Let’s be very clear. Let’s be very clear about the price that 
he just referenced. It’s all part of the contract. It’s all part of the 
contract which ends in June, as prescribed by the Health 
minister. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a matter of the public record, 
but we’re happy to have him spend all of question period if he 
likes. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this story coming from the 
Premier and from the minister and from the internal documents 
and John Black’s own words in his email are not adding up, Mr. 
Speaker. The Health minister says it ends in June. Then the 
Premier says that there’s no additional cost. But we have John 
Black saying that he’s doing tours as the tour guide at 200,000 
bucks a pop, taking health care workers all over the province. 
We asked the country, the States. We asked the Premier when 
this is going to end and he says it’s going to continue. John 
Black, Mr. Speaker, if we know one thing about John Black is 
he does not work for free. We have seen that time and time 
again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we see, Mr. Speaker, that this will carry on for years. 
Within the contract, in the internal documents, John Black is 
actually, will be coming back to Saskatchewan to do audits on 
our health care system. It’s unbelievable. The same toxic 
consultant, Mr. Speaker, that senior administrators say tattle on 
individuals. They show that he gossips. He shows that he 



5834 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

undermines authority, Mr. Speaker. It’s unbelievable. 
 
My question to the Premier: how many times a year will John 
Black be flying back to Saskatchewan to audit the 
Saskatchewan health care system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, now he’s up to $200,000 a 
pop. I guess that means a trip. The problem with our hon. friend 
is he gets really, really excited. And as he gets more and more 
excited, the facts become sort of further and further away from 
his presentation in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the documents will note that there is a total 
contract. The total contract will come to an end in June of next 
year. There’s an option to renew, Mr. Speaker, which may or 
may not be exercised. If it will, that will also be part of the 
public record. And all along, all along the whole contract to the 
government will cost $35 million. We’ve already saved $60 
million and seen improved patient outcomes, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to continue to see those outcomes, and then when 
John Black’s contract is finished, all the capacity will exist in 
this province to continue to provide that lean training. 
 
Well, and members laugh. Once again I’d point out there’s an 
institution called the Mayo Clinic that’s interested in precisely 
what we’re doing. They want to enter into a fellowship with the 
Government of Saskatchewan. So once again we’re left with a 
choice: the increasingly excited and animated Leader of the 
Opposition and his health care advice, or the Mayo Clinic. 
We’ll choose them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier needs to be clear with 
Saskatchewan people because there is a different story coming 
from the minister, from the Premier, from John Black, and from 
senior administrators within the health care region. John Black 
thinks he is leading tours for Saskatchewan health care workers 
in the States until 2017 and, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think he’s 
doing that for free. 
 
My question to the Premier: will those tours be continuing to 
2017? How much are we paying, and why has he led 
Saskatchewan people to believe that this contract and the bills 
will be ending in June? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because in terms of the financial 
obligations of the Government of Saskatchewan, that’s when it 
ends. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Community Health Clinic 
 
Ms. Chartier: — SWITCH, the student wellness initiative 
toward community health, provides incredibly valuable 

after-hours health care, clinical, and outreach services from the 
Westside Community Clinic in Saskatoon. Until this month the 
SWITCH clinic was open three days a week, but financial 
constraints have forced it to scrap its Saturday clinic. To the 
minister: what is this government doing to help? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think members will know, and the public may not 
know, but SWITCH receives funding from a number of 
different sources on an annual basis. Certainly the Ministry of 
Health is a part of that through the Saskatoon Health Region. 
We provide $50,000 a year in funding. Saskatoon Health 
Region provides an additional, I believe this year it was 
$20,000 for some targeted funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the $50,000, it’s certainly my 
expectation that those dollars will continue. They do good 
work, and I’m looking forward to meeting with the executive 
director and the leadership of SWITCH in the coming weeks to 
have a further discussion about how we can continue their good 
work into the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina . . . excuse 
me, for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The SWITCH clinic serves many vulnerable 
people in the core area of Saskatoon, and by doing so, it helps 
reduce the strain on St. Paul’s Hospital. Better core funding for 
this important program should be a no-brainer for this 
government. Better core funding. Even if the government 
cancelled just two of John Black’s North American lean tours, 
just two, Mr. Speaker, it could cover the entire annual budget of 
SWITCH. To the minister: will he commit today to scrounge 
together more money to help restore the clinic hours for 
SWITCH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I will commit to a meeting with SWITCH. We’ve 
already set up a meeting to discuss how we can ensure that their 
good work continues into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do provide funding through the Ministry of 
Health. That has not changed. That will not change. But 
obviously they have other funding sources through donors, 
through volunteer activities, through fundraisers, Mr. Speaker. 
So I do look forward to having a discussion with them on how 
we can see their work continue on into the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Smart Meter Program 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, both the SaskPower 
minister and the spokesperson the minister now repeatedly 
hides behind said yesterday that SaskPower will pay for the fire 
damage caused to homes by the dangerous smart meters. It’s 
absolutely fair for these costs not to be borne by the families 
who have experienced meter fires, and government should 
definitely be there to help. But it’s not fair for Saskatchewan 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5835 

ratepayers to be covering the costs of these damages. The failed 
manufacturer should. To the Premier: what is he doing to 
recover that money from the failed manufacturer of these 
dangerous, fire-prone smart meters? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, early on the 
Government of Saskatchewan worked out with Sensus an 
agreement where $24 million would be refunded to the people 
of Saskatchewan. There was a credit for $18 million and then 
$5 million for a program of testing meters here in the province 
in the future. 
 
SaskPower is involved in discussions with the affected 
ratepayers with respect to the property damage that they have 
been . . . unfortunate has happened with respect to their 
properties. And between them and insurance, the total costs will 
be covered by them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, my question wasn’t for the 
minister who shouldn’t be a minister anymore, and a minister 
who’s failed Saskatchewan people, a minister whose story 
changes by the day, and a minister who’s sold out the safety of 
Saskatchewan people. My question is to the Premier: did the 
government’s secret deal with Sensus, signed knowing that 
there were serious safety concerns, include any provisions for 
the manufacturer to cover the costs of the damage done to 
people’s homes by these dangerous, explosive meters? Yes or 
no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — You know, you know, Mr. Speaker, this 
member opposite comes into the Assembly on a regular basis 
providing all kinds of misinformation to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The member opposite, the member opposite said 
in the early stages of this that technical decisions should not be 
made by politicians. Well perhaps he should follow some of his 
own advice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, early on the member came in here and he said that 
smart meters were caused by . . . problems were caused by 
unqualified installers. Wrong, Mr. Speaker. Not only were there 
five of these meters installed by qualified journeyman 
electricians, the report by Ritenburg & Associates proves that 
this was not the problem that has resulted. 
 
Then the member opposite says that PECO in Philadelphia 
abandoned Sensus following the smart meter incidents in 
Philadelphia. Wrong again, Mr. Speaker. In fact, PECO still 
works with Sensus, using both their network and their meters, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then, of course, the leadership team over there then sets up 
the poor old member from Nutana to come into the legislature 
with a Dwain Lingenfelter-style attack in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. And it just continues and continues from that member 
opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again that question was to 
the Premier, not to the minister whose story has changed every 
step of the way, has sold out Saskatchewan people’s safety, and 
who is ultimately responsible for having dangerous smart 
meters strapped to the homes of Saskatchewan people all across 
this province. 
 
And this story just gets more ridiculous really every day. Now 
we know this government expects Saskatchewan people to give 
Sensus, the failed manufacturer, millions of dollars — a gift 
from Saskatchewan people — hard-earned ratepayers’ dollars. 
And now that minister also thinks that Saskatchewan people 
should also be paying for the damage caused by those smart 
meters. All of these costs are simply added to the power bills of 
Saskatchewan people, and it’s entirely unacceptable that this 
government is causing this. 
 
To the Premier: how is this fair to Saskatchewan people, and 
why won’t he stand up to fight to get our dollars back? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, in addition, in addition to all 
the other things that the member opposite has got wrong, we’ll 
just add to that list. The member came into the Assembly and 
says, why don’t you just do it like they’ve done in Saskatoon 
and use the meters that Saskatoon is using? When indeed, of 
course, that’s wrong as well, Mr. Speaker. Those meters will 
not work in all of Saskatchewan, and I think the member 
opposite knows that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yes, just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite said 
that the householder here in Saskatchewan that was affected by 
the smart meter fire most recently had not been contacted. 
Wrong again, Mr. Speaker. Wrong again, Mr. Speaker. In fact, 
SaskPower contacted the owner the very next day to discuss 
damage claims that they may have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a new NDP team over there, but it’s the same 
old Dwain Lingenfelter-style NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I would caution the member for Regina 
Rosemont to be careful with his words both on and off the 
record. I won’t ask him to apologize, but be careful from now 
on. 
 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Costs for Boundary Dam Carbon Capture Project 
 
Ms. Sproule: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the 
SaskPower minister. What is the total final cost to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers of the Boundary dam carbon capture 
project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure the final costs 
are in. It’ll be an approximate range of $1.4 billion for the 
carbon capture facility as well as the upgrades to the power 
facility, the power island as it’s known, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a project that’s getting worldwide acclaim. It’s a project 



5836 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

that I think many people are recognizing that is setting the 
standards for the world in terms of clean coal generation for the 
future, Mr. Speaker. This is a project that has the support of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. We just wonder whether it has 
the members’ opposite support. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I hope the SaskPower minister is 
being entirely honest with that number, because we’ve heard 
from insiders that the actual total cost is about $1.6 billion. And 
for some reason SaskPower has taken their press release off 
their website, so we can’t read that anymore. 
 
Saskatchewan people deserve to have the full picture. Here’s 
another specific question for the SaskPower minister. Do 
taxpayers actually own the technology, and can we 
commercialize it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, of course it’s not the 
technology that SaskPower would be making available or 
perhaps commercializing in the future. It’s the knowledge that 
has been gained through the whole process. 
 
The technologies are a combination of technologies that are 
used in various circumstances around the world in different 
types of applications. It’s the bringing together of all that 
information that has resulted in the project, a very successful 
project, down in the southeast part of our province. We generate 
electricity from a vast supply of coal that we have down in that 
part of the province, Mr. Speaker. So this is something that 
SaskPower is looking at, the commercialization opportunities 
perhaps that are available to the people of Saskatchewan as a 
result of what they have learned through this project. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is that the technology 
is owned by Cansolv Technologies, a subsidiary of Shell Global 
Solutions. And they are the ones who will be able to 
commercialize this, not SaskPower. That’s a crucial point that 
this government has conveniently glossed over. The taxpayer 
paid for it, but we don’t own it. How can Saskatchewan people 
judge the true merits of this project without proper 
transparency? 
 
Here’s another specific question for the tired SaskPower 
minister: what’s the selling price for the carbon that this 
government negotiated with Cenovus? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the carbon, the 
CO2 that is being captured has been contracted to Cenovus 
down in the southeast part of Saskatchewan. I think that’s a 
matter of public record. I will check that, but I believe it’s in the 
range of about $25 per tonne. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’re looking for the exact 
pricing that was arrived from Cenovus. Twenty-five dollars per 
tonne is the minister’s guess. We would like to know what the 
actual figure is. Saskatchewan people need proper transparency 
from this government in order to judge the true merits of this 
massive, expensive project. 
 
Perhaps the SaskPower minister will answer this question: how 
much revenue does this government expect from the sale of 
sulphuric acid? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Obviously there are a number of 
components with respect to this that SaskPower is working with 
in terms of this. There’s obviously the CO2. There’s a number 
of other things that are a part of this, Mr. Speaker. We can get 
the exact information. We can get the exact information. We’d 
be happy to do that for the member opposite, to pass it on to 
them. 
 
But what I would say is that this is a project that’s getting 
worldwide renown, Mr. Speaker. People from across the world 
are coming to Saskatchewan to view it. There’s been a great 
deal of private sector investment into this project, Mr. Speaker. 
This project is very, very successful for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it’s time that the members opposite got on 
board. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Again, Mr. Speaker, no real answer from this 
poor, tired SaskPower minister. These are important questions, 
and we need real answers if we’re going to be able to judge the 
true merits of this project. Perhaps he’ll actually answer this 
question. To the minister: how much revenue does this 
government expect from the sale of fly ash? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the reason why we’re a little 
bit leery when the member opposite comes in and provides 
information to the House is because she unfortunately has a 
track record of providing information to the Assembly that isn’t 
quite right, Mr. Speaker. It’s sort of that NDP, Dwain 
Lingenfelter-style of stringing information together in the hope 
that somebody out there might believe it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is this is a very, very successful project. This is 
something that is getting worldwide renown, Mr. Speaker. This 
is something that is very, very good for Saskatchewan. It’s 
keeping the cost of generation at a low rate here in the province 
for the ratepayers of our province, Mr. Speaker. And it is clear 
that it’s time that the NDP got on board. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it is so frustrating that this 
minister is just cheerleading his project instead of providing real 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5837 

answers to Saskatchewan taxpayers. Is this a 1.4 or $1.6 billion 
project? Ratepayers and taxpayers deserve transparency and 
accountability. 
 
To the SaskPower minister: what is the parasitic load for this 
project? Does he at least know that answer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s clear here in 
Saskatchewan at the successful conclusion of the project down 
there, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of that, Saskatchewan is 
setting the standard for the world. We’ve seen that most 
recently the President of the United States was in China talking 
about emissions and the importance of addressing those kinds 
of emissions. I think this is exactly the kind of project that 
would help to do some of that kind of good work that needs to 
be done in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you’re ever in China, you would certainly 
recognize the problems that they have in terms of emissions. 
And I think it’s this type of project and I think that’s the reason 
why, I think that’s the reason why, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen 
country after country, company after company, coming to 
Saskatchewan to take a look at this project here in 
Saskatchewan. It’s a project that has been supported by this 
government from the outset, and it’s a project that has not been 
supported by the NDP. And it’s clear to the people of 
Saskatchewan that they’re on the wrong side of the issue once 
again. 
 
[10:45] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to questions 68 through 112. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 68 through 112. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Health Care Initiatives 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
move a motion today at the end of my 15 minutes. I will be 
moving a motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for ignoring 
scathing criticisms from front-line health care workers and 
senior health administrators, renewing the toxic and 
wasteful $40-million contract with the American 
consultant, and continuing to fly in Japanese senseis and 
pay them $3,500 per day while neglecting the basics in 
health care. 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important debate that we’ve been having 
in this legislature for the past year or so, Mr. Speaker. This 
really is a debate about priorities, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
government who has chosen to engage and continue to engage a 
$40 million American consultant and ignore the basics in health 
care, ignore the fact that we have a seniors’ care crisis in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. So this government had an opportunity 
this summer to get out of this contract, and instead this 
government has chosen to renew the $40 million contract with 
John Black until next June. 
 
But we’re not sure if it’s next June, Mr. Speaker, or if it’s July 
or August or September or 2017, Mr. Speaker, 2017. John 
Black seems to think that he’ll be working in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, until 2017, Mr. Speaker. John Black seems to 
think he’ll be here for a few more years. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, how over time we’ve heard a great 
deal from front-line health care workers about their concerns 
around lean. We’ve heard their concerns about paper 
airplane-folding workshops, the kaizen basics workshops. 
We’ve heard concerns . . . I know I had an opportunity to talk to 
a front-line health care worker, a nurse who works in palliative 
care who had a huge concern about the rapid process 
improvement workshops. The Saskatoon Health Region is 
engaged in many of these. I’ve been told by front-line health 
care workers how disjointed they are, how they’re not meshed 
together, Mr. Speaker. So this particular health care worker in 
palliative care was telling me, you know, this government looks 
at one rapid process improvement workshop and sees an 
improvement, but fails to look at how that particular 
improvement process has impacted another area negatively, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So for example, at St. Paul’s Hospital, the pharmacy did a rapid 
process improvement workshop and, lo and behold, they made 
an improvement, saved some money, and found some 
efficiencies. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? It was on the 
back of the palliative care unit at St. Paul’s Hospital. It had a 
negative impact. So we have front-line health care workers 
telling us about their frustrations with the training, the 
frustration with spending their time away from patients, not 
being able to provide the care that they want to provide. 
 
But you know, I think something that’s even more telling, Mr. 
Speaker, is hearing from leaders in health care, Mr. Speaker, 
who have been at the top of the ladder here when it comes to 
lean training, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a briefing note. Actually it was interesting for me, this 
briefing note that we’ve discussed this legislative session where 
senior health administrators outline “that getting out of the John 
Black contract would be an improvement.” “The coaching has 
been sporadic and inconsistent.” “This is not going well.” 
“Need to incorporate adult learning concepts.” “We are 
investing a lot of money for a program that appears to have no 
defined objectives,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it was interesting when we saw that briefing note because 
that reflects exactly with what I had heard from people who had 
been doing the lean leader training, Mr. Speaker. A comment I 
had heard from folks last year in the Saskatoon Health Region 
doing the lean leadership training was that the health region was 



5838 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

“holding their breath until the contract was done.” 
 
I heard a story, Mr. Speaker, about someone who attended some 
John Black training last summer, a value stream mapping 
training session last summer, Mr. Speaker, where John Black 
and staff were there. There was a doctor who booked out her 
entire day. And this government wants doctors to be engaged in 
the lean process, Mr. Speaker. This doctor books out her entire 
day and goes to the value stream mapping workshop and has a 
mix-up with the time and is a few minutes late and is told she 
can’t participate. So a family doctor, who is normally a very 
busy individual, books out her day to do the lean training, 
which this government wants her to do, and John Black, the 
bully, will not let her participate in the value stream mapping 
workshop, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We hear, we hear, Mr. Speaker, time and time again some of the 
comments that people have told me who’ve participated with 
John Black and his staff, their frustration. Again everyone is 
holding their breath until the contract is over. The education is 
appalling. This is what I was told by someone who has done the 
lean leadership training. The education is appalling, that the 
data was 10 years old, old slide presentations, which jibes 
completely, Mr. Speaker, with what was in the briefing note. 
 
The Health minister a couple of weeks ago . . . I think it was 
incredibly telling when the Health minister a couple of weeks 
ago says to us, when John Black is done, we’ll be able to tailor 
lean to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Forty million dollars. 
You’re telling me that John Black and Associates cannot tailor 
the lean training and lean process to Saskatchewan for $40 
million? That is absolute insanity. But again it jibes with 
exactly what I have been hearing from people who have 
engaged in the lean leadership training process. So these are the 
people who have been flown to the States and elsewhere, Mr. 
Speaker, to do some of this training. 
 
I had heard one concern from one of these individuals who 
actually commented that lean is a tool, and it was a tool that 
was being used in our health care in Saskatchewan before this 
$40 million John Black contract. So this particular individual 
isn’t opposed to lean itself, but it’s the John Black contract and 
the John Black implementation or his style of lean that many 
people have taken issue with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know this one individual who thinks in general that lean is a 
good tool to use but said her frustration was around the 
Americanized . . . The approach that he was bringing to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, didn’t fit in our context. Lean is 
supposed to be about front-line engagement or listening to the 
people on the front lines who are telling us what can and can’t 
be, or what is working and what isn’t working. But the reality 
is, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to John Black, he is dictating 
from on high how things are working, Mr. Speaker, and how 
they should be working. And that is not acceptable. We’re 
paying, taxpayers in Saskatchewan are paying 40 million-plus 
for a consultant to come in and tell us what to do, tell us . . . It is 
absolute ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead of health care in this province getting better, we see 
health care in this province getting worse. We have, Mr. 
Speaker, we have ER [emergency room] wait times in 
Saskatchewan that have increased under this government. We 

have in Saskatchewan right now, according to CIHI [Canadian 
Institute of Health Information], the second-longest wait times 
to see a specialist here, in Canada, Mr. Speaker, behind only 
New Brunswick. In Canada the average, patients waiting longer 
than three months to see a specialist, in Canada it’s 16.4 per 
cent of people. In Saskatchewan it is 21.8 per cent of people 
waiting for longer to see a specialist, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this government might talk about their surgical wait times, 
but the fact is you can’t get a surgery date, Mr. Speaker, unless 
you actually see a specialist who will refer you for surgery. But 
when you’re waiting months and months and months at a time 
to see a specialist, it is a huge problem. And again, Mr. Speaker, 
according to recent data from CIHI, Saskatchewan has the 
second-longest wait time to see specialists. 
 
But again this is a debate about priorities, Mr. Speaker. We had 
a Throne Speech just a few weeks ago that had nothing, Mr. 
Speaker, that had nothing in this Throne Speech to address the 
seniors’ care crisis. Instead it was a . . . It looked back, patted, 
this government patted itself on the back for its one-time, 
drop-in-the-bucket measure to address the seniors’ care crisis, 
Mr. Speaker, and a crisis that the government wasn’t even 
willing to admit exists. How can you fix a problem, Mr. 
Speaker, if you are not even willing to admit there is one, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
So we have a Throne Speech, we have a Throne Speech just a 
few weeks ago that had nothing new to address the seniors’ care 
crisis. So we have people like Carrie Klassen who has been 
advocating for a year and a half to try to get this government to 
see that we have a serious problem, Mr. Speaker. And in the 
news last week, she said she was back here basically because 
the same problems are going on and the government hasn’t 
fixed them. 
 
Carrie Klassen has been looking after her mother daily because 
she says the staff is too overworked to ensure basic needs are 
met. She says: 
 

People are not getting on the toilet in a timely manner. 
Hygiene is getting missed. I got a call from a friend saying 
her father went to the dentist and had a whole bunch of 
cavities in six months because they basically said his teeth 
aren’t being brushed. 

 
So Carrie Klassen is a prime example of pointing out the 
mixed-up priorities that this government has — $40 million for 
an American consultant, $3,500 a day for senseis, $600 for 
interpreters. Those are things that health care leaders said, Mr. 
Speaker. The senseis were not adding any value to the lean 
process, Mr. Speaker. But the government continues to engage, 
fly senseis from Japan, Mr. Speaker, hire translators to help 
them do their work. So you’ve got $3,500 a day for their rate. 
You’ve got the flights from Japan. And you’ve got the cost of 
$600 a day per interpreter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve got a government who has taken the Health Quality 
Council and has turned it from an arm’s-length, independent 
board that should be assessing the value of health programs and 
what’s working and what’s not working in this province and has 
turned it into a promotional arm for lean, Mr. Speaker. That is 
completely unacceptable. 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5839 

I had an opportunity just a couple of days ago to have a 
conversation with a family who is completely outraged. This 
individual’s father passed away this summer. His father had 
been started out at RUH [Royal University Hospital] in 
Saskatoon, ended up at City Hospital in the transition unit. And 
because we don’t have long-term care spaces, Mr. Speaker . . . 
The former CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatoon 
Health Region acknowledged this summer that the resources 
aren’t there in her health region and elsewhere to serve seniors 
well, Mr. Speaker. But this individual that I had an opportunity 
to talk to cannot believe that his government is so focused on its 
lean pet project and continues to ignore the basics in health 
care. He saw his father pass away, stuck in the transition unit at 
City Hospital in Saskatoon, in and out of a wheelchair. That 
was this man’s last days, Mr. Speaker — in his bed, in his 
wheelchair, in his bed, in his wheelchair. And it led to his death, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about what the government should do 
instead of spending the 40 million-plus on John Black and 
Associates. This government should use and regulate minimum 
quality-of-care standards for all care facilities. We had a bill 
before the legislature, a private member’s bill, last spring, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government unanimously voted down. This 
government, its own Law Reform Commission recommended 
implementing a residents-in-care bill of rights for seniors’ care 
in long-term care. This government has refused to do that. 
Again that was part of that legislation; it was the 
residents-in-care bill of rights. And this government refused to 
do this. 
 
This government could reopen Saskatoon City Hospital to acute 
care, reverse the wrong-headed decision that had patient beds 
removed from entire wings in City Hospital so that managers’ 
desks could be moved in, and lay out a multi-year plan to have 
City Hospital’s emergency room open 24 hours a day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[11:00] 
 
This government could actually come up with a strategy, a 
seniors strategy, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that our seniors are 
getting the home care that they need to keep them in their 
homes. And not just the medicalized home care — the things 
that we used to have in home care, the laundry, the groceries, 
the tending of yards. There are things, very practical, tangible 
things that can help people stay in their home, Mr. Speaker. So 
we need a better home care . . . We need a seniors strategy here 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. The government could start there. 
 
The government could stop ignoring the $2.2 billion deficit in 
health care facilities, Mr. Speaker, $2.2 billion which doubled 
under this government, Mr. Speaker, in terms of investing in 
infrastructure. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my time is running out here. It’s amazing how 
fast 15 minutes goes. But I would like to move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for ignoring 
scathing criticisms from front-line health care workers and 
senior health administrators, renewing the toxic and 
wasteful $40 million contract with the American 
consultant, and continuing to fly in Japanese senseis and 

paying them $3,500 per day while neglecting the basics in 
health care. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for ignoring 
scathing criticisms from front-line health care workers and 
senior health administrators, renewing the toxic and 
wasteful $40 million contract with the American 
consultant, and continuing to fly in Japanese senseis and 
paying them $3,500 per day while neglecting the basics in 
health care. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I could 
say I’m very excited to get into this debate today. And first of 
all I want to comment on a few things that the member from 
Riversdale said. She talked about a couple of things. She talked 
about not having enough specialists, that our surgical wait times 
are improving — which I thank her for recognizing that, that 
our surgical wait times are getting much better than they were 
the previous seven years. 
 
I just want to, as we seem to be doing quite a bit on this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, is correcting what is put out there. The 
opposition seems to be putting a lot of numbers and a lot of 
information out there. They sometimes are splicing information 
together to be able to make a quote, trying to get the media 
interested. 
 
But the cold, hard facts actually are the number of overall 
specialists has increased by 224 from March 2007 until now. 
That would be more specialists out there to be able to see 
patients. They’re spending their time in a better way, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re more efficient on seeing the patients, getting 
the patients into surgery. And whether that surgery is in a 
normal hospital setting or it’s in one of the private clinics that 
are publicly funded by our system, we needed to recognize that 
there needed to be some change. 
 
All governments at all levels need to recognize that there needs 
to be some improvements in health care. We can’t just keep 
dumping money in, Mr. Speaker. If we keep dumping money 
in, we’re going to have the same results that we did. That’s 
what the NDP did. They just kept doing the same thing all over 
again, lowering the expectations of everybody and then just 
hitting just above that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we need to do is we need to look at things differently. 
And yes, we had to hire an outside consultant to be able to do 
that. We did go outside. We do have expertise within our health 
care systems, but we needed to look at things a little differently. 
We needed to turn it, just a little bit of a paradigm shift and be 
able to make sure that we are looking at this from all levels. 
 
And what I consistently have not heard from them is, what 
about the patients? What about the patients? What are they 
thinking? Do they really . . . They’re so worried about the 



5840 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

front-line health care workers which are engaged in this 
process. If they did any research on lean, they would understand 
lean is driven from the ground up. They seem to try to sell it 
that it’s the top down and John Black and Associates. But it’s 
actually not, because I’ve studied lean way back in 2003 and I 
understand the process. 
 
We were working on this a long time ago within our 
SaskEnergy stores area. We were working on lean processes 
because we were trying to get more of a pull system rather than 
a push system. I understand this process; I don’t think that they 
do. 
 
They do have all of these quotes from people they’ve talked to. 
Somebody that suggested something. There is a letter out there. 
I heard it on coffee row. We asked them, table those 
complaints. Put them on the table, and let’s actually talk to the 
people. But no, they don’t seem to be able to do that. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has been invited several times by 
Dr. Shaw to be able to come and say, how is lean working? Let 
me actually show you so you understand. And I don’t 
understand it, Mr. Speaker. It borderlines on ignorance. If you 
don’t understand exactly what it is, why are you complaining 
about it? I would like the opposition, I’d like all members of the 
opposition to understand lean. Pick up a book. Read about it. 
Don’t just believe what everybody else is saying, actually 
understand what the process is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to understand that health care is the top priority of 
people in Saskatchewan. And what they want, Mr. Speaker, is 
they are not interested in why they are getting their health care 
in a better way. They’re just concerned or they’re just happy 
that they are. They want to get in to see a doctor. If they, 
unfortunately if they need to go see a specialist, get that done as 
quick as possible whether they’re in rural Saskatchewan or in 
the cities. Get that surgery done and move forward. And what 
we’ve seen with lean is it’s improving that process from start to 
finish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The lean concept works. And that is why, as the Minister of 
Health was touching base on either . . . that’s why hospitals, 
leading hospitals — these aren’t just small hospitals around the 
country — leading hospitals such as the Massachusetts General 
Hospital; Johns Hopkins Hospital; the Cleveland Clinic; the 
University of California, Los Angeles Medical Center; New 
York-Presbyterian; University of Pennsylvania; and the Mayo 
Clinic are coming to us. 
 
The Mayo Clinic is actually coming and saying, how did you 
guys do this? We want to be able to improve. And I, 
unfortunately I was at the Mayo Clinic about 12 years ago with 
my daughter, and I was overwhelmed on the process that they 
had to be able to move things. I thought they were light years 
ahead of us at that time. And back in 2002, they absolutely 
were; they were way ahead of us. 
 
Now they’re coming to us. And it’s come full circle, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’re coming to us to actually figure out how 
are we doing it. They want to talk to our Health minister and 
our Minister of Rural and Remote Health and our officials and 
front-line workers. They want to know exactly what is going on 
from their perspective, not just from the government’s 

perspective. Because the government can implement a program. 
If it doesn’t work on the front line, Mr. Speaker, then it’s not a 
good product. But the difference of lean is it is coming from the 
front. 
 
You look at the children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker. That was 
designed with lean processes. And we had everybody from 
patients, to nurses, to janitors, to doctors, to surgeons, to 
architects, all working together to try to find the most efficient 
children’s hospital, a children’s hospital that they talked about, 
made lots of fancy announcements, but they never actually did 
it, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely sad, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the other things that I want to touch on is our surgical. 
And again I thank the member from Riversdale, or the MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Riversdale, for 
acknowledging that our wait times are coming down on our 
surgical . . . [inaudible]. And I think this needs to be read into 
the record again. More than 18 months, people waiting for 
surgery now compared to 2007, more than 18 months down 99 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. That in itself sells the process of how 
lean is working. More than one year, down 97 per cent. More 
than six months, down 90 per cent. People are getting in to their 
surgeries. They’re recovering quicker, and they’re returning 
back to normal life. 
 
Nobody wants to go in for surgery, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Nobody wants to go through that process. Unfortunately if they 
have to, we want them to get back to their normal life as quick 
as possible. And that, the first step in that is getting them in, 
seeing their doctor. Getting referred to the specialist. Getting 
into the surgical unit, whether it’s a normal surgical unit or 
again a privately run, publicly funded surgical unit which are 
using the same doctors. It’s just more facilities, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But it is absolutely imperative that the NDP and the opposition 
sit down and read a book on this. They’ve been drinking the 
Kool-Aid. I mean they use words like condemned and sensei 
and all of these things that they say, Mr. Speaker, but they’re 
absolutely dead wrong on this one.  
 
The people of Saskatchewan, when I go out door knocking in 
different areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I door knock in 
Saskatoon, Regina, Lloydminster, when I go out and door 
knock, people aren’t asking questions about John Black and 
Associates. People are saying, you know what? My friend, my 
family member, my sister, somebody was in the hospital. They 
were in and out quickly. They recovered. Thank you for finally 
doing something that is improving the health care system for 
the patients that are using the health care system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And part of this process is making sure that our staff throughout 
the health care systems are deployed in the right way. The 
biggest thing in that is actually having the staff there. More 
nurses, more doctors, more specialists to look at what is the 
particular ailment. More facilities: children’s hospital, Moose 
Jaw. We are building hospitals on this side to make sure that we 
can provide the proper care, the care that they talk about over 
there that they say that they do. They didn’t actually do 
anything. They closed hospitals. They cut nurses.  
 
We had to step . . . When we got into government in 2007, we 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5841 

had to step in and hire nurses because it was critical. It wasn’t 
even just partially that we were missing nurses. It was critical 
that we got in there. Hired more doctors. Implemented things 
like the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] program to 
help out rural Saskatchewan. So we have literally a flying 
emergency room around Saskatchewan. 
 
We make sure that we are looking out for everybody. They 
talked about it over there, Mr. Speaker. And they talked about 
lean and they talk about other things, but they don’t actually 
understand it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s the part that 
really frustrates me as a parent, as an MLA. They stand there 
and they just keep chattering away about nothing. They take 
little splices of things and they try to make it . . . They stand up 
there and said, absolutely, we don’t have enough specialists. 
Well we have 227 more specialists. 
 
So again they keep . . . I don’t want to use the word, not truth 
telling, but I’m not sure if that’s politically correct, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But what they continuously do is not give the 
Saskatchewan people the whole story. They keep giving little 
snippets of this — John Black, senseis, all of that — but they 
don’t actually say what is improving within the health care 
system. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to say, cannot support that 
recommendation, and I think it’s absolutely absurd that they 
brought it forward to this Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is a pleasure to enter into this debate. And I just want to review 
the motion that we’re debating here. I know the government 
side and the members will not want to talk about this. Will not 
want to talk, but they want to talk about everything else under 
the sun and hope that we let this sleeping dog lie. But it’s not 
sleeping. People are outraged by it. 
 
This is the motion before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The motion 
before us is: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for ignoring 
scathing criticisms from front-line health care workers and 
senior health administrators, renewing the toxic and 
wasteful $40-million contract with the American 
consultant, and continuing to fly in Japanese senseis and 
paying them $3,500 per day while neglecting the basics in 
health care. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s the motion before us. 
 
And what we’ve heard from the previous speaker, he will talk 
about everything else under the sun. But I really want to know 
and I’m interested when he says he’s knocking on doors, does 
he raise that? Does he say, have you heard about our contract? 
We’re really proud of that contract. We think it’s the right 
thing. We’re getting a deal on senseis. It’s only $40 million 
we’re spending. We’re only spending $40 million on this pet 
project. No, they don’t want to talk about that. They do not 
want to raise that, even if front-line health care workers are 
raising concerns and continue to raise them and raise them. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know this really hits a sore point 
over there. And we will get into the details about that. 
 
But they don’t want to talk about the $40 million contract. They 
will do whatever they can to make sure we avoid the 
conversation and the truth and the facts on that. In fact we 
actually saw that this morning in question period when the 
Leader of the Opposition raised, well when does this gravy train 
stop for John Black, they don’t know. They don’t know. They 
really don’t know because they’re talking about these tours now 
that we understand was $200,000 a trip — $200,000 a trip. Now 
what are the details? 
 
You know, this government when it was first elected said, we 
would be transparent. We will be accountable, except for the 
John Black contract. Except for the John Black contract, we 
will not be transparent. We will not be accountable. They’re 
really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find this so odd that they will talk 
everything else but that. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And I’m looking forward to hearing comments from the 
members opposite about John Black and how they’ve talked to 
their constituents and raised the issue that we are spending $40 
million on this American contractor from Seattle. We think it’s 
a good deal. And we don’t know when the contract will actually 
end. We think the main part, the primary part is in June of next 
year. But you know, actually it has apparently some extensions 
to it where he comes back and he will do audits. He will do 
audits. 
 
We don’t know what the price of the audits are, but hey, that’s 
how we do things with John Black. He tends to set his prices, 
and it may be high. And we don’t know if there’s other people 
in Canada or other places that we could be more price-effective, 
but this government really doesn’t want to talk about that. 
 
And we can read, and I will read into the record some of the 
editorials, some of the quotes from various people about this 
because really this is an issue that we really have to address 
head on, head on. And we saw yesterday when we raised the 
issues of really essentially choices, choices that this government 
is making. Yesterday we raised the issue about science 
ambassadors, a $10,000 program that was not renewed by this 
government. 
 
Now we understand that the letter was lost. The letter was lost 
and perhaps there was some files that were misplaced between 
the changes between the old post-secondary minister and the 
new post-secondary minister. A letter was lost for $10,000, and 
all of a sudden they’ve found the $10,000. Well we’re glad of 
that. And we’re glad that we brought that forward, but the noise 
in the House yesterday was of course that that couldn’t have 
happened. But here we found out that it actually did happen. A 
letter was misplaced. I don’t know if that’s actually the case, 
but we’ll go with that and we’re glad that it’s been found. But 
really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s about priorities. 
 
We see a situation with SWITCH today, SWITCH having to cut 
back their hours, having to cut back their hours. And what that 
just, you know . . . It’s a very inexpensive, very important 
program in the core communities of Saskatoon. But you know, 



5842 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

what it could mean for the people in downtown Saskatoon if 
that funding could be bumped up. But no, we see the 
continuation of John Black’s contract. And that’s really 
something that we are really worried about. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we see, and I’m going to quote The 
StarPhoenix here, the editorial last spring, “Lean propaganda 
runs full tilt.” And I quote: 
 

When a government invests its political capital in 
something, nothing becomes more important than leaving 
the appearance that “something” is actually working. 
 
So the Sask Party government is determined to make it 
look as if lean is working, regardless of the facts and 
regardless of how much political or health system 
propaganda it takes. 

 
And it goes on and talks about the good work that Mark 
Lemstra has done in exposing some of the real facts about 
what’s happening with health care. And I go on and I quote: 
 

For example, HQC [the Health Quality Council] nursing 
reports in 2012 showed that “24.53 adverse events per 
1,000 medical patient discharges, which is an increase 
from 19.39 adverse events in 2010. For surgical patients, 
nurses reported 26.47 adverse events per 1,000 discharges 
in 2012, up from 23.77 such events in 2010.” 

 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s amazing how this 
government will not let facts get in the way of a good 
propaganda exercise. Here you have a situation where they will 
not let the facts get in the way, will not let the facts get in the 
way. And we have heard, we have heard from, we have heard 
from . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And here again they shout 
down facts. They shout down the facts. That’s a simple quote. 
That’s a simple quote. 
 
But we have nurses who are raising concerns about nurse 
intimidation, again from last spring where it was revealed in the 
media that “Last Friday nurses are being told they have to 
support lean or risk recrimination, including professional 
consequences and even being put into a time-out room.” I 
mean, Mr. Speaker, really, this is something else. 
 
And then senior administrators this fall, when it was found out 
. . . And these are not our words. These are words from senior 
administrators in Regina here, and I quote: 
 

Our experience with John Black and Associates have been 
one of lack of respect, tattling on leaders if they question, 
expecting rigid conformity in a militaristic style, gossiping, 
and undermining. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

The lean training consists of activities that are not 
meaningful and in some cases insulting, all of which are 
part of John Black and Associates’ approach that are not 
only not educationally sound, but of course create 
skepticism, alienation, and frustration. The orientation to 
the kanban process within the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region by the sensei had little added value. 

And so you’d go on and on and on. And I don’t know if the 
members opposite . . . Of course, they will dismiss this. And of 
course then there was the provincial-wide health care survey 
that were very troubling, some of the results that talk about the 
disconnect between the employers and the employees and the 
impact it has on health care. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, really . . . And you know, I just want 
to say we could have this debate go on and on because it’s such 
an important one. But we have to look at the work of people 
like Mark Lemstra, who talks about how lean distracts from the 
real issues, and asks, and I quote, “So what business are we in? 
Are we in the business of health or are we simply in the 
business of health care provision? Do we have a ministry of 
health or do we only have a ministry of health care?” 
 
You know, so we have to think deeper than this. And this 
government’s obsession with John Black, and this continuing 
on and not being straight with the facts, we have some 
questions. I just want to end with a quote. No, I think I’m 
running out of time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so I’ll leave that at 
that. And I know we’ll raise this later on. 
 
But I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, this debate, and we’re 
talking about ignoring scathing criticisms from the front-line 
health care workers and condemning the wasteful $40 million 
contract with the American consultant . . . We’ve got to put a 
stop to that. So we’ve got to pass this motion, send a clear 
message to the Minister of Health, and particularly the Premier 
who will defend this at any cost. We’ve got to pass this motion. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to join into 
this debate. I can’t support the motion the NDP has brought 
forward, and I’ll give you some reasons. We’ll have to start 
with a little bit of history. I mean we’ll go back and look at the 
record when it comes to health care. You know, cutting 52 rural 
hospitals, increasing the surgical wait-list, you know, those are 
things . . . And no change and no policy. When I was first 
elected, when I went door to door, the people told me, you 
know, health care spending is getting unsustainable. We cannot 
lose our health care. We cannot lose health care in rural 
Saskatchewan, and we were doing that. We would have been 
doing that under their watch with the closure . . . We lost how 
many long-term care facilities? 
 
An Hon. Member: — 19. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — We lost 19, a member said. We lost 1,200 
long-term care beds under them. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? There was no new ideas. No 
new ideas come to them. No, not change policy. That’s their 
record through the ’70s and all through the ’90s was, don’t 
change. Doesn’t matter what’s happening. You can look at the 
way they operated with highways. You can look at the rural 
service centres they closed. No change, no policy. You can’t 
have that. 
 
The people told us that you, opposition — and we were, and I 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5843 

was in opposition in ’99 — you also have to have some ideas. 
You just can’t just say that’s wrong. You know, you have to 
also present some ideas, and we did that. We did that when we 
first were in opposition. We laid out policies. And it showed as 
elections rolled on and we formed government, and it also 
showed in the elections forthcoming as I still heard that on the 
doorstep. I do quite a bit of door knocking in the cities for my 
city counterparts and that’s what I hear on the doorstep. You 
know, patients first. 
 
We need to keep improving health care. We need to keep 
moving forward. We need to have new ideas. And they’ll ask, 
we’ve gone to the NDP’s website on their policy and we’ve 
heard nothing. We don’t see anything. We don’t see any new 
ideas. That’s it. Just criticize, criticize. A good government has 
to look at ideas. There has to be changes in health care. That’s 
why we looked at lean. That’s why we brought lean forward, 
Mr. Speaker. We need change. 
 
I’ve heard from lots of patients that were on two-year waiting 
lists when I was in opposition. We’ve brought that way down, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re down to about, if I remember right, in most 
of them is three months, three months. You look at their record. 
They promised to cut surgical waits by 30 per cent in 1999 but 
actually increased the wait-list by 61 per cent. How can you 
make a promise like that and then turn around and increase it by 
61 per cent? That, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 
 
Never mind the elimination of 52 hospitals. Eliminated 19 
long-term facilities. Eliminated 1,200 long-term care beds. 
They did not increase the seniors’ income plan for 16 years. 
They reduced pediatric beds in Regina by nearly 28 per cent, 
closed 421 hospital beds between 1999 and 2007, cut back the 
nursing program by 385 nursing training seats were eliminated. 
And you know what? All they kept looking at was just saying, 
no change. We’re going to just keep losing things. 
 
I can remember with the students they said, we’re planning for 
3,000 less students a year. That’s their record. And then they 
wonder why they’re sitting with nine members and possibly less 
next election because no new ideas. And this is what this 
government is doing. 
 
You know, you have to address problems. And we have a 
problem in health care, escalating costs, and you have to look at 
that, Mr. Speaker, if we want to make health care sustainable to 
go in the future. If we want to make it free and accessible for 
our constituents, we have to look at changing and we have to 
look . . . always be open to new ideas. And that’s something we 
are on this side of the government, Mr. Speaker, a government 
that’s always looking forward and always looking to make 
things better. And you have to do that, unlike the members 
opposite. And all I’ve heard, and my constituents tell me the 
same thing, all I’ve heard is complaining. Just saying, well 
that’s wrong. Don’t do any change. Don’t spend any money. 
Just cut back. Just cut back. 
 
Well you know what? There’s savings of $60 million that this 
program has saved so far, and there’s going to be more savings 
as we move forward. We have to keep looking at our health 
care system all the time if we want to maintain it in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 

We brought in STARS. That was another. And I’ll tell you 
what. Just in my constituency alone, I’m not even sure how 
many visits when I talked to Rod Gantefoer, but it’s in the 
hundreds, and I don’t know how many lives that it’s saved. 
 
I know I met . . . They were in Raymore. I met a person there 
that said, I wouldn’t be alive today if STARS hadn’t been able 
to get me to the hospital in time. There’s been accidents on No. 
11 as it gets increasing. Those are things that we’ve been 
looking at, that we brought forward when we were in 
opposition. We brought them ideas forward which you have to 
if you’re going to be in government. And the former 
government never, ever looked. 
 
I remember Rod Gantefoer brought STARS here, and they said, 
that’ll never work. It’s too much money. Don’t bring that. Don’t 
look at that. No, that’s just going to help . . . That’s not going to 
help anybody. Well I’ll tell you what. You tell that to the 
hundreds of people’s lives that have been saved and are going 
to be saved in the future with that. And that is your record of 
not looking forward and that’s the same thing with this motion, 
is don’t do anything. Don’t do anything. Don’t make it change. 
Just put your head in the sand and maybe your problems will go 
away. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what. They don’t, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
government that steps up, that looks at problems, hits them, 
meets them head on. And that’s what we’re going to be doing in 
the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from our side that spoke, from Sutherland, hit the 
nail on the head when he said this is about patients. This is 
about patients — patients first. That should be our focus. 
 
Next is about the workers, front-line workers. But this is how 
we can make patients, their visits shorter. Because I tell you 
what. It’s very traumatic if you have somebody in the health 
care system, whether it be doing cancer clinics or just doing 
operations and the many visits to a doctor. 
 
This is what this program is looking is, how can we make this 
better for the patients? How can we shorten this? How can we 
make health care better? And this is something that our 
government is proud to move forward with savings at $60 
million and more in the future, of looking at the system and 
knowing that, as we move forward, as health care costs keep 
going, we’re also working in a balanced budget, something they 
didn’t do. 
 
They let health care . . . I remember when I was first elected, the 
health care budget, I think, grew by 6 per cent a year. Well 
that’s unsustainable. I heard that on the doorstep. They say, we 
can’t have that. We’ve got poor health care, and it’s still 
growing by 6 per cent? This is what looking at making changes, 
at trying to keep our budget with health care sustainable and 
also making it better for the patients. Those are the two most 
components, and this is what this contract deals with. 
 
You know, they keep talking about the individual, Mr. Black. 
This is about the process, not the individual. This is what his 
team can bring forward. When you have the Mayo Clinic 
looking at what we’re doing here, I think that’s pretty 
important. That tells you that we’re making some pretty good 



5844 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

strides here. When you’re starting to have other jurisdictions 
looking at the savings that we’re instituting here . . . 
 
[11:30] 
 
Because I tell you what. I go to some conferences in the States; 
I go to SARL [State Agriculture and Rural Leaders]. And I’ll 
tell you what. Health care down there is just as important as it is 
here. And the costs, same thing. Those are the same things 
they’re dealing. And how can they deliver health care to the 
residents, to the constituents? They struggle with the same 
problems we do, how to deliver it cost-effective to rural and 
also to the cities. 
 
This is what this program looks at. How can we keep health 
care sustainable? Because I tell you what. On the doorstep, this 
is one of the most important issues. And I think each and every 
member that has ever door knocked will say that, when it comes 
to health care, when you mention that, everybody has an 
opinion on it. But the main thing is, every opinion is, we have 
to keep it going. We have to keep it sustainable. We have to 
have a good supply of specialists. We have to have doctors, 
which we’ve been working on, doctor recruitment. And to do 
that, you also need money to bring in specialists. You need 
money to keep the rural hospitals going. You need to keep all 
hospitals going. You need money. 
 
We’re looking at how we can best deliver that health care at the 
best possible cost, and we’re getting every . . . Every dollar 
that’s being used in health care is being used to its maximum 
best. Because if you’re going to keep health care sustainable, 
that, Mr. Speaker, is what you’re going to have to do. You’re 
going to have to save as much . . . Every dollar is going to have 
to be used to its best potential because there is a big demand for 
health care. I was on treasury board and I tell you what. When 
health care comes forward in the budget . . . I mean every 
initiative is good. There isn’t one bad initiative there, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s not one initiative that’s bad. If you don’t have 
the money to fund them, you’re going to run into trouble, and 
that’s something we don’t want to do. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’ve been moving 
forward and we’re moving forward with this lean contract. I 
think it speaks for itself in saving money, but just not . . . They 
talk about this year, or the year and a half costing $40 million. 
It’s going to save in the future, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to save 
hundreds of million dollars in the future. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m kind of wishing that we were allowed to eat in the 
Chamber because I certainly would have had some popcorn 
with that last speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That was really 
something. 
 
Sadly, sadly not one of the government members who are 
getting up in this debate have managed to even say the words, 
John Black. They’re somehow worried about the fact that this is 
the issue that we’re concerned about right now. 
 
One of the things, Mr. Speaker . . . This is a political debate so 

obviously there’s a lot of politics going on, lot of shouting 
going on, and that’s what we do in this Chamber. But I think 
what’s important, since the government doesn’t want to listen to 
the opposition . . . We’re the opposition. They don’t like it. So 
maybe we should listen to what some of the front-line care 
workers are saying, what the nurses are saying, what senior 
administrators are saying, and perhaps what the media’s saying. 
So I’ve just gathered some quotes here from different articles in 
the media and from health care workers and maybe, maybe this 
government might actually listen to it. But we’ll see because 
certainly they don’t want to talk about the John Black contract. 
That’s something that even the Premier and the Minister of 
Health won’t even talk about when we raise questions about it. 
It’s very concerning. 
 
So where should we start? We’ve got so many things that we 
could cite here, but I’m going to start with an article from the 
Leader-Post, dated I believe just recently, by Murray Mandryk. 
Now it’s either October 11th . . . I think it’s October 11th. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Your mentor. Your mentor. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — It’s funny that the Minister of Finance calls 
Murray Mandryk our mentor when . . . It’s kind of interesting 
that he would do that when we see that the press is a pretty 
neutral evaluation of what’s going on here. Anyways he said on 
October 11th: 
 

. . . it’s hard to ignore NDP Leader Cam Broten’s claims 
that [Maura] Davies’s early demise — at considerable 
expense to all Saskatchewan taxpayers, given that regional 
health budgets come from the province — had something 
to do with her questioning of Seattle-based lean consultant 
John Black [there I’ve said it, John Black] and his 
company’s methods used in the $39-million contract to 
implement his brand of lean on a provincewide basis. 
 
According to an email obtained by the Opposition through 
freedom-of-information, Davies — despite her public 
support of lean — was also no shrinking violet when it 
came to engaging in “critical conversation” with Black 
over his methods and implementation style. 
 
The memo, from health board member Dr. Dennis Kendel 
to chairperson Dr. Susan Shaw, states that Davies was 
“very candid and explicit in describing” what the 
Saskatoon Health Region needed in the next 18 months — 
something that took Black by surprise, but something he 
supposedly appreciated. 
 

The quote goes on to say: 
 

“We ought to seize the opportunity to be equally frank and 
explicit in our conversations with John about what HQC 
(Health Quality Council) needs from him and what we do 
not need over the next 18 months,” Kendel wrote in the 
memo. 

 
Well, Davies will have no chance to do that now and it 
would very much seem that whoever her successor is from 
the region would be well advised to not try that approach 
either if they want to maintain their role for any length of 
time. 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5845 

He goes on to say at the end of the article: 
 

If lean is largely about the ability of workers to have direct 
input into solutions, what kind of message does it send 
when the CEO can’t publicly raise concerns or even 
privately challenge the implementation methods? 
 
A clear message in Davies’s dismissal is the Saskatchewan 
Party government seems only interested in cheerleaders. 

 
That’s a comment from a commentator. 
 
Now I don’t know if the Minister of Finance will like this, but 
I’m also going to quote from another person who is a health 
columnist, and it’s Mark Lemstra from April 3rd, 2014 . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I think he’s just trying to participate 
in debate. He keeps shouting, but we keep hearing his voice 
here. 
 
“The government has stated that . . .” This is from April 3rd, 
2014, and it’s a quote: 
 

The government has stated that its kaizan promotion 
offices do not measure or evaluate lean, and that no reports 
have been written. At the same time, however, it has stated 
that lean has already demonstrated benefits. To test this, I 
reviewed the Health Quality Council website — Quality 
Insight — that has a significant amount of provincial data. 
For each indicator I will report the first and last month or 
year where data were collected. 

 
And he goes on to talk about a bunch of the different kinds of 
data, and he shows that actually things aren’t improving. At the 
end of his article he says: 
 

This brings us to advocacy. Throughout the HQC website 
are numerous yet unreferenced statements that lean 
increases patient safety, patient satisfaction, reduces cost 
and improves health outcomes. However, none of the 
indicators available on the HQC website support these 
conclusions. 
 
In fact, the opposite is true. This despite the fact that their 
survey data shows the aboriginal population is severely 
under-sampled. It is likely that the results would be much 
worse if this discriminated-against population is fully 
represented in the sample. 

 
So that’s quotes from Mark Lemstra. 
 
Well now let’s talk to the Union of Nurses. Now they aren’t 
happy about the political squabbling that goes back and forth, 
and I don’t blame them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But they have 
some concerns about lean and the implementation based on the 
John Black model of lean. And one of the things she said is, 
what we’re missing here in the legislature . . . And this is a 
quote from March 24th in the Leader-Post. This is Tracy 
Zambory. She says: 
 

The partisan back-and-forth has largely missed the key 
issue for members of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
[so maybe we can listen to the nurses. Continuing with the 
quote]: the implications of lean for the quality and safety of 

direct patient care. 
 
She goes on to say: 
 

No one doubts that lean has helped identify waste and 
make improvements. However, evidence of its 
effectiveness in improving direct patient care is weak and 
inconclusive, as the research literature makes clear. 
 
The clearest successes have been in the areas of the health 
system that most resemble physical production [and what 
she’s referring to there, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that this 
comes from a production line to make automobiles], such 
as inventory management and process redesign to reduce 
unnecessary steps. 

 
She goes on to say: 
 

But we need to make sure that lean principles are not 
applied rigidly or inappropriately . . . Lean does not have 
all the answers. 
 
Unlike supply management, the registered nursing process 
is not linear and predictable and cannot be reduced to 
bundles of tasks and rationalized on business principles. 
When lean moves from supporting the nursing process (by 
freeing up time and resources for direct patient care) to 
re-engineering it in its own image, it is inappropriate and 
unsafe and threatens to erode quality care by providers 
treating the “whole patient” [that’s a quote within her 
quote] and ensuring the continuity and co-ordination of 
care. 

 
It’s one thing for a retail outlet to fail to meet unanticipated 
demand. It is quite another for hemodialysis patients to be 
put at risk and harmed, or for hospitals to run out of linens 
or wound dressings, because the margin for error or 
uncertainty has been “leaned” out of supply chains. 
 
As discharges are rushed to increase patient flow, we see 
poor outcomes and costly readmissions. As efficiencies are 
found by scaling back high-touch surface cleaning in 
operating and emergency rooms, rising rates of 
hospital-acquired infection are the result. As untested 
model of care changes under the cover of lean reduce the 
capacity of registered nurses to adequately assess and 
monitor patients, safety and outcomes . . . [occur]. 
 
Registered nurses are in a tough spot in raising the alarm 
about patient safety. They are exempt from whistleblower 
protections, are concerned with patient confidentiality, and 
fear repercussions in their workplace. 

 
So that’s from the nurses, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s been 
other articles in the newspapers about this program, about the 
lean program. 
 
Just recently on October 23rd, CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] news posted a story about concerns from Marlene 
Smadu from the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. And her 
concerns are about things like PowerPoint slides that can’t be 
changed, poor quality videos, didactic approaches. 
 



5846 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

The approach of the company delivering lean lessons is not 
only educationally unsound, but is causing skepticism, 
alienation, and frustration. And one person complained that the 
lean lessons show a lack of respect and that tattling on leaders 
was expected if they questioned the process. 
 
And I just simply don’t have enough time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to share with the government all of these quotes. Obviously, 
they haven’t been listening to what the people are saying about 
this. 
 
But perhaps we can talk a little bit about another article from 
the Leader-Post on October 25th, again by journalist Murray 
Mandryk. And it was a scathing article. He starts out by saying: 
 

What should be the Saskatchewan Party government's 
biggest worry about lean is whether its $40-million 
contract with John Black and Associates has poisoned the 
well for an otherwise practical way of improving health 
delivery. 
 
Unfortunately, Premier Brad Wall and Health Minister 
Dustin Duncan may be too caught up in a facesaving 
exercise to understand the damage done. 

 
Oh, I think the Finance minister is wishing he was able to get 
up in this debate. It’s really too bad that he hasn’t been able to 
stand up and get up, and speak to this issue, but maybe he’ll get 
up in the questions. We’ll see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m out of time. Unfortunately, there’s only 15 seconds left, but 
I really hope that this government . . . They won’t listen to the 
opposition. They don’t like listening to the opposition, but they 
really should be listening to the people that know this issue. So 
I hope they will support this motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And actually despite what the member from Saskatoon Centre 
said, it’s a pleasure to get up and talk about our lean program 
that’s going through not only health care, but government-wide, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m looking at their motion right 
here: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for ignoring 
scathing criticisms from front-line health care workers and 
senior health care administrators, renewing the toxic and 
wasteful 40-million contract with the American consultant, 
and continuing to fly in Japanese senseis and paying them 
35 per day while neglecting the basics in health care. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I actually take quite . . . I don’t really 
think that this motion pays the respect it should to the work 
that’s been done in health care in the last seven years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I think if they want to talk about John 
Black and that’s their pet obsession, the Leader of the 
Opposition says, I have inboxes full of emails from people that 
are talking about how bad lean is, and how bad our health care 
system is. I haven’t seen any of them. I would love him to show 
us some of these emails. He says people are scared to talk to 
government. I don’t find that. I don’t find that people are scared 

to talk to us, talk to us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I did find one thing very interesting coming from the 
member from Saskatoon Centre. And I have not been elected 
near as long as he has, so he probably knows some things about 
politics that I may not. But one thing that I do find funny is 
when he said, when you guys are on the doorsteps in the 
summer. When you guys are on the doorsteps in the summer 
talking to your constituents, do you tell them what they want to 
talk about? Do you tell them about lean? 
 
Well on this side of the House, when we go and knock on 
doors, we tend to listen to people. We would actually, we would 
actually not go knock on a door: hi, I’m your member for the 
Legislative Assembly, and say and you want to talk about this. 
That’s probably not something that this side of the House 
practises very much. We go on a door, and we listen to what 
people want to talk about. So that might be one, one advice that 
I’d try to give the member from Saskatoon Centre. He is 
experienced; he is a veteran. He’s done well in politics. But one 
thing that I do differently than him is that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So one thing that I’m going to do differently as well, despite 
what the members opposite are doing. I’m going to go through 
some quotes on lean that think lean has improved our health 
care system. But one of the different things I’m going to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is I’m actually going to attribute names to 
these quotes because people actually are putting their names 
behind some of the things they’re telling us about lean. 
 
[11:45] 
 
So I quote, “I was a physician skeptic, now I am a physician 
champion for lean initiatives and rapid process improvement 
workshops.” Dr. Ram Abdulla. Quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
“The biggest thing I like about lean is the ‘do it now’ approach. 
If we have an idea, we trial it and tweak it as we go. People are 
saying, if I have an idea it can happen.” Erica Church, 
continuing care aid.  
 
Quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “I am using the patient order sets. 
It’s easier not to forget things. I thought it would be extra 
paperwork, but it’s okay once you get used to it. It is quite fast. 
Surgeons using it will make a difference. It does prevent 
mistakes.” Dr. William Retief. Quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “A 
lot of these ideas are ones the staff have had for years and now 
because of lean they’re being able to try it.” Erica Church, 
continuing care aid. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what lean is actually supposed 
to provide. It comes from the ground up. It starts with patient 
care and the best possible patient care it can deliver. Then you 
go and you talk with front-line health care providers and take 
some of their ideas and try to make the system better, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’ll quote, I enjoy quoting people that actually put their names 
to paper, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unlike the members opposite. So 
I’m going to do a couple more.  
 

There is no question we want to ensure the gold standard 
for all of our patients [Patients again]. Changing the way 
we work is hard . . . but this is a good example of how the 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5847 

hard work pays off . . . all of our surgical patients are now 
getting their antibiotics at the right time,” Jeanette 
Fahlman, nursing unit manager. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s one more that I’d like to throw out 
there. And I think it’s been used a couple of times, but: 
 

The most exciting aspect of the lean process is that 
registered nurses are being engaged alongside the entire 
health care team on the front end of change. This approach 
to reducing . . . [efficiencies] while improving patient 
safety maximizes the collective knowledge of our frontline 
staff, and demonstrates true leadership. 

 
Tracy Zambory, president of SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses]. RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] website, 
submitted January 15th, 2014. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that members opposite that have 
all engaged in this debate already, don’t want to hear quotes 
with people’s names attached. They’d rather go and talk about, 
well I heard this from someone about something somewhere, 
Mr. Speaker, and they didn’t like lean. Or I heard from 
someone that that John Black, he’s an evil man. People don’t 
like him. Which, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
kind of reminds me of Bobby Boucher’s mom in The Waterboy, 
if you’ve ever seen that, saying, John Black’s the devil — the 
devil I tell you, Bobby. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that some of the overtop rhetoric 
coming from the members opposite really, really aren’t doing 
credit to a new initiative that the job, the job of moving forward 
in the province of health care. 
 
I think when health care is looked at by many of the patients 
that we’re serving, which we did a patient-centred approach to 
health care which was much different to the approach . . . And 
don’t worry, opposition members, I’m going to get to your lean 
program here in a couple of minutes. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I think the patient approach to looking at health care taken by 
this side of government was a recognized change. And they 
want to get into the debate, so I’ll bring them into the debate, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll talk about the lean program under the 
NDP. 
 
The lean program under the NDP is, they leaned out our youth. 
They made sure not a lot of our youth wanted to stay in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They leaned out our 
population. They made sure that that highway to Alberta was 
packed hard with vehicles from Saskatchewan. 
 
They leaned out our economy, Mr. Speaker. They made sure 
that they taxed business high enough that they wanted to make 
sure they never wanted to come back to Saskatchewan under the 
NDP. They leaned out our nurses and doctors. Nurses and 
doctors went down under their reign, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
I think that they should recognize some of the problems they’ve 
made, and we’ll get to that in a couple of minutes too, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And one other thing they did, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that they 
leaned out the hospitals — 52 hospitals closed under them, 53 
counting the Plains hospital, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

They also leaned out our long-term care home. The member 
from Riversdale jumps up on her chair all the time, and says, 
what are you doing for long-term care? But we don’t want to 
talk about what they did. They don’t want to talk about what 
they did. They closed 19 long-term care hospitals and 1,900 
beds, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Do you think that has a little bit to 
do with our infrastructure deficit going on right now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Because I probably do. 
 
And you know, one of the things that I find interesting is their 
Leader of the Opposition jumps up from his chair every QP 
[question period] and talks about lean, except during their 
leadership campaign one of his promises was to find 
efficiencies in the health care sector. He never really said how 
he was going to do that. Well they never said how they’ll do 
anything. They have no policies whatsoever, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But I would love, I’d love . . . And the member from 
Saskatoon talks about . . . [inaudible] . . . talks about, I want to 
have a debate. I’d love to have a debate on your guys’ policy 
any time, anywhere, anyplace. You just don’t have any, so 
that’s pretty hard to have a one-sided debate, member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
So I’m looking forward to the time when they do bring some 
ideas forward. And I think at some point in time maybe the 
member, the Health critic which is actually the member from 
Riversdale, might be able to talk to him and say, you know, Mr. 
Leader, it’s probably time that we bring some policy forward 
because I’m going out to the doorsteps. I’m going out to the 
doorsteps and I’m trying to talk to people and they’re asking us 
what we’re going to do, and I don’t have any idea. So the 
election’s about a year out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think to 
be that unprepared for the election shows probably why there’s 
nine members over there and why there’s 49 members over 
here. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had a lot more I wanted to get to and just 
not enough time to get it done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But one of 
the things I’d like to say is that making improvements in the 
health care sector is very important to this side, this 
government, and moving forward we’re going to continue to try 
and deliver the best health care possible for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Lean is about 
creating efficiencies, saving money to reinvest in health care, 
and ensuring patient safety. Many health care workers see the 
benefits of lean first-hand and support the work that is being 
done. Roxanne Franklin and Glen-mary Christopher are both 
RNs [registered nurse] and have this to say about lean: “My 
colleague and I, both registered nurses and SUN members, wish 
to convey our strong support for the lean program that the 
Saskatchewan government has implemented.” Kat Moyer, a 
unit manager, also shows support for lean by saying, “This is a 
way to build staff morale and leadership. The staff are truly 
process owners.” 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: why won’t you 
listen to the front-line health care workers who are supporting 
lean? 



5848 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular 
debate is about the John Black contract, the toxic contract with 
the American consultant that has poisoned the well around the 
benefits that could be accrued from lean, Mr. Speaker. There 
are people over and over again, from front-line health care 
workers to those leaders in health care, who have talked about 
the problems with the John Black contract. We have heard loud 
and clear from them time and time again, Mr. Speaker, and 
don’t understand why this government refuses to listen to them. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
have a question for the folks opposite that make a lot about 
knocking on doors and talking to their constituents. I want to 
know how they would feel about telling their constituents that 
they could’ve had 72 more care aids for what this government 
has spent on John Black’s travel. 
 
To the member from Sutherland: how does he feel when he can 
tell them, his people, they could have 72 more aids instead of 
the travel bill? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. In response to the question, when I was door knocking 
in . . . the member from Saskatoon Centre, when I was 
knocking in his area, people weren’t talking about lean. They 
weren’t talking about John Black. They weren’t talking about 
senseis. They were talking about how we have invested in the 
health care system and we’ve improved things over and over 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. All they do over there is they just 
talked about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They don’t actually do 
anything. The people on the streets and the people on the doors 
are very happy with the direction of the Saskatchewan 
government and they’re very pleased with what’s going on 
within lean and within all our health care systems across 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
just amazed that the members opposite would even want to talk 
about health care after their dismal 16-year record of making 
cuts across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has a proven record of funding 
health regions, building hospitals, and reducing surgical wait 
times. Since 2007 there are 423 more doctors working in our 
province, 423 more doctors; 2,600 nurses, more nurses than 
there was when we came to power in 2007. We’ve built 15 new 
long-term care facilities, invested $235 million in a children’s 
hospital, and $100 million for the new Moose Jaw Union 
Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were in government, their record 

was closing 52 hospitals, actually 53 hospitals, Mr. Speaker, 
and the list goes on. Mr. Speaker, it’s often said the best 
predictor of future behaviour is past behaviour. 
 
To the member for Saskatoon Riversdale: what makes her think 
that the people of this province will forget their 16-year record 
come the next election? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
government has record revenues at its disposal, more money 
than common sense, Mr. Speaker, more money than common 
sense. The reality is we have highly understaffed facilities 
where patients are waiting for hours to get pain medication. We 
have facilities that are crumbling where netting has to be put up 
on the buildings to keep it from falling on top of people, Mr. 
Speaker, where surgeries are cancelled, where surgeries are 
cancelled because the HVAC [heating, ventilating, and air 
conditioning] system isn’t working, Mr. Speaker. That is the 
record of this government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, 
we hear a lot over there about all the wonderful things this 
government is doing, but what we know is that there is a 
shortage of medical care workers across the province. And what 
I want to ask the member from Saskatoon Sutherland is, does he 
think it’s right to pay $40 million to an American consultant, or 
have 800 more care aids helping our seniors? What does he 
prefer, American consultants or our own seniors? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am absolutely 
pleased that our government has invested in a process of lean 
and spent some money to save some money. And I don’t think 
that’s a concept understood by the members opposite over 
there. The member from Saskatoon Centre keeps chirping, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but he doesn’t understand you actually have to 
change your way of thinking. They don’t understand that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They can’t do the same old thing and expect 
different results. 
 
We have changed the way that health care workers are looking 
at things, patients are looking at things. We’ve invested in 
doctors. They talk about a lot of money that we have. Yes, 
we’ve been very fortunate, but we’ve also invested that back 
into our health care system with doctors, nurses, practitioners, 
LPNs [licensed practical nurse]. We’ve put it across the board 
to make sure that Saskatchewan patients are first and foremost 
in our minds. Thank you, Mr. . . .  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening with interest 
to members opposite talking about John Black and they’re 
talking about administrators. They’re talking about buildings. I 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5849 

don’t hear them talking about people, and I don’t hear them 
talking about patients. And I don’t hear them talking about 
outcomes.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m really pleased that the Sunrise Health Region 
has been sharing a schedule of available clinicians and 
appointment times, and how people with severe mental health 
issues are receiving services within 24 hours. That’s a 50 per 
cent increase in efficiency. That’s what matters to people on 
this side. 
 
Also at the Royal University Hospital the maternity ward is 
freeing up time for healthy . . . home nurses and allowing them 
to be out visiting more clients. Now parents that have babies in 
the neonatal centre are seeing their nurses more often.  
 
To the member from Saskatoon Centre: how can you ignore the 
fact that lean is making a positive impact on patients? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I find this a very interesting question, that 
she’ll go on and rant on about things that are important to 
people in Saskatchewan. I’ve got to tell you, the conversation 
we’re having today is about John Black and $40 million, and 
we can’t get a straight answer from this government about, 
when will this gravy train end? When will this gravy train end? 
And I think in particular with this former member who took a 
lot of pride in the work she did about whistle-blower legislation, 
whistle-blower legislation, except for the fact that nurses are 
exempt from that. Why is it that nurses are exempt and can’t 
really tell us what’s really happening with John Black on the 
floor in our hospitals and our health care centres? Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — To the member from Walsh Acres: why are 
the blood plasma savings being cited as being benefits of the 
JBA [John Black and Associates] contract when it clearly took 
place before John Black . . . that contract existed? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much for the question, 
member from Riversdale. And because it’s part of the lean 
process, that’s why it’s included. To the member: we’re saving 
money with the new blood process through the lean initiative, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
One thing I would like to ask all members from over there is, 
why do you think that we should take advice from you instead 
of the Mayo Clinic, instead of the Massachusetts General 
Hospital, instead of the Cleveland Clinic, instead of the Johns 
Hopkins Hospital? I know the member from Lakeview thinks 
he’s the smartest man in the world, but I think these people are 
going to give us better health advice in health care than you 
nine over there. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, lean is not just about organizing 
broom closets, as the Leader of the Opposition has stated in the 
past, nor is it about throwing away Christmas trees as the NDP 
did in their version of lean. Lean has allowed for pediatric 
cardiology patients to have services brought to them. The time 
per patient from registration to discharge was reduced from two 
and a half hours to one hour and 15 minutes, a 50 per cent 
reduction. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Centre: will you encourage 
your leader to accept the invitation of our Premier to see 
first-hand the positive work of the lean initiative? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve answered that question. A 
matter of public record that when we have been invited, the 
invitation’s been quashed by that group over there. 
 
But I wanted to ask, and I want to put this on record. Marlene 
Smadu of the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region said, and she 
said, “You will free think exactly the way I free think.” That’s 
what John Black says. “You will free think exactly the way I 
free think. The rigidity is off-putting for physicians. So getting 
out of this will be an improvement.” 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope we have time to vote on this 
motion and that they will come to their common sense over 
there and reject John . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time has expired. The 75-minute 
debate is over. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Estevan. 
 

Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon 
Capture and Sequestration Project 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to 
stand today, and at the end of my comments I will be moving 
the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports this government’s 
commitment to the Boundary dam integrated carbon 
capture and sequestration project. This innovative facility 
is the first of its kind and is a tangible step in addressing 
the production of greenhouse gases worldwide. Further, its 
innovative technology supports Saskatchewan’s resource 
industry, which is vital to the prosperity of our province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think one of the first things that we have to get 
out there is some information on carbon capture and storage and 
just what this is all about, and some may ask what this actually 
is. And carbon capture and storage is a process where carbon 
dioxide is captured from large industrial plants. This prevents 



5850 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

the carbon dioxide from entering the atmosphere. The gas is 
then compressed and either stored deep underground at a 
carefully selected site or used elsewhere, and that is most 
notably injected into oilfields to boost production, and we have 
seen that evidenced in the area I represent. The gas can also be 
transported by pipeline or specialized truck. 
 
And the Boundary dam carbon capture and sequestration 
project also captures other gases that have an impact on our 
environment, such as sulphur dioxide. This gas is then 
transformed into sulphuric acid, a tradable commodity that is 
then sold on the market. 
 
And why do we need this, Mr. Speaker? And why is SaskPower 
committed to this technology? And as the world’s population 
increases and developing countries continue to industrialize and 
increase their standard of living, CO2 emissions will continue to 
grow. Reducing emissions is an important way to develop 
environmentally sustainable industry and power generation. 
 
The Government of Canada is among the first in the world to 
actually legislate on emission reduction for coal-fired plants, 
while others like the United States and Europe are discussing 
targets. 
 
SaskPower continues to develop renewable power options and 
encourages conservation as a way to reduce emissions at the 
source. The Boundary dam CCS [carbon capture and storage] 
project will capture a million tonnes of carbon dioxide every 
year. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s the equivalent to taking a 
quarter of a million vehicles off our roads. 
 
And some may ask how carbon capture and storage fit into 
SaskPower’s future supply options. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s essential for SaskPower to develop environmentally 
sustainable power generation options for Saskatchewan’s 
future. We are researching the best balance of options to 
produce affordable, reliable, and sustainable power that 
includes carbon capture and storage, cogeneration, geothermal, 
nuclear power from small modular reactors, natural gas, hydro, 
wind, solar, and biomass. SaskPower is also developing energy 
efficiency and conservation programs. 
 
And if we don’t bother storing our man-made carbon dioxide, 
Mr. Speaker, the world will come to rely on fossil fuels in 
decades to come. With a growing population and industry of 
developing countries, several scientific studies forecast climate 
change as a result of increasing greenhouse gases into our 
atmosphere. Changing average temperatures, sea levels, and 
agricultural patterns are all possibilities. 
 
Carbon capture and storage is one of the many initiatives taking 
place around the world to reduce emissions and the scale of 
climate change. The Government of Canada now legislates how 
much carbon dioxide can come from coal-fired plants. If carbon 
capture is not applied to Saskatchewan’s coal production, we 
will eventually have to shut down, and with a third of our 
province’s power generation, the result would be more 
expensive generation and much higher power bills. 
 
And I think one of the most popular questions asked is, is this 
carbon capture and storage an experimental, unproven 
technology? And the answer is simply, no it isn’t. The first 

carbon storage project dates back to 1979, and many more since 
have successfully stored carbon dioxide underground for more 
than 30 years. And this includes Saskatchewan’s own 
Weyburn-Midale project in the early 2000s, and that is a project 
out there that is along the boundaries that are shared between 
the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy and my constituency, 
and I mean that has been out there for a number of years. 
 
Saskatchewan power’s BD3 [Boundary dam 3] project is the 
first of its kind due to the scale and the many parts involved, but 
it is not the first or last project that will successfully use carbon 
capture, transportation, and storage technology. Research 
continues to make it more efficient and, with the breakthroughs, 
leading to lower costs and smaller scales for future projects. 
 
Decades of monitoring and research have confirmed that careful 
storage of carbon dioxide is safe, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again, 
Saskatchewan’s own Weyburn-Midale project analyzed the 
underground storage of this gas for more than 12 years. The 
rocks, soil, water wells were all analyzed extensively and no 
effect was found. At Boundary dam the carbon dioxide is stored 
and monitored 3.4 kilometres under the earth. 
 
Other than enhanced oil recovery, there are other uses for the 
captured carbon dioxide. Potential uses include the food 
industry, agriculture, as dry ice for refrigeration, to name a few. 
And as carbon capture operations continue to develop around 
the world, new uses will be researched and marketed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of this province. I am very proud 
of this government. Our province is strong. Saskatchewan is 
strong. The Saskatchewan economy is strong. The population is 
growing and exports are growing. And just recently we’ve 
heard many members on this side get up and respond to the 
Throne Speech, and they spoke of the number of exports that 
we have from our province, and again it’s very strong. It’s 
become a global hub for innovation. 
 
And as I mentioned in my opening comments, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the federal government brought in new environmental 
regulations regarding coal-fired power plants, and that 
necessitated the need for a project such as this. And with 
Boundary dam power station in my constituency — it’s just 
located outside of Estevan — and with Boundary dam unit 3 
aging out, it made it an ideal fit for this project. We were given, 
we in Saskatchewan were given the opportunity to become a 
world leader in environmentally coal power generation, and this 
province and this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rose to the 
occasion. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m just going to mention a couple 
of articles here. And this is from the Estevan Lifestyles — it’s a 
local paper in Estevan — and it’s dated Thursday, October 9th, 
and David Willberg is the writer for it. He’s very interested in 
this project. And David writes under the headline, “The world 
gathers to celebrate project’s grand opening,” and it says that: 

 
Delegates from 20 countries were among those who 
attended the launch. They were at a clean coal symposium 
in Regina prior to the Boundary Dam official opening, and 
they travelled to Estevan for the festivities. 
 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5851 

They heard speeches from provincial and national leaders, 
who touted the project's potential global impact. 
 
And they toured the carbon capture island and the rebuilt 
Unit 3 at Boundary Dam . . . 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I’ve had the opportunity to 
tour this carbon capture project at Boundary dam. I toured it last 
summer with the Premier and Senator Heidi Heitkamp, who is a 
senator from North Dakota. We went out there. They gave us a 
tour. 
 
And just a couple weeks in fact before the official grand 
opening, the Minister of SaskPower and I were out there. And 
that is when they honoured the employees out there, all the 
workers who worked on this project. I believe at the peak 
period there was something like 1,700 employees there and not 
one man-hour lost due to accidents. So that is something that 
we in Saskatchewan and the employees can be very proud of, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will also continue a quote here in this very same article from 
Estevan Lifestyles. And I’m quoting now, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

Wall said one of the biggest challenges that governments 
face is balancing the need for energy with environmental 
considerations. 
 
Governments are faced a Faustian, “rock and a hard place” 
choice, he said. There's the low-cost, affordable energy that 
coal provides, which is good for the economy and 
consumers, but not [good] for the environment; or 
higher-cost forms of energy that aren't good for consumers, 
but are better for the environment. 

 
And he went on, the Premier went on to explain . . . I’ll close 
the quote there. But he went on to explain about how 1,200 new 
coal-fired plants are being planned for the world, and India and 
China account for about 76 per cent of that figure and that 
something had to be done to protect the environment as well as 
ensure sustainable, affordable power generation for those 
countries, Mr. Speaker. And China alone is planning the 
equivalent of a power river . . . pardon me, a Poplar River 
power station — that’s kind of hard to say — every 12 days. So 
I think that the Premier, when he summed it up, that when he 
said, it used to be that when you said clean coal, it was 
considered an oxymoron, but that is no longer the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will also read an article, or excerpts from an 
article, for the International Energy Agency, and it stated: 
 

The International Energy Agency (IEA) today welcomed 
the launch of the world’s first large-scale power station 
equipped with carbon capture and storage technology, [and 
this is out of Paris by the way, Mr. Speaker] calling it a 
historic milestone along the road to a low-carbon energy 
future. 
 
The IEA Executive Director Maria van der Hoeven said 
the launch represents “a momentous point” in the history 
of the development of CCS . . . She added: “CCS is the 
only known technology that will enable us to continue to 
use fossil fuels and also de-carbonise the energy sector. As 

fossil fuel consumption is expected to continue for 
decades, deployment of CCS is essential.” 

 
. . . “Getting Boundary Dam up and running is a great 
example of how Canada is a leader in CCS” . . . “The 
experience from this . . . [is] critically important . . .” [And 
it used to be] “that large-scale capture of CO2 from a power 
station is indeed not science fiction, but today’s reality.” 

 
And we hear comments from the members opposite, and they’re 
basically, you know, opposed to coal. And I think from what we 
heard in question period today, we can assume that they’re 
opposed to clean coal. I think that just shows the 
small-mindedness and, you know, perhaps not knowing what is 
going on in the province. 
 
[12:15] 
 
And I’m very proud of our government because our government 
is committed to ensuring Saskatchewan continues to be a major 
player in the international stage. And the members opposite, 
when they were in government and now as they are in 
opposition, with only nine I might add, are content with 
Saskatchewan remaining a wee province. We were never a 
leader. We always had to be a follower because . . . What was 
that statement? No one . . . You couldn’t finish last or 
something. I remember Calvert used to have the . . . [inaudible] 
. . . and you know, we all had to, we all had to finish last. I 
mean he never spoke about us being a leader at all in this 
province. But they do not support innovation to make coal 
power generation environmentally viable, and they would scrap 
the industry. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the Pipeline News. . . And I have to 
commend Brian Zinchuk because he realized the importance of 
this project. He’s a local reporter from Estevan that puts out 
Pipeline News, and he’s very fair-minded. And he dedicated a 
huge, huge amount of space from this Pipeline News to this 
project in Estevan. And he has the headline here: “NDP isn’t 
convinced clean coal is worth the money or that it’ll work.” 
 
So he goes on, and he’s questioning the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana — and this is in the October edition of 
Pipeline News — and he asks what her thoughts are on the 
project. And that member from, and I’ll . . . The member from 
Saskatoon Nutana says, “Well we’re becoming increasingly 
concerned about this particular project.” 
 
So then he says, “Assuming everything runs well, what does 
this mean for the province going forward?” She answers, “It’s 
hard to answer that.” 
 
Then he asks, “This project came not long after the previous 
NDP government passed on a much more expensive clean coal 
project at the Shand power station. Should clean coal be part of 
Saskatchewan’s future? And do you feel it is clean?” And she 
said, “Well those decisions were made before I entered 
politics.” 
 
And . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Exactly. 
 
And she did go on to say, “Saskatchewan could have done other 
diversified projects, especially in smaller distributed renewal 



5852 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

projects. That’s what we would like to see in the future, 
reducing our reliance on coal and looking to hydro, biomass, 
and all those things.” 
 
And then she said, if it works, we should look . . . They asked 
her, “If it works, should we look at replicating carbon capture at 
units 4, 5, and 6 in the coming years?” And she says again, 
“That’s something we’re going to keep very close watch on.” 

 
And then she said, “Does having a clean coal project in 
Saskatchewan give us an advantage when dealing with other 
jurisdictions on greenhouse gas emissions?” 
 
I would say, unfortunately . . . And she said, “I would say, 
unfortunately, not really, because we know carbon capture is 
not a silver bullet. It only reduces carbon capture by 1 million 
tonnes in Saskatchewan. And this is only dealing with a very 
small part of the problem.” 
 
But I would like to go back to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what she 
said about, was asked about the cancelled project that the NDP 
did. And I can remember that very, very clearly because the 
member from Lakeview was minister of SaskPower at that 
time. And they came out and they announced this project and 
there was . . . Everyone was so happy that this project was 
going to happen. And here the member says, “What I 
understand is at the time the government decided it was just too 
expensive and the technology wasn’t commercially viable and 
that’s why we decided not to put that kind of money into an 
experiment for clean coal.” 
 
But wouldn’t they have done that homework before they made 
the announcement? I mean usually you do a feasibility study, 
find out, you know, could this thing work? How much is it 
going to cost? And you do that kind of research into projects 
and a study into a project before you would ever, ever begin to 
announce it. 
 
And you know, and then it kind of reminded me, it kind of 
reminded me of the fiasco they had that wasn’t to do with clean 
coal; it was to do with ethanol out at Belle Plaine. And I’m sure 
lots of members over here remember that one. They had the 
tents and the buses and sent a few clowns out there, and nothing 
ever happened. I mean there was nothing, nothing that ever 
happened on that spot. So I mean that’s kind of how they 
operated when they were government. 
 
And I can also remember that Peter Prebble, I mean he was 
very, very adamant when he . . . He just calls for an end to the 
use of coal and he bashes the carbon capture and storage for 
being too expensive. And I can remember in the 2011 election, 
Mr. Speaker, I can remember when I was in my campaign 
office and I was, you know, we were always looking for things 
that, well when you’ve got a carbon capture and storage plant 
being built, you look for things that Peter Prebble is saying, 
pretty much. And he was on about how coal plants should just 
be shut down, shut down completely. You know, there’s no 
need for them. 
 
And I’m telling you, I mean the people in my constituency . . . 
Of course I, you know, kind of got the message out there to 
them. I wasn’t going to let that one sit when coal is such a huge 
part of what happens in my constituency and employs so many 

people. In fact I mean a lot of the workers out there went to 
work at SaskPower during the . . . oh probably I’m thinking the 
’90s, and that when we had a government in this province that 
would not support agriculture. And so many of those young 
farmers went to work for SaskPower to subsidize the farm 
income so they could keep food on the table for their families. 
 
So you know, it’s very important there, Mr. Speaker. And so 
when Peter Prebble came out with something like that, I 
thought, you know, wow. This is something that we can, we 
could make sure the public out there knows the truth of, you 
know. 
 
And then also, Mr. Speaker, when I look in the tree book, which 
is the NDP platform that was put out last time, and of course it 
was authored by none other than the present Leader of the NDP. 
His signature’s on the inside. He is the author of that book. 
Pretty proud of it, the tree book. Pretty proud of the tree book. 
 
But this is what it says about what the NDP say about 
environment: “Mandate SaskPower to phase out coal electricity 
generation as . . . [soon] as possible unless the power plants are 
fully equipped with mechanisms to safely capture and sequester 
CO2.” So now I mean we’ve got a plant that’s doing that, and 
they have nothing good to say about it. 
 
“Position Saskatchewan as a world leader in environmentally 
friendly and economically viable carbon capture and 
sequestration and permit SaskPower to profit from its 
knowledge and innovation by marketing CCS technology 
around the world.” And again, I mean the member from Nutana, 
her questions today were not reflective that that was their policy 
at all. And I mean maybe that’s just perhaps a matter of the left 
hand doesn’t know what the other left hand is doing. I’m not 
sure. 
 
But you know, we’re just going to go back a little bit here too, 
Mr. Speaker. And I just happened to come across some stuff 
that I had here, and it was about the NDP when they were in 
power. And it says here — what did Lorne Calvert say? — and 
it says: 
 

If we don’t protect and enhance our environment, what will 
be left for children and our grandchildren. It’s almost a 
tenet of ours that we need to bear some environment 
responsibility and stewardship. 

 
That was in the Regina Leader-Post, October 24, 2003. And so 
that would have been coming up towards an election, so I 
imagine that might have had some . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes. But according to the NDP’s own numbers, 
Saskatchewan’s emissions are 62 per cent above 1990 levels. 
 
Here’s what the David Suzuki Foundation says: “. . . the highest 
greenhouse gas emissions of any province or territory on a per 
GDP basis.” 
 
And Lorne Calvert again, April 5th, 2007. He was the premier 
at the time. Saskatoon StarPhoenix, and it’s quoted, “We have 
both a record we cannot be proud of in terms of our emissions 
. . .” And that was for Lorne Calvert, NDP premier. And the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix, a week or so later, April 13th, 2007, it 
quoted, “Environmentalists slam province’s green plan.” Again, 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5853 

April 13th, 2007. 
 
Sierra Club of Canada, a report card given to that government, 
the NDP government, 2006: “An environmentally regressive 
Premier and a cabinet whose NDP orange verges on brown.” 
 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix again: 
 

During his tenure, the green in Calvert’s green and 
prosperous economy has been covered by a brown of 
emissions from SaskPower’s coal-fired power plants and 
are the third-biggest contributor to greenhouse gases in 
Canada. 

 
And then there was David Suzuki Foundation again in 2006, 
status report of provincial climate change plan: 
“Saskatchewan’s greenhouse gas emissions have grown more 
since 1990 than any other province and territory.” 
“Saskatchewan’s greenhouse gas emissions are the highest in 
any territory.” Again the David Suzuki Foundation in 2006. 
And after 16 years in government the NDP did not have a 
climate plan, a climate change plan in place until 2007. 
 
And here’s “Saskatchewan green groups call for a change in 
action,” and this is from April 29 and this is again Peter 
Prebble: 
 

An end to all provincial subsidies to the oil industry. 
Requirements that the province’s oil industry capture all its 
methane rather than venting it. Replacing all the province’s 
coal-fired power plants with renewable energy over the 
next decade. 
 
Peter Prebble, director of environmental policy for the 
Saskatchewan Environmental Society . . . 
 

And I remind people a well-known NDP; he was once a 
minister of the Crown in the NDP government and in fact is 
referenced in the tree book as a source of their research. 
 

Peter Prebble acknowledged that many of the 
recommendations might not be immediately popular in a 
province that rakes in over $1 billion a year in royalties 
from the oil industry. [He says] “Clearly there’s going to 
be revenue loss for any oil producer in the world, including 
ourselves.” 

 
That’s a quote from Peter Prebble. So that, this here in my 
constituency alone, those few short paragraphs, Mr. Speaker, 
can win the election because that part of the province relies so 
heavily on the oil industry for jobs. And to have someone come 
out and make statements like that is just unrealistic. 
 
But I’ll tell you what the NDP did do regarding their 
environmental footprint or perhaps somebody else’s. And this 
here is, the CBC posted this in April 5th, 2007. It’s got here, 
Former U.S. presidential candidate Al Gore coming to town and 
“SaskTel, the provincially owned phone company, is fronting 
the $208,000 cost of the event . . .” 
 
An Hon. Member: — Al Gore. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Yes. 

An Hon. Member: — What an inconvenient truth. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Yes, and that was an inconvenient truth or a 
convenient untruth. I’m not sure which it was. But: 
 

Calvert said polls show the environment is not as hot a 
political issue here as in other parts of the country. 
 

And he’s hoping that, you know, Gore’s presentation will . . . 
would show us links between carbon emissions and global 
warming and was turned into an Oscar-winning documentary, 
will raise the profile of the issue in Saskatchewan. 
 
And he said that this province has carbon emissions that they 
can’t be proud of. And, “Calvert said he’ll announce his new 
strategy to reduce greenhouse gases around the time of Gore’s 
visit.” And, “The Opposition Saskatchewan Party says Calvert 
ran on an environmental platform in the last election and hasn’t 
done much to improve things since then.” 
 
And it was suggested here also that Calvert is just going to use 
the Gore appearance as a photo opportunity. And we know how 
much they liked those when they were in government. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I . . . it really frustrates me when 
people like Al Gore and Leonard DiCaprio, and . . . Good actor, 
but that’s what he should stick to. And Neil Young, they fly 
around, charter jets, fly around the world. They have yachts and 
have entourages picking them up, and chauffeurs and all this 
and that kind of stuff, and then they come and they tell me to 
reduce my carbon footprint. You know, it’s kind of the old NDP 
philosophy — don’t do as I do, do as I say. And, you know, and 
that is really, really frustrating. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Just another article, Mr. Speaker, that you know just really 
accentuates the importance and the endurance of coal, and this 
is from Gordienko, Hunt, Cochrane, and Sigurdson. They’re 
environmentalists. And it’s titled Environmentalists get facts 
wrong about coal and this is from October 26th, 2014: 
 

I look at it from the perspective of the importance of coal 
. . . in terms of employment, it’s huge here but I would 
remind city folk that it provides employment also for 
people in the Greater Vancouver area. 

 
And that was from Sparwood Mayor Lois Halko. 
 

While there has been much attention and controversy 
surrounding a small, proposed coal terminal — Fraser 
Surrey Docks — the larger picture of how important coal 
mining and exports are to British Columbia’s economy is 
being missed. 

 
Our unions’ members are the coal miners and workers who 
ship steelmaking coal from B.C. to markets overseas, 
where steel is made to produce everything from cellphones 
to wind turbines to subway cars to surgical equipment. 

 
And it goes on to say how: 
 

B.C.’s coal sector employs 26,000 people directly and 



5854 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2014 

indirectly, creates $3.2 billion in economic activity and 
generates $715 million in tax revenues for the province 
and B.C. cities and towns every year. 

 
In other words, coal pays for hospitals, schools, roads and 
other public services. 

 
Some object to coal based on misinformed health concerns 
— and yet all of our unions have members working closely 
with coal daily but do not see any negative health impacts. 

 
How is it that workers — sometimes up to their knees in 
coal — mining, running coal trains and loading coal 
directly onto ships are all healthy for decades and yet 
“experts” tell the public to beware of the “dangers” of coal 
dust? 

 
And I’m quoting from this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Our unions are responsible for our members’ health and 
safety — if coal caused illnesses, as claimed, we would 
know and would have acted [a] long [time] ago. 
 
To be sure, in the early days of coal mining before modern 
equipment and precautions were introduced, it was a very 
dangerous job. Today it’s still tough and there are some 
risks but safety has improved incredibly. 
 
Today’s coal industry in B.C. creates family-supporting 
jobs all over the province — including Metro Vancouver 
— and is a big part of our economy. 
 
Surprising to many, Canada’s total coal mined is less than 
one per cent of world production. 

 
And it goes on to praise the Boundary dam carbon capture 
project: 
 

. . . is the world’s first large-scale coal plant to use carbon 
capture and storage technology to reduce sulphur dioxide 
emissions by 100 per cent and [CO] . . . emissions by 90 
per cent . . . cutting one million tonnes of greenhouse gas a 
year. 

 
And that is again the equivalent to 250,000 cars being taken off 
the road. 
 
And the plant will produce 110 net megawatts of energy and 
that is enough to power 100,000 Saskatchewan homes. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I can’t emphasize the attention this 
project has garnered from China and Europe and the United 
States and, you know, it’s just amazing the interest that it has 
garnered. 
 
And also I’ll just read another, from another article here, Mr. 
Speaker, that says . . . It’s talking about carbon capture, and this 
is from the October 8th issue of The Estevan Mercury. And I’m 
quoting now: 
 

Critics of the investment in what is dubbed “clean coal” 
suggest spending . . . [1.4 million] on renewable, 
zero-emission energy would be a better place for those 

taxpayer dollars. Premier Brad Wall said during the grand 
opening that the province’s energy eggs don’t need to be in 
one environmentally friendly basket, and carbon capture 
has a role to play. 

 
And we all know where the eggs in the baskets come from, 
because that’s pretty much the extent of their ag policy over 
there as well, Mr. Speaker. But the quote goes on: 
 

“It’s not an either/or proposition,” Wall said bluntly, 
“because what the Sierra Club is forgetting is that the 
statistics are pretty clear: There are . . . [12,000] plants 
going to be built around the world. India’s using coal. 
China’s using coal. They’re building new plants all over 
the world. We need to invest in renewables, but we better 
also invest in technologies . . . [and] clean up coal. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are others that will want to 
speak on this motion. So at this time I will read this following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports this government’s 
commitment to the Boundary dam integrated carbon 
capture and sequestration project. This innovative facility 
is the first of its kind and is a tangible step in addressing 
the production of greenhouse gases worldwide. Further, its 
innovative technology supports Saskatchewan’s resource 
industry which is vital to the prosperity of our province. 

 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Estevan: 
 

That this Assembly supports this government’s 
commitment to the Boundary dam integrated carbon 
capture and sequestration project. This innovative facility 
is the first of its kind and is a tangible step in addressing 
the production of greenhouse gases worldwide. Further, its 
innovative technology supports Saskatchewan’s resource 
industry which is vital to the prosperity of our province. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to be able to rise today and speak to this motion as 
well. In my speech, address to the Throne, I talked about some 
of the things that make me proud to be a member of this 
government. And I think this is just one more of those projects, 
Mr. Speaker, that does make me very proud. I think this is a 
project that indicates that Saskatchewan is definitely hitting 
above its weight. We’re thinking beyond our borders. Our 
technology that’s available here is being looked at by 20-some 
countries, as my colleague from Estevan mentioned. Twelve 
hundred new plants worldwide that may be looking at this sort 
of technology. We’re taking the equivalent of 250,000 cars off 
our highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot that I would like to say about this 
motion, but at this time I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 



November 13, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5855 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved that this House do 
now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
Monday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:38.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5829 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5829 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5829 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5829 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5829 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5830 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 New Housing for Recovering Addicts 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5830 
 Power of Humanity Gala 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5830 
 Canadian Feed Research Centre Opens 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5830 
 Family Physician of the Year and Family Doctor Week 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5831 
 Managing Agricultural Drainage 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5831 
 Happy Memories of Danceland 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5831 
 Diabetes Awareness 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5832 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Costs, Benefits, and Contract Terms for the Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5832 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5832 
 Funding for Community Health Clinic 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5834 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5834 
 Smart Meter Program 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5834 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5835 
 Costs for Boundary Dam Carbon Capture Project 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5835 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5835 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5837 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Costs and Benefits of Health Care Initiatives 
  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5837, 5848 
  Merriman ...................................................................................................................................................................... 5839, 5848 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5841, 5848 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5842 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5844, 5848 
  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5846, 5849 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5847 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5848 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5848 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5849 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture and Sequestration Project 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5849 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5854 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


