
























































Hansard: November 03, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 7A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5649 
 November 3, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of my 
colleagues in the Assembly to make an extended introduction 
this afternoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, during the last few weeks I 
think we have been even more mindful of the great service that 
is done to our country by those who are prepared to serve in the 
Canadian Forces and to put themselves in harm’s way to help 
people the world over, and sometimes to be of great assistance 
here at home in times of struggle or calamity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we had another opportunity in the Assembly 
to honour those who bravely protect our freedom and the 
freedom of others in troubled areas of the world, and who are 
willing to serve their fellow Canadians. 
 
As we recognized the latest recipients of the Saskatchewan 
Scholarship of Honour at an awards ceremony here in the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, you will know that the Scholarship of 
Honour was actually an idea that came from you, sir, when 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] were gathered to 
discuss ideas on what we could do in government. I want to 
acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker, as well as the work of the 
member for Wood River, the military liaison for the 
government, and the current member for Saskatoon Greystone 
who, as minister, developed the Scholarship of Honour. 
 
It provides a one-time award of $5,000 to defray the costs of 
post-secondary education for those who are returning from 
military operations as well as the spouses and the children of 
fallen or disabled soldiers, Mr. Speaker. We have the recipients 
here today, or at least a number of them, and I would just ask 
them to maybe wave as I read their names into the record and 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
We have with us today Petty Officer Linda Conarroe. We have 
Chief Warrant Officer Allan Rishchynski; Sergeant Justin 
Demenoff; Amy Gillert; Gunner Shane Smith; Britnee Mishak; 
Ms. Sabrina Beason, wife of Warrant Officer Daniel Beason; 
Ms. Katia-Angela Guzzardi, wife of Captain Nicholas Verleun; 
Mr. Kristopher Reynolds, son of Sergeant Shaughn and Carol 
Wittman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those receiving the award who are not able to 
attend today’s ceremony include Captain Bryan McCulloch, 

Sergeant Scott MacKay, Sergeant Mark Calow, Corporal 
Michael Miller, Corporal Bjorn Hunter, Captain William 
Lindsay, Sergeant Brianna Rhind, Corporal Brandon Landry, 
Major Kevin Mead, and Mr. Alexander McKenzie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the program’s launch, 129 scholarships have 
been awarded, totalling $645,000. Ten of these recipients are 
family members of soldiers who died while serving our country, 
serving all of us. The scholarship is a small token compared to 
what these women and men have been prepared to sacrifice, Mr. 
Speaker. I just want to say to all of them, thank you. Thank you 
for that service. Thanks for being here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we wish them well in their educational 
endeavours. I’d ask all members to join me in recognizing them 
and welcoming them as well to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Premier in recognizing and expressing our deep 
appreciation and gratitude to these recipients receiving the 
Scholarship of Honour Award. Mr. Speaker, when members of 
our Armed Forces go into the line of duty, they don’t do it 
looking for a reward. They don’t do it looking for recognition. 
They do it because it’s a calling. They do it because they want 
to serve their fellow citizens. And that’s the mindset they 
approach it, Mr. Speaker, that it is their duty. 
 
We as Saskatchewan residents, as citizens of Canada, we have a 
duty as well, and that is to express our gratitude and to say 
thank you and to recognize the huge sacrifice that individuals 
have made and ultimately that families have made at the very 
same time, Mr. Speaker. So it’s very fitting that we as a 
province are able to make this type of recognition. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, I want to express my deep 
gratitude to each individual, to each family represented, and to 
say simply thank you for all that you have done. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. And 
we know that in September this year this government walked 
away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable housing 
project in Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take 
control and then rent the units at full market price. I’d like to 
read the prayer, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our 
province, and to immediately reverse its policy of now 
allowing private developers with whom the government 
has close relationships to default on fixed-price contracts 
for affordable housing projects. 

 



5650 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
the unacceptable danger on Dewdney Avenue by heavy-haul 
truck traffic that’s been created by that government. And they 
call upon that government to finally and urgently act to ensure 
safety on Dewdney Avenue and get those heavy-haul trucks off 
of Dewdney Avenue. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
condemning this government’s dangerous smart meter program. 
The undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
want to bring to our attention the following: 
 

Whereas the government knew about major safety 
concerns related to its smart meter project; whereas the 
government ignored those safety concerns and plowed 
ahead with its program; and whereas the safety of 
Saskatchewan families was put at significant risk, we, in 
the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request that 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
take responsibility for its failure to act on readily available 
information about safety concerns with its smart meter 
program, including through the immediate resignation of 
the Minister Responsible for SaskPower and a fully 
independent inquiry into the concerning chain of events 
that severely compromised the safety of Saskatchewan 
families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is presented by individuals from 
Saskatoon, Regina, and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Western Canada Conference on American Sign Language 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 17th I 

had the pleasure to attend the Western Canada Conference on 
American Sign Language (ASL) and English Bilingual 
Education at the University of Regina. I know the member for 
Regina Douglas Park was there also so I hope that he will bring 
back what he learned to his colleagues in the government as 
well. 
 
This conference provided an opportunity for teachers, experts, 
and members of the deaf and hard of hearing community to 
come together to discuss the important issues facing bilingual 
ASL education in Canada and here in Saskatchewan. There 
were a number of engaging speakers from all over North 
America who spoke about some very important topics for deaf 
education here in our province, the importance of developing 
both written and sign language skills, the systematic barriers 
many deaf and hard of hearing students face in our schools and 
society, and the transfer of language skills from American Sign 
Language to written English. 
 
One issue that came up over and over again at the conference 
was the need for ASL to be a recognized language for 
instruction here in our province. All of the deaf community 
advocacy groups all want to see ASL officially recognized as a 
language of instruction here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 
hope that all members will join me in supporting this very 
important cause. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Scholarship of Honour Recipients 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a strong history of women and men from Saskatchewan 
serving Canada’s Armed Forces with distinction. They serve 
with courage in often difficult circumstances around the world. 
Mr. Speaker, today we want to thank them through the 
Scholarship of Honour. 
 
This $5,000 scholarship was first announced in 2009 and was 
created to honour the commitment our members of the Armed 
Forces make to our country. It gives returning servicewomen 
and men and family members of injured or fallen individuals a 
chance to pursue post-secondary studies. 
 
This is an example of our government’s commitment to the 
women and men that have fought and made sacrifices for our 
country. Saskatchewan is the only province to offer this type of 
scholarship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as mentioned previously, there have been 129 
Scholarship of Honour recipients to date — 119 of them are 
returning servicewomen and men, and 10 are children or 
spouses of Armed Forces members. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we celebrate and honour 16 of the latest 
recipients of this scholarship. Six of these recipients are in the 
House with us today. This scholarship is a token of our 
gratitude and respect. It is because of these courageous women 
and men we live in a country where our freedom is preserved 
and we’re able to pursue our dreams. For that, we are eternally 
grateful. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5651 

Remembering Betty Pickering 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it is with sadness that I rise in 
this Chamber to commemorate a great Reginan and a tireless 
advocate for seniors in our province, in our city. I’m speaking 
of Betty Pickering. Sadly, Betty passed away on October 16th. 
Her funeral service took place last Sunday, October 26th. 
 
Betty was the president of the Saskatchewan Seniors 
Mechanism and recently received that organization’s 
Celebrating Seniors Award. Although Betty was not able to 
attend the awards ceremony, the folks at the Seniors 
Mechanism brought the award to her at Grace Hospice so she 
could celebrate and be recognized for all that she has 
contributed to the community. 
 
Betty Pickering helped the Seniors Mechanism to address a 
number of issues facing families and seniors in Saskatchewan, 
including elder abuse, health, and fitness. She also led the way 
in organizing conferences, in working with governments and 
businesses to improve access and qualities of services for 
seniors, and in reaching out to those who were isolated and 
alone. 
 
Betty Pickering showed true leadership through her work to 
make Saskatchewan better for seniors. She embodied 
volunteerism and community spirit. The passing of Betty 
Pickering is a great loss to our province, and I hope that all 
members will join me in expressing our condolences to the 
Pickering family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
2014 Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 

 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday my 
colleague from Regina Dewdney and I had the pleasure of 
attending the annual Nation Builders and Community 
Recognition Awards ceremony hosted by the Ukrainian 
Canadian Congress. 
 
Since 1995, the UCC [Ukrainian Canadian Congress] has 
recognized Saskatchewan volunteers who provide outstanding 
service to their communities and the Ukrainian-Canadian 
landscape. This year two of the Nation Builders Awards were 
presented to Natalie Ostryzniuk and Norbert Wasylenko. As 
well, seven others received recognition for their work in the 
community. 
 
The third Nation Builder Award recipient was my friend Mr. 
Edward Lysyk who sadly passed away earlier this year. Ed was 
recognized for his tireless dedication to the Saskatchewan 
Ukrainian community. 
 
This year was also special, Mr. Speaker, because our Premier, 
the member for Swift Current, received the Newsmaker of the 
Year award. This award was presented to recognize our 
government’s unwavering support of the Ukrainian community 
of Saskatchewan and the people of Ukraine. The UCC said that 
our Premier and our government have been pillars of strength 
for the Ukrainian community and that our strong words of 
support, the flying of the Ukrainian Flag at the Legislative 
Building, and the humanitarian assistance demonstrated this 

commitment. 
 
In accepting the award, our Premier reminded us that freedom is 
never free and that events of late have reinforced our 
commitment as Canadians to this value. Mr. Speaker, our 
government is honoured to work in partnership with the 
Ukrainian community for the betterment of our province and 
the people of Ukraine. Thank you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Volunteer Heritage Language Teachers Awards 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October the 
4th, I had the opportunity to bring greetings on behalf of the 
Minister of Education at the Multilingual Association of 
Regina’s Volunteer Heritage Language Teachers Award Night. 
The MLAR [Multilingual Association of Regina] is a non-profit 
registered charity committed to the retention and promotion of 
heritage languages. Volunteer teachers teach classes outside of 
regular school hours at heritage language schools which provide 
language instruction and celebrate cultural diversity. The 
MLAR has an ongoing focus of providing support for their 
volunteer language teachers through workshops and in-service 
training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the awards night honoured volunteer language 
teachers with three or more years of service. Twenty-six 
volunteer teachers received bronze service pins for three to four 
years of service, 12 received silver service pins for teaching 
between five and nine years, and eight teachers received gold 
service pins for 10 or more years of volunteer service. Honorary 
life membership awards were given to two recently retired 
long-serving MLAR board members. Mrs. Mary Kolitsas was 
honoured for her 25 years of continuous service and Mr. Ved 
Arora was honoured for his 35 years of continuous service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in celebrating the 
incredible work of the Multilingual Association of Regina and 
the volunteer language teachers who keep heritage languages 
alive, and in congratulating all of the award recipients. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Habitat for Humanity Build in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise in the House to talk about a new Habitat for Humanity 
build, the fifth that is under way in Moose Jaw. On October 
31st I had the pleasure of joining Habitat and its partners to 
celebrate this achievement and, most importantly, celebrate 
Krista and her daughter Sawyer’s joy in becoming homeowners. 
 
Today in Saskatchewan there is much to be thankful for. Our 
government’s Speech from the Throne highlighted our strong, 
growing province and the strength and determination of our 
citizens. Our government is proud to support Habitat’s efforts to 
lift families up and change their lives through home ownership. 



5652 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

This is why our government is providing $65,000 to help build 
this home. Mr. Speaker, this brings our commitment to Habitat 
for Humanity to a total of 7.85 million since March 2009. This 
is one of the many ways we are working to keep Saskatchewan 
strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province’s strength is found in the compassion 
and generosity of its people. This is certainly true of Habitat for 
Humanity and their partners. These values will keep Moose Jaw 
and Saskatchewan moving forward as we work together to 
make life more affordable for everyone. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

National Down Syndrome Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Canadian Down Syndrome Society has proclaimed November 1 
to 7th as National Down Syndrome Awareness Week. This 
public awareness campaign focuses on the unique strengths and 
abilities of people with Down syndrome. It also brings 
awareness to the discrimination that some people with this 
genetic condition face. 
 
Celebrating National Down Syndrome Awareness Week helps 
to ensure equitable opportunities for all Canadians with Down 
syndrome. Mr. Speaker, about 1 in 800 people are born with 
Down syndrome. These people have many abilities and 
continue to make great contributions to our communities. 
 
That is why this year’s budget included 9.9 million in funding 
for the Ministry of the Economy employability assistance for 
people with disabilities program, to assist adults with 
disabilities to prepare, secure, and maintain employment. 
 
This program recognizes the great contributions of people with 
Down syndrome in our society and encourages equitable 
opportunity for all. Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Down Syndrome 
Society continual campaign, See the Ability, promotes the 
abilities of those with Down syndrome and works to educate 
Canadians about this genetic condition and help eliminate any 
stigma. 
 
I would like to ask all members to join me in celebrating 
National Down Syndrome Awareness Week and the See the 
Ability campaign. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Smart Meter Program 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is the Premier aware 
that it was actually senior officials at SaskPower that made the 
decision to remove the dangerous smart meters from the homes 
of 105,000 Saskatchewan families? Is he aware of that, yes or 
no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of what 
conclusions senior management had come to with respect to the 
meters, but I can tell you the conclusions the government had 
come to after meeting with the minister and senior advisers in 
my office. We made the decision to direct SaskPower to pull 
the meters. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier should take 
time to read the report that was provided, and you can see it’s a 
very different story than what we’ve heard from this 
government. 
 
Last week in the House, the Premier made a very bold claim 
that turns out not to be true. The Premier said: 
 

And as soon as there was a concern with respect of 
safety — Mr. Speaker, on the part of the minister, not 
SaskPower — on the part of the minister, action was taken 
to remove the meters. 

 
Well this flies in the face of what actually happened on a 
number of fronts, Mr. Speaker. So will the Premier stand today 
and correct the record? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I recall the morning when we 
had discussions at cabinet. Prior to the cabinet meeting, I had a 
discussion with the minister and senior advisers. There were no 
SaskPower officials present for those meetings. We made the 
decision, after some considerable discussion, that the action of 
the pulling of the meters needed to be directed to SaskPower. 
 
Now if they had come to the same conclusion at some similar 
point in time, that may well be the case. But I’m telling this 
House, Mr. Speaker, I’m telling you for the public record, I’m 
telling my friend across the way, that the decision to pull the 
meters that the government made was made absent advice from 
SaskPower. It was made absent direction from SaskPower. 
Rather, it was the cabinet, the minister responsible, myself that 
made this decision, directed SaskPower to pull the meters. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what we said at the time. I scrummed shortly 
thereafter. That’s exactly the case. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the report from 
PricewaterhouseCoopers lays out exactly what happened, Mr. 
Speaker. And the PricewaterhouseCoopers version doesn’t 
match with what the Premier and what the Minister of 
SaskPower have been claiming. Here’s what the 
PricewaterhouseCoopers’ report says: 
 

SaskPower executives advised that they met with the 
president of Sensus on July 29th, 2014 and subsequently 
decided that they would recommend to the board that the 
installed meters be removed. 

 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: why does his 
version of events differ so much from the facts that are stated in 
the PricewaterhouseCoopers report? 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5653 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, cabinet made the decision 
without any consults, without any advice from SaskPower 
officials — never mind where they had been, never mind where 
they had been, never mind what they may have told the board or 
the meetings they had with Sensus. The deputy leader says 
that’s unbelievable. It is precisely the case, Mr. Speaker. 
Immediately after the decision was made, we informed the 
media. We called a scrum. We indicated to the media exactly 
what was going to be happening. We directed SaskPower to 
remove the meters. 
 
Now immediately, and I think publicly and privately, 
SaskPower indicated back to the government, and publicly, that 
they supported that decision. So the information that my 
friend’s presenting isn’t a surprise. Apparently they were 
coming to the same decision as was the elected members of the 
government. The fact remains our decision was made as a 
cabinet, and as the minister responsible, and not with respect to 
any advice from SaskPower. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a big disconnect between 
what PricewaterhouseCoopers clearly reports on the actions that 
were taken at SaskPower and what the Premier and the minister 
have been claiming. On July 29th, senior officials at SaskPower 
met with the president of Sensus, and they weren’t satisfied 
with what they heard in that meeting. So the senior officials at 
SaskPower decided to remove the dangerous smart meters from 
the homes of 105,000 Saskatchewan families. 
 
We’ve been told, Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower officials 
informed the minister of their conclusion and that they were 
working to pull the board together for a meeting as quickly as 
possible, but that was proving to be a challenge. So senior 
officials, Mr. Speaker, told the minister that he could use his 
prerogative to approve the decision and avoid having to wait for 
a board meeting. So the minister, Mr. Speaker, hopped in front 
of the parade and made the announcement. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: was he aware of 
the true version of events when he was claiming, when he 
claimed that the minister took bold and decisive action against 
the will of SaskPower? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would invite my honourable 
friend to look at the executive summary for 
PricewaterhouseCoopers’ report with respect to this initiative. 
And just several paragraphs down, four from the bottom, it 
reads as follows, we considered . . . This is PwC 
[PricewaterhouseCoopers] now for the member opposite: 
 

We considered SaskPower MIA procurement activities 
from May 29, 2009 when the SDR was approved by the 
board of SaskPower through to July 30, 2014, when the 
government ordered SaskPower to remove the smart 
meters that had been installed. 

 
Keep reading, I would say to the hon. member. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the Premier to 
look at the facts laid out clearly by the board in the report, Mr. 
Speaker. It is more than passing strange, Mr. Speaker, that 
senior officials at SaskPower meet with the president of Sensus. 
They’re going to pull the meters off the homes. And then 
suddenly, magically, Mr. Speaker, the minister pops in front of 
the parade and claims that they’re pulling the meters off against 
the will, Mr. Speaker, of SaskPower. 
 
Let’s be clear what has been happening here. This is a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that knowingly put Saskatchewan 
families at risk. This is a government that has not been 
transparent with all the facts, a government that has been 
pretending to take decisive and bold action against the will of 
SaskPower. But PricewaterhouseCoopers’ report is very clear: 
officials, Mr. Speaker, made the decision to remove the meters, 
not the minister that has been answering. So 
PricewaterhouseCoopers has taken away, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier’s only line of defence of the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he fire the Minister of 
SaskPower? And, Mr. Speaker, will he take the minister to task 
for not being forthcoming about when he knew, Mr. Speaker, 
and what he knew? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I didn’t think my hon. friend could actually 
take to new heights his penchant for actually not telling the 
whole story in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote from the report now. I am 
quoting from the report that he is referencing that was tabled: 
 

SaskPower executives advised that they met with the 
president of Sensus on July 29, 2014 [this is going to be 
the rest of the story again] and subsequently decided that 
they would recommend to the board the installed meters 
be removed. SaskPower advised that they were in the 
process of holding an ad hoc board meeting when the 
Government of Saskatchewan ordered the removal of . . . 
[the] meters . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, which is exactly what I’ve said in the House. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s exactly the answers here. It’s exactly the case. 
Then in the subsequent page, Mr. Speaker, it indicates that the 
board was coming to the same conclusion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve had just about enough of someone 
who is an aspirant to the highest office in the province playing 
fast and loose with the facts and cherry-picking reports. This 
government made the decision, directed SaskPower to pull the 
meters. Now they were, might be coming to the same 
conclusion, which the report verifies, a report that was secretly 
hidden on the Internet and released publicly, Mr. Speaker, and 
one that he has access to. No one is going to be asking anyone 
to get fired. His colleagues, though, may ask him to do a little 
bit more homework, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



5654 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what is offensive to the people of 
Saskatchewan is the story being spun by this Premier and this 
Minister Responsible for SaskPower. Mr. Speaker, the report is 
clear. The report is clear. SaskPower made the decision to 
remove the meters. This government, Mr. Speaker, claims that 
it took bold and decisive action, but it was officials from 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, that told members there that the 
meters were going to be pulled. And suddenly we see a meeting 
called, Mr. Speaker, where they claim that they pulled it. 
 
Saskatchewan people are not stupid, Mr. Speaker. They can see 
the chronology of events for themselves. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Premier: when will he do the right thing and 
take this minister to task for not being forthcoming for what he 
knows and when he knew it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, more volume from the hon. 
member is not going to change the fact that he’s forgotten to 
read essential elements of the report. Mr. Speaker, I’ll quote the 
following from the report: 
 

SaskPower ordered by Government of Saskatchewan to 
remove smart meters. Announced by Hon. Bill Boyd [I’m 
quoting, Mr. Speaker], Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. SaskPower advised it 
was preparing a briefing to its Board to recommend the 
same measure when this announcement . . . [had already 
been made — by the minister — public in the province of 
Saskatchewan.] 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday the 
SaskPower minister was asked whether he was concerned that 
Sensus meters were still being put on homes in Hanley after 
SaskPower was informed that those very, exact same meters 
were dangerous to families down in Philadelphia. 
 
The SaskPower minister had no real answer. In fact he basically 
said he would need to go through the timelines in detail. It’s 
quite shocking that the SaskPower minister still hadn’t bothered 
to properly read the report and review the timelines, if that’s the 
case. 
 
My question is for the Premier: has the Premier taken the time 
to review the full report, and what does he have to say about the 
timeline in which meters that were known to be dangerous were 
being put on the homes of Saskatchewan families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, yes we’ve reviewed it, and I 
would advise the member opposite and the Leader of the 
Opposition they might want to do the same, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the meters, it was our 
understanding, through SaskPower officials, that the meters in 
question in the Philadelphia incidents, none of them caught fire 
as a result of the meter themselves, that there were other 

installation problems and wiring problems that resulted in that. 
And that’s why, subsequently, the SaskPower officials advised 
the government to continue to proceed with the meter 
installations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Here’s what Hanley resident Kerry 
Sheffield told the media: 
 

I just don’t know why it took so long to finally figure out 
there is problems [and] why they didn’t do anything sooner 
. . . It concerns me, I mean, I have two children and the fact 
that it could have had a fire at any point just scares the . . . 
[unparliamentary word] out of me. 
 

What does the Premier have to say to people like . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member knows that you cannot do 
indirectly what you can’t do directly, so I would caution the 
member to take his words carefully. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — What does the Premier have to say to 
people like Kerry Sheffield, and how can he stand beside the 
minister when that minister knew about major safety concerns 
related to the exact smart meters and still allowed them to be 
put on the homes of families here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this information is very, very 
clear. SaskPower was aware of the incidents around the 
problems that were associated with fires in Philadelphia. They 
checked into it and found out the information was such that the 
meters were not responsible for the fires, that there were other 
problems associated with wiring or installation. As a result of 
that, SaskPower officials advised the government to continue to 
proceed with the installation both at the Hanley site — the test 
site — and further than that. After that of course that’s when the 
problems started to develop. 
 
What we would say to the residents of Hanley and the rest of 
the province of Saskatchewan, clearly there has been significant 
problems with this smart meter program, without a doubt. We 
have certainly taken a number of steps to address that, Mr. 
Speaker, including the removal of those meters across the 
province where they have been installed. In addition to that we 
have sought and received money back from Sensus with respect 
to this program. In addition to that we have conducted a review 
which is before all of us in this House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as we have seen 
throughout this debacle, that minister’s statements just don’t 
hold water. Kathy Menendez of the Philadelphia Electric 
Company, PECO, has made it abundantly clear that PECO 
reached out to SaskPower in August of 2012 to alert them to 
major safety concerns related to Sensus meters. The minister 
can dismiss those if he wants, but they canned their program 
and shelved their relationship with Sensus, Mr. Speaker. But 
this government just plowed ahead and it kept putting those 
exact same meters that were catching on fire in Philadelphia 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5655 

onto homes of hundreds of Saskatchewan people more than two 
years ago here in Saskatchewan. 
 
How can the Premier defend that? How can the Premier 
continue to stand by that minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the appropriate 
steps were taken. Safety was paramount with respect to this. 
After the Hanley test situation was completed, all of the meters 
were tested to ensure their safety and none of them failed with 
respect to the safety issues that were later a concern with 
respect to smart meters here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the steps that were taken were the 
appropriate steps with respect to this. And we took the advice of 
officials just as the member opposite advised that he would do 
under similar circumstances, that he would take the advice of 
officials and not be the one that’s put in the position to make 
that decision. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister can try to 
deflect from his responsibility and his negligence all he wants, 
but the facts speak for themself, when he had officials go down 
to Philadelphia because of the fires, Mr. Speaker, and because 
he was contacted by that very company, they continued to plow 
ahead here in Saskatchewan putting peoples’ lives at risk. 
 
When reporters asked that minister whether he was aware that 
officials actually went to Philadelphia in 2012 to investigate 
safety concerns, he said, “I learned just recently.” But eight 
minutes later, just eight minutes later, he let it slip that he had 
known about the trip before it happened. He reversed his entire 
answer. He knew more than two years ago. And his excuse for 
his earlier statement was pathetic. He said, well he didn’t know 
the names of the people that were down there at the time, and he 
said that’s why he said he only recently learned of the trip. 
 
It’s just simply not credible, Mr. Speaker. The minister knew a 
whole lot more than he’s been telling us every step of the way. 
The opposition and the media have been forced to drag it from 
that minister. To the Premier: how is this acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I would say on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan once again, it was a very, very 
unfortunate set of circumstances that resulted in the fact that the 
smart meter program was a failure here in Saskatchewan. 
Clearly that was the case. 
 
But at the time that all of this was unfolding, Mr. Speaker, the 
best advice that the government was getting from the officials at 
SaskPower was to proceed with the program. And if you ask the 
question, should we have asked more questions, given what we 
know today? Probably yes. However, at the time the 
information was such, at the time the information was such that 
we should proceed. And that’s exactly what happened, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

In the Hanley situation, there were no fires that happened in the 
Hanley situation. The meters were tested afterwards and proved 
to be adequate. In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I would say 
that we’ve also contacted the mayor of Hanley, and the mayor 
of Hanley said they believed that the situation was handled 
correctly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last year I asked that SaskPower 
minister questions about the smart meter program in committee. 
The minister never once bothered to identify problems either in 
the testing phase here in Saskatchewan or with regard to 
deployment in other jurisdictions. 
 
So my question’s for the Premier: doesn’t it bother him that the 
minister made a bold and decisive decision to not reveal any 
concerns about this government’s smart meter program despite 
being asked about it in committee? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, all through this situation we 
asked questions of the SaskPower folks when they came in to 
provide briefing information. They asked and we received 
information about the situations. They said that they were 
comfortable with the situations. They felt that the situations had 
been addressed to the best of their knowledge with respect to 
this. 
 
Of course now we learn that there was definitely problems. And 
that’s why the government moved as quickly as we did to have 
these meters removed from the homes of Saskatchewan people, 
and that’s why we sought and received the money back from 
Sensus with respect to it as well. That’s why we also conducted 
three reviews to see what happens. And the evidence is before 
all of us, and it is very clear, Mr. Speaker. There were 
problems. The government acted, and we make no apologies for 
that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, when I asked in committee for 
updates on how the smart meter program was going, the 
answers I received included “It’s going quite well actually.” 
“The project is running according to plan.” 
 
Not once did the minister bother to reveal that he was aware of 
major safety concerns with Sensus smart meters. No, his story 
was that the project was going well and running according to 
plan. So again to the Premier: how is it acceptable that the 
minister knew about major safety concerns but chose not to 
reveal them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Of course, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite would know that the SaskPower officials would be 
sitting right there, right there advising the minister, advising 
myself with respect to the situation. And when asked, and when 
asked about the information around these things, they would be 



5656 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

saying, yes there were some problems associated. Those 
problems have been looked at very, very carefully, Mr. Speaker. 
Those problems have been looked at very, very carefully. We 
believe that the situation is such that the meters are safe. 
There’s been some 10 million of these meters have been 
installed into the United States, and we have had very, very 
limited number of problems associated with it, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Clearly we made the most appropriate decisions based on the 
information that was provided by the officials at the meetings. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s refusal to share 
relevant information in committee is certainly concerning, but 
it’s especially concerning that the 2012 annual report that the 
SaskPower minister tabled in this Legislative Assembly is not 
accurate. That report says that the Hanley field test of the smart 
meters was successful. Well perhaps this government has a 
different definition of successful, but when you need to rip out 
400 dangerous smart meters and replace them with the original 
meters, I’m not sure how that can be characterized as a 
successful field test. 
 
To the Premier: how does it not concern him that the annual 
report tabled by SaskPower minister wrongly characterizes 
what really happened in Hanley? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — There were no fires in the Hanley test 
phase of this installation, no fires whatsoever. There were 
problems with other parts of the meters with respect to the 
electronic portion of the calculations and things of that nature, 
Mr. Speaker, but there were no fires in the Hanley situation. All 
of those meters were removed, Mr. Speaker. They were all 
tested and found to be adequate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — This is outrageous. This government knew 
about smart meter fires in Philadelphia, and in fact it was so 
afraid it removed 400 meters from homes in Hanley in the fall 
of 2012. But in committee, the government characterized the 
field test as going well, and it characterized the project as 
running according to plan. In the annual report tabled by that 
minister, he characterized the botched Hanley smart meter 
experiment as successful. This isn’t just a business deal gone 
bad, Mr. Speaker. This is a case of the government putting the 
safety of Saskatchewan families at risk and then refusing to be 
transparent about it. 
 
So again to the Premier: how much more does he need to hear 
about that minister’s incompetence before he will finally make 
a bold and decisive decision to remove him from cabinet? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I will say it again to the 
member opposite: in the Hanley test phase of the smart meter 
rollout, there were no fires. None. There were problems with 

other areas of it. They checked into those problems and 
indicated that the meters were fine. They subsequently removed 
the meters and went through tests again and found that those 
meters were fine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The situation is very, very clear. The government made, the 
government took the appropriate steps all the way through this 
based on the advice that we were given by the SaskPower 
officials, which is in sharp contrast to what the member 
opposite said he would do, which was he simply would accept 
the advice of the SaskPower officials, which is exactly what 
happened. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a very 
strange definition of successful. When you need to rip out 400 
dangerous smart meters and replace them with the original 
meters, I sure wouldn’t call that a successful field test. 
 
But I have another specific question for the Premier that he 
hasn’t answered yet: does he think it’s acceptable that the 
minister and his officials said the smart meter program was 
going well and running according to plan when the minister 
knew about major problems? Is this acceptable to the Premier, 
yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there were no 
fires in Hanley. There was no fires in Hanley. There was 
problems with other areas of the meters such as the actual 
mechanical electronics board, and those kinds of things, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s exactly what was advised by the SaskPower 
officials, and that was the advice that the government took with 
respect to continuing with the installation program across the 
province which was advised by the officials of SaskPower. 
 
And that’s exactly what happened, of course, which is in sharp 
contrast to the members opposite when they were in 
government and lost money hand over fist in this province as a 
result of the fiascos that they were involved in. 
 
[14:15] 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Education. 
 

Supports for Learning 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to talk about a new direction our government is 
taking to respond to the needs of students in the classroom. 
 
Last Friday we announced that the $4.6 million previously 
allocated for the student achievement initiative will be 
redirected to where it is needed the most, to the classroom. 
Specifically, $3.5 million of this funding will be distributed to 
school divisions based on the supports for learning component 
of the funding formula. The remaining $1.1 million will also be 
rolled out through supports for learning but will be targeted 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5657 

towards enrolment growth. Supports for learning provides 
school divisions with the resources to put in place supports for 
vulnerable students, students with intensive needs, and students 
whose first language is not English. 
 
We know that teachers are in the best position to identify where 
this funding can have the most impact on students and teachers 
in the classroom. That is why we have asked school divisions to 
work with teachers to determine where supports are needed and 
ensure that this money is going to support those things, whether 
that be hiring additional teachers, education assistants, or 
speech-language pathologists, or investing in technology in the 
classrooms. We are supporting student success. 
 
We also know that students in Saskatchewan schools have seen 
an enrolment increase again this year, the fourth consecutive 
year for growth in our schools. We now have 173,548 students, 
almost 3,000 students more, which represents an overall 
increase of 1.74 per cent. More people are calling Saskatchewan 
home, and the growth means great things for our province, but 
we recognize that growth can place a strain on our schools. We 
are listening to students, teachers, and our school divisions 
about the challenges facing our classrooms, and we have 
responded with support that will help improve educational 
outcomes for our students. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
see this action occur. It’s something that we, the official 
opposition New Democrats, have been calling for from the day 
that that government announced almost $5 million for 
standardized testing, Mr. Speaker. We stated that at budget 
time. We’ve placed that debate on the floor of the Assembly. 
We’ve pushed that government to place those dollars to where 
they matter, where they make a difference in the lives of 
students. So this is something that, you know, that we’ve been 
calling for and that we’re pleased to see. 
 
What we need to recognize though, is that the pressures within 
classrooms are real and significant. What we need to recognize 
as well is that, although these dollars are better spent here of 
course than on wrong-headed standardized testing pursued by 
that government, there’s still big gaps in providing the needed 
funds to school divisions across Saskatchewan, many school 
divisions identifying their intensive need supports actually 
coming in with a shortfall from funding of that government well 
in excess of this one-time transfer. 
 
So although we’re glad to see these dollars that were going to 
be wasted by this government for province-wide standardized 
testing diverted to where they matter, we will continue to press 
to make sure this government finally recognizes and prioritizes 
education and those growth pressures across the province, 
recognizing the important needs of students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ll continue to watch. You know, we know that 
government has spent untold millions towards standardized 
testing to date. That’s wrong-headed. That’s not supported, 
doesn’t have evidence behind it. We’ll continue to watch that 
government moving forward to ensure that they don’t waste any 
further dollars of Saskatchewan people’s hard-earned money on 
province-wide standardized testing, of which I know there’s a 

lot of concern that this government’s simply going through a 
rebranding exercise and that this may emerge at another point in 
time. 
 
So we’ll continue to work with our educational partners across 
Saskatchewan, the fine teachers of this province, the great 
school boards, and stand up for students. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 607 — The Buy Local Day Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 607, The Buy 
Local Day Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of the 
Opposition that Bill No. 607, The Buy Local Day Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Mr. Broten: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 
questions 1 through 25. 
 
The Speaker: — The government has ordered the responses to 
questions 1 through 25. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 26 through 31. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 26 through 31. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 
Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 
 



5658 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed an honour to address this Assembly and a 
welcome opportunity to offer some comments on the 2014 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
Now I want to begin, as other members have so appropriately, 
with a few well-deserved thank yous. First to my wonderful 
wife, Jocelyn, whose constant love and support makes 
everything that I do here in the legislature possible. I’m sure all 
members feel exactly the same about their spouses and partners. 
 
Next I want to thank Kyle Leonard, my hard-working 
constituency assistant who runs the Regina South office so 
efficiently and always with a keen awareness of serving our 
residents well. He also works very hard, Mr. Speaker, to keep 
me organized and on task, truly a thankless job if ever there was 
one . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . For him, absolutely. A 
special hello to Michelle, his lovely wife, and their beautiful 
young daughter Emily, one of Saskatchewan’s newest, happiest, 
and no doubt most energetic citizens. 
 
And next, Mr. Speaker, a very sincere thank you to the good 
people of Regina South, not only for their support through the 
years, which I deeply appreciate, but also for providing their 
insight and sharing their concerns on an ongoing basis. As I am 
fond of saying, Mr. Speaker, the most important homework we 
elected representatives can do is to listen and learn from the 
people we are elected to serve. 
 
And finally as other members have done, I offer my heartfelt 
thanks to our military community and protective services 
personnel for all they do to keep us safe and to preserve our 
cherished values and freedoms. Mr. Speaker, as many have 
noted, these thoughts are especially appropriate at this time of 
national mourning for our two soldiers killed on their very own 
soil while carrying out their appointed duties, targets simply 
because they were wearing their uniforms with pride. 
 
At times like these, Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded of an immigrant 
family that moved into our neighbourhood a few years ago right 
in the middle of the civil war in the former Yugoslavia. Over 
the next few months I took the time to get to know them pretty 
well and grew to like them a lot. The husband’s name was 
Ennis and he explained to me that he, his wife, and young 
children were part of the small Muslim minority in Bosnia, 
caught up in a tragic and brutal war that none of them had 
wanted. 
 
He told me that every day, along with the other men in his 
village, he would pick up his AK-47, take up a position behind 
the barricades, and shoot at the people determined to wipe out 
his entire community. He said he never knew whether he would 
be alive at the end of a given day. Said he never knew whether 
his family would be alive or whether his house would even be 
standing when he returned home to see them in the evening. So 
finally he and his wife made the difficult decision that they 
could no longer stay in their homeland. For their sake and for 
the sake of their children, they just had to get out. 
 
I can only imagine the courage this would take, fuelled by 
desperation and raw determination to survive. Somehow they 

slipped through enemy lines and eventually found their way to 
Regina, Saskatchewan. What a difference. Could there possibly 
be a starker contrast, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Ennis often talked about the harrowing experience of escaping 
one of modern history’s bloodiest and most senseless conflicts. 
Somehow he preserved a sense of humour throughout it all. He 
regularly invited me over to his place for conversation, along 
with roast goat straight off the barbecue and a cup of clear 
homebrew that could peel the paint off the side of a barn. He 
was a talker and always had lots to say, Mr. Speaker, but of all 
the things he told me, I will remember one in particular forever. 
Hey neighbour, he said, in an accent so thick you could cut it 
with a knife, maybe it’s good there is someone like me to 
remind you Canadians how lucky you really are. Sure you have 
problems, he continued. Who doesn’t? But no war, no crazy 
people killing thousands of other people just because they’re 
not the same. 
 
It’s the times like these that I recall my Bosnian friend’s wise 
words. He was right after all. We are lucky; indeed we are 
blessed. And we owe it all to our military personnel and our 
first responders, who work hard and with great dedication on 
our behalf each and every day, including of course our 
Sergeant-at-Arms, Pat Shaw, and his staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amazing national outpouring of shock and 
grief for our two most recent fallen soldiers, along with 
compassion and support for their families, is appropriate and 
it’s gratifying, but there are other important ways that we can 
show our thanks as well. Certainly we should also attend 
Remembrance Day ceremonies in our own community. Here in 
Regina, we can do that at the Brandt Centre or outside at the 
cenotaph downtown in Victoria Park. 
 
And here in Regina as well, we can attend the annual Police and 
Peace Officers Memorial Day Ceremony. It takes place each 
year at the legislature on the last Sunday of September. It’s a 
very moving experience honouring RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] members, municipal police officers, and 
conservation officers as well who had given their lives and their 
service to us. Participation by the public is most welcome and 
deeply appreciated. We can show our respect in particular to the 
RCMP who have their own special ceremony for fallen 
members, which is important this year as the force struggles to 
overcome the recent tragedy in New Brunswick. 
 
We can do these things and should do these things, Mr. 
Speaker, but with the deepest of respect, I ask that we also take 
time to honour the living, those who continue to serve us, the 
colleagues of our fallen heroes. What could we do for them, we 
might ask? Well, Mr. Speaker, it was a very welcome 
opportunity for MLAs in the House today to applaud the World 
War II veterans who visited their legislature. We appreciated 
this gesture. I suggest we say hello also to fellow citizens in 
uniform when we meet them on the street, and thank them for 
their service. Buy them a cup of coffee the next time you see 
them in a restaurant. Become better informed about their world, 
their perspective on life, and their service by reading up on the 
topic. 
 
Globe and Mail columnist, Christie Blatchford’s compelling 
book, Fifteen Days, about her experience embedded with 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5659 

Canadian troops in Afghanistan fighting on our behalf is a 
perfect example. I just finished reading this book. It was a copy 
provided to me by Ben Walsh, one of our legislature’s seasonal 
staff members whose own son died while serving us in 
Afghanistan. Mr. Speaker, that made reading the book twice as 
difficult, but also twice as meaningful. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we can volunteer our time and talents in 
support of local military units. It’s not hard to do. In Regina we 
have the Royal Regina Rifles who were among the first 
Canadian regiments on Juno Beach, June 6, 1944; the 10th 
Field Artillery unit; and HMCS [Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship] 
Queen as well. That’s the Royal Canadian Navy’s establishment 
in the Queen City. 
 
Just a few miles away in Moose Jaw is 15 Wing, one of 
Canada’s most important air force bases and home to the 
NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] flight training 
program. Moose Jaw is also home to the Saskatchewan 
Dragoons, a deservedly proud regiment with a very 
distinguished record stretching back to World War I and storied 
places like Vimy, Somme, and Passchendaele. 
 
This is the regiment my wife has chosen to serve and into which 
she will soon be inducted as Saskatchewan’s newest honorary 
lieutenant colonel. I’m very, very proud of what she’s doing. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, members. With those words 
said, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn my attention to the contents 
of the Throne Speech in itself and offer my insight. 
 
Members of the opposition state that they can’t find anything 
interesting, let alone exciting in this, Mr. Speaker. Well it 
doesn’t look like they read the SaskPower report on smart 
meters, and it could be that they didn’t even read the Throne 
Speech either. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I happen to have brought an extra copy here 
today, and I’ll be quoting from it. And I’d be delighted to table 
it if any of the members on the opposite side would actually like 
to read it. So it’s here for them any time they need it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Just look at the words on the very first page, Mr. Speaker. 
Here’s what it says: 
 

Saskatchewan is strong. 
 
Our province is growing. 
 
There are more people living here than ever before. 
 
More people are choosing to stay in Saskatchewan. 
 
More . . . are coming from other provinces and other 
countries. 
 
More people are working in Saskatchewan than ever 
before. 

In June, employment hit a record high of 577,000 people 
working in our province. 
 
In July, unemployment hit a record low of 3.2 per cent — 
the lowest unemployment rate ever recorded. 
 
In September, Saskatchewan had the lowest 
unemployment rate and the fastest rate of job creation 
[also important] anywhere in Canada. 
 
Saskatchewan people are earning more than ever before 
and they are keeping more of what they earn, thanks to 
lower taxes. 

 
Our province has a balanced budget, according to the Throne 
Speech, Mr. Speaker, and during this session, the government, 
it’s stated, will again demonstrate its commitment to sound 
financial management by delivering its eighth consecutive 
balanced budget. Now that’s a record of achievement. 
 
Because of the government’s commitment to sound financial 
management, Moody’s recently upgraded Saskatchewan’s 
credit rating to AAA, the highest rating possible. Mr. Speaker, 
not only is that interesting, that is in fact exciting. I’m not sure 
why members on the opposite side don’t see it that way. Maybe 
they don’t like to see us going forward. Absolutely. 
 
Here’s an excerpt from page 2: 
 

Saskatchewan’s economic star continues to rise. 
 
Since 2007, Saskatchewan’s exports have increased by . . . 
[over 60] per cent, while manufacturing shipments have 
climbed by more than 50 per cent. 

 
That’s good news. That’s interesting and it’s exciting. 
 

Surging demand for our products has created 
unprecedented opportunity for workers and businesses, and 
attracted people from across the country and around the 
world. 
 
Saskatchewan’s population is now at an all-time high of 
over 1,125,000 people. 

 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — That’s absolutely worth applauding, no 
question about it.  
 
“That represents an increase . . .” Yes, the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] said it was statistically impossible to expect 
increases like that, and they also said we’d always be a have-not 
province. They said those things, Mr. Speaker, and they were 
wrong. 

 
That [increase in population represents] . . . more than 
123,000 people in the past seven years — a far cry from 
the previous seven years [that was when the NDP were in 
government, Mr. Speaker] when Saskatchewan’s 
population actually declined.  

 
In fact we used to say that our greatest export was our youngest 



5660 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

and brightest people. 
 

Our province remains on track to reach the population 
target set by . . . [the] government of 1.2 million people in 
the year 2020, while Statistics Canada has predicted 
Saskatchewan’s population could surpass 1.5 million by 
2038. 

 
The NDP may not find the unprecedented growth in 
Saskatchewan’s economy and population and opportunities for 
their youngsters exciting, but other Saskatchewan people do. 
 
Here’s a couple of anecdotes that underlines that, Mr. Speaker. I 
remember on the doorstep a couple of years ago meeting a 
young fellow who said, I’m married to a lab technician. She 
works in one of the hospitals here in Regina for the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region. The work is exciting. She’s having 
a lot of fun, but you know, as rewarding as it is, her dream has 
always been to be a registered nurse. That’s something that 
we’d love to do, but I just don’t see it as possible, he said. It’s 
going to cost a lot of money for tuition and she’s going to have 
to quit her job, her full-time job. We have a mortgage to pay. 
We have car payments to look after. We have youngsters to 
support, food to put on the table. I don’t know if we’re ever 
going to get there, and there isn’t even enough space in the 
nursing school. So I’m not sure why we’re dreaming about this 
after all. 
 
I remember talking to him a little while later and he said, wow, 
good things can happen in Saskatchewan. We found out that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has increased the number of seats 
available in the nursing education program, and my wife is in. 
And he also said, we also found out about the graduate retention 
program which means that she can actually have her tuition 
reduced by $20,000 over the next few years if she stays and 
works in Saskatchewan which is exactly what we plan to do. He 
said, right now my wife is living the dream. Thanks for doing 
those things to make all of this possible. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what we’re talking about here. 
 
Another anecdote. Shortly after the election in 2007, I had 
lunch with a couple of young fellows that were insurance 
salesmen. The head office for their company was in Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, and they said, business is great; business is booming. 
It couldn’t be better. But you know what? It wasn’t always this 
way. Just a couple of years ago, prior to the election, they said, 
our Winnipeg guys phoned us up and said, you know, we’ve 
been looking at the figures. You people aren’t doing 
particularly well there in Regina. In fact it’s going so badly, 
we’re thinking of closing our Saskatchewan operations and 
consolidating everything back here in Manitoba. Don’t give up 
just yet, these kids said. Don’t make a hasty decision. There is a 
provincial election coming. The Sask Party might form 
government and if that happens our fortunes will rise. We’ll be 
doing better. Hang on and see if we aren’t right. 
 
Well everything turned out exactly as they had predicted, Mr. 
Speaker. The Sask Party did win the election. We did form 
government. And those youngsters now have a great future here 
in Regina, here in Saskatchewan, in the business of their choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, infrastructure and investments in 
critical infrastructure will always remain one of the keys to 

success both for our economy and for our people’s quality of 
life. As the Throne Speech itself says, “[The] government has 
made significant progress tackling the province’s infrastructure 
deficit.” And what a deficit we were left by members opposite 
— crumbling highways, schools and hospitals in disrepair, all 
kinds of essential investments either ignored or deferred and 
deferred and deferred. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Would that be the schools that they 
didn’t close? 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — The schools that they didn’t close. They 
closed well over 100 of them. The ones that were left weren’t 
being attended to. 
 
Since 2008 ministries and Crown corporations have spent close 
to $16 billion on a wide range of capital projects, including 
hospitals and highways and schools and power plants and many 
other things, Mr. Speaker. This year alone the Throne Speech 
confirms nearly $3 billion has been committed to renew and 
expand the province’s infrastructure. In fact infrastructure 
investment is about one and a half times what it used to be. 
That’s the improvement that a Sask Party government has been 
able to bring to the good people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I could talk about the projects all around the province, Mr. 
Speaker. We don’t have time for that today and other members 
handled that role extremely capably. I’m going to concentrate 
on what’s going on right here in my hometown of Regina. We 
completed the Rawlco mother baby care centre at RGH [Regina 
General Hospital], and to give them credit, that was a project 
started by the previous administration. 
 
A brand new facility for STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society], the emergency air ambulance service. There’s the 
heliport at the Regina General Hospital and then there’s the air 
base out at the airport. All of that is done. Brand new facilities 
for Arcola and Douglas Park schools. Structural upgrading of 
Campbell Collegiate, something that was talked about for years 
and years but never actually done, Mr. Speaker, completed by 
the Sask Party government. 
 
Renovation of the former Robert Usher Collegiate for use by 
the French-speaking students of Monseigneur de Laval high 
school. Commitment to replace Scott Collegiate. Planning is 
well under way. Planning under way also for several joint-use 
schools here in Regina where they are desperately needed 
because of all the kids that are coming in with their parents into 
the new Saskatchewan. 
 
New roads serving the Global Transportation Hub now open for 
business. New overpasses at Pinkie Road and Lewvan Drive 
where they meet Highway No. 1. We talked for years about that 
needed overpass to reduce accidents and tragedies at the 
Lewvan and No. 1 Highway. A lot of talk from members on the 
other side. We got it done, Mr. Speaker. Planning has also been 
completed for the Regina east bypass, Saskatchewan’s biggest 
infrastructure project ever. 
 
Hundreds and hundreds of new affordable housing units 
completed right in my hometown. Brand new student residence 
under construction at the University of Regina. Mr. Speaker, 
you can tour it today if you wish. Funding committed to assist 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5661 

with the construction of Regina’s new Mosaic Stadium. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on. Those are some of the 
highlights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many members will know, I used to be a 
member of the Regina City Council, and one of the things that 
we talked about was, how are we ever going to repair our 
crumbling infrastructure? Where will the money come from? 
What we were looking for was provincial leadership. Well we 
got it with the Sask Party government. 
 
Municipal governments, as you know, are on the front lines of 
dealing with opportunities and challenges in our growing 
province. One of the priorities in government that we have is 
helping our municipal partners by providing them with a 
predictable funding source for priority projects in their 
communities. Mr. Speaker, that was something that we talked 
about on Regina City Council, as members of other city and 
town and village councils talked about for years and years and 
years. In fact a brand new provincial revenue-sharing program 
for municipalities was something that the folks on the other side 
of the aisle — may they ever stay there — talked about 
endlessly. But they never got around to doing it. We did. They 
never got around to it. 
 
In 2011 we accomplished all of this by tying revenue sharing to 
our municipal friends to one point of the provincial sales tax or 
PST. As PST revenues increase, so too does the amount of 
revenue shared by the province with the municipalities. For 
example, the 2015-2016 revenue-sharing total will increase by 
over $8 million to a record $265 million and will represent a 
funding increase of over 100 per cent. That’s double, more than 
double since 2007-2008 fiscal year. It’s the envy of 
municipalities across Canada. Just talk to our folks at SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association]. They travel 
all over the place. They talk to their FCM [Federation of 
Canadian Municipalities] partners in other jurisdictions and 
they can confirm that for you. 
 
This Saskatchewan municipal revenue-sharing program 
continues to provide record amounts of unconditional funding 
to communities across the province. Unconditional — it can be 
used for any priority the municipalities choose themselves. This 
is one way to ensure that they’re stronger and more vibrant than 
ever. You can find current revenue-sharing totals online any 
time you wish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on that topic, in March the federal government 
announced a new $53 billion Building Canada Fund, or BCF for 
short, to support the construction of roads and bridges, public 
transport, and other infrastructure projects. To help 
municipalities take advantage of the new BCF program, our 
government is going to reintroduce and expand the popular 
Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative, known by 
participants as SIGI. This program provides interest rate 
subsidies for up to five years on municipal borrowing for 
infrastructure development. Under the first iteration of SIGI, 
nearly $200 million in borrowing was approved and 82 
communities benefited from interest rate subsidies. 
 
Here’s just one example. I remember talking to the former 
mayor of Yorkton at this particular time. He said, you know, 

we’re a growing community. We have new subdivisions that 
are planned and ready to build, but we’re not going to get there 
if we don’t have expanded water service. We have to have 
treated water available in larger amounts to service all of these 
new homes and these new subdivisions. SIGI actually allowed 
them to do this, and he said, it’s going to save us $1 million in 
interest payments. For a smaller community like Yorkton, he 
said, this is a really big deal. Thanks for thinking of the 
program. Thanks for rolling it out. Thanks for being a friend to 
the good people in Yorkton. 
 
And that is one of 82 similar examples all across this great 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My government also believes that Saskatchewan First Nations 
would also benefit from SIGI, so the program will be open to 
those First Nations in a position to participate. It’s great to see 
the program expanding to include First Nations communities, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Innovation is another topic close to my heart. As the Throne 
Speech itself says, and here again, Mr. Speaker, I’m simply 
quoting from the words in the speech itself: 
 

Earlier this month, people from around the world gathered 
at Boundary Dam Power Station near Estevan [yes, in the 
great city of Estevan, the member says] as SaskPower 
opened the first commercial power plant in the world with 
a fully integrated [commercial-sized] post-combustion 
carbon capture system. 

 
It’s a long title. What it simply means is greenhouse gases that 
in the past escaped into the atmosphere, contributing to 
greenhouse gas emissions and warming, global warming, are 
now going to be captured and stored. 
 

More than 90 per cent of the carbon dioxide emitted at 
Boundary Dam 3 will be captured and stored for use in 
enhanced oil recovery operations in mature oil fields. This 
is the equivalent [Mr. Speaker, this is so important; I hope 
members are listening: this is the equivalent] of taking 
more than 250,000 [a quarter of a million] vehicles off 
Saskatchewan roads each year. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not only interesting; it’s very, very exciting. 
I wish we could make the folks on the other side see it that way. 
 
“Boundary Dam 3 strengthens Saskatchewan’s reputation [the 
Throne Speech goes on to say] as a global leader in carbon 
capture and storage research.” Now that’s innovation. 
 
[14:45] 
 
“SaskPower has established a global CCS consortium [as it’s 
known] to share knowledge and best practices with other 
utilities and researchers.” And as I mentioned a minute ago, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re coming from all over the world to see what 
we’re doing. Saskatchewan is in the lead once again. 
 
“Construction of Saskatchewan’s cyclotron and radioisotope 
facility at the University of Saskatchewan is in the final stages,” 
the Throne Speech notes. Another great example of innovation 
on a very, very important file. 



5662 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

The $25.5 million laboratory is a partnership between the 
federal government, the province, and the university. 
 
The laboratory will provide Saskatchewan researchers with 
the resources they require to develop radiopharmaceuticals 
— [those are] drugs containing radioactive materials. 
 

Very, very important for medical treatments. “These drugs can 
be used to detect, diagnose and treat diseases such as cancer, 
Alzheimer’s . . .” 
 
[Inaudible interjection] . . . And the member from Carrot River 
wants me to mention the Wildcats. So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll do that 
on his behalf. Thank you. Thank you. 
 
Parkinson’s and multiple sclerosis will also be treated with 
these radioisotopes. “The laboratory will be managed and 
operated by the Sylvia Fedoruk Canadian Centre for Nuclear 
Innovation.” There’s that word again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve touched on some of the most important parts 
of the Throne Speech from my personal perspective: 
innovation, certainly; investments in infrastructure. It’s now 
time for me to wrap up my comments and I’d like to do that by 
concluding . . . Oh the members opposite are happy that I’m 
going to be sitting down. I guess they’re tired of hearing about 
progress. I guess they’re tired of hearing about Saskatchewan 
moving ahead. I guess they’re tired of hearing a Throne Speech 
that is both interesting and exciting . . . There we go. The 
people of Saskatchewan are indeed tired of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude by returning, if I can for a 
moment, to some of my first remarks. I’m proud to be part of a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that honours those who serve our 
country, a government that introduced the Saskatchewan 
Scholarship of Honour for returning military personnel and 
spouses and children of members lost or disabled. We’ll recall 
that we had, just a moment ago, the great privilege of 
welcoming some of the most recent recipients in our Assembly. 
I’m proud to be part of a government that recognizes Canadian 
Forces cadets with their own special day of recognition, a 
government that has designated an official military liaison 
position — a role very capably filled by the MLA from Wood 
River, himself a distinguished veteran of the Canadian Forces 
— and, Mr. Speaker, a government that will be making 
available a special commemorative licence plate to those 
Canadians who have earned the Silver Cross. All of these things 
combine to show that Saskatchewan is indeed a province that 
appreciates service and sacrifice. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be a part of a 
government that focuses on so many of the things that my 
Bosnian friend and his family came to Saskatchewan hoping to 
enjoy — peace and tranquillity, of course, certainly that, but 
also growth of the population and growth of the provincial 
economy with the purpose of providing revenues to improve 
our quality of life. Improvements like more job opportunities 
for ourselves and our children, important investments in health 
and education, new highways and hospitals and schools as we 
have mentioned, more support for our most vulnerable citizens, 
investments in sport, recreation, and culture, and real innovation 
that moves our province and our society forward. With this in 
mind, Mr. Speaker, I think my Bosnian friend would support 

this Throne Speech and on behalf of him and his family and 
everyone like him, I’ll be supporting it as well. Thank you so 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in, but 
before I get into making comments about the Throne Speech 
and stuff I’d like to . . . And I know we’ll be celebrating 
Remembrance Day, thinking about my grandfather and his 
brothers as war vets but, Mr. Speaker, you know, I know the 
Aboriginal First Nations vets and Métis vets that are out there 
think about the two families that laid their loved ones to rest, 
and I know everyone in my constituency that’s First Nations 
and Métis vets think about them, and I know my family. And 
everybody’s mentioned that about, you know, we think about 
the families as they deal with the loss of their loved ones and 
the honour that they served. So with that, I’d like to join the rest 
of the colleagues in acknowledging those family that . . . and 
the soldiers, our two soldiers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to get into the Throne Speech 
response and some of the things that . . . But I’d like to 
acknowledge a few people in my constituency again. I’d like to 
take a minute and thank my CA [constituency assistant], Devin 
Bernatchez, who does an excellent job. He has a couple of 
individuals come in part-time and work with him. And he does 
a great job, you know, of servicing the constituency — and not 
just the Cumberland constituency. We get calls in from all over 
to deal with situations when ministries, whether it’s provincial, 
federal, sometimes you have to assist community members 
because they’re struggling, whether they’re pensioners dealing 
with family allowance, casework, whether it’s SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], whether it’s SaskPower 
issues. There’s so many different issues that are facing — and 
I’m going to get into that — facing individuals and families in 
northern Saskatchewan and the Cumberland constituency. I will 
get into some of those situations. 
 
But I want to acknowledge Devin as a CA, and the staff, for the 
great job that he does. He’s very dedicated. He cares about 
people and he wants to make sure he does, I guess, justice to 
their files and the casework that comes across his desk. And I 
want to say thank you, Devin, for the great work. And to the 
two individuals, Doris . . . and we have a number of them that 
come in and help out and assist. 
 
With that I would like to also acknowledge my wife and family 
for the support. I know we couldn’t do it without support of our 
wives, our families, and I just want to acknowledge my wife for 
the great support she gives me. We also have, you know, an 
executive. And for the Cumberland executive, I swear that I 
have the best executive out there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t swear. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — And I won’t swear out loud. But no, in a 
very positive way I want to thank my executive for the great 
work they do in the Cumberland constituency to reach out to the 
individuals. 
 
So having said that, you know, and acknowledging those 
individuals, I know my colleagues over here and the staff that’s 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5663 

in our office in Regina here, the caucus office, they do a great 
job assisting us and giving us that support. 
 
But having said that, I want to get into some of the challenges. 
And I’ll talk a little bit about the Throne Speech. And I know 
the government wants to put out its goals, initiatives, 
legislation, and wants to talk about it, puts it out when they do 
their Throne Speech. For those that are listening, it’s a plan and 
I guess a vision of where they’re going over the next year and 
where the government’s going. 
 
Government may, and I’ve listened to a lot of different, I guess, 
stories from that side, they respond and . . . on their side. 
 
But before I get into the meat and potatoes of it, I would like to 
go back and talk about . . . Some of the members, you know, 
talk about the NDP and the years. And I want to talk about how 
proud I am too, and some of our premiers that were NDP and 
New Democrats, whether it’s, you know, Tommy Douglas, and 
I heard a bunch of negative stuff. I don’t have a problem with 
talking about Tommy Douglas as our premier or, you know, our 
Premier Roy Romanow, Lorne Calvert. There’s leaders that I 
can stand behind. I’m very proud to say as a party we don’t hide 
away. So we could talk about different years where they came 
in and everything, right or wrong, you know. 
 
But at the end of the day, I just want to be clear. I’ve heard from 
members opposite there are certain times they don’t want to talk 
about certain leaders. In the ’80s, they don’t mention that. 
There’s a time they just totally forget about. I’ve listened time 
and time again. Why don’t they want to talk about their party in 
the ’80s? And some of them were a part of that party, and are. 
And a conservative’s a conservative. They’re cousins. They 
don’t want to mention about that. 
 
So it’s interesting. Just thought I would share that. The ’80s, 
they really forget about everything under the NDP. But enough 
of that. I don’t want to get into the situation. I just want to set 
the record straight that as a Saskatchewan democrat I’m proud 
of our leaders and will continue, having said that. You know, 
the job our leader’s doing right now, we have the current leader 
of Her Majesty’s opposition. 
 
You know, but I want to talk about some of the situations back 
home. And people watched the Throne Speech, looking at 
government’s direction and seeing where government’s going 
to go. And they were hoping to hear very positive things for 
northern Saskatchewan, for the Cumberland constituency. You 
know, they wanted to hear about the good things that this 
government, this government was going to do. And you know, 
some of the issues that they have raised, and I know whether 
it’s through petitions, whether it’s through meetings from our 
leaders in the North, whether First Nations, Métis, municipal 
leaders, they share with the ministries and governments the 
needs, and I know that. You know, and I’m going to get into 
some of the challenges and some of the press releases. 
 
That New North, I look at New North and some of their 
challenges and issues that they’re facing in northern 
Saskatchewan. And you know, there’s 35 mayors that represent 
New North and they’ve put out a press release, and it isn’t very 
positive to government, to the ministry for a reason. There’s 
many challenges that they’re facing, and they do. They deal 

with the situations every day in their communities, and they try 
to. And they’re proud of the challenges that are there, that they 
can locally deal with, and they do a great job. You know, we 
have to give credit to that, to the leadership, and they do a great 
job taking care of situations. 
 
But sometimes they come up with plans and ideas and 
challenges, and they want the government to work with them 
and to hear those challenges. And you know, I’m going to get 
into some of the quotes from a press release that was put out 
and some of the challenges that the Chair of New North, you 
know, has put out. And I’ll get into that. We’ll talk about that. 
 
I was at a meeting where New North meets, they hold their 
annual meeting, and I heard some of the concerns from the 
mayors. There was no . . . I didn’t see government MLAs or 
ministers at the meeting. I was there from 9 o’clock till 4. They 
didn’t show up, Mr. Speaker. So I heard some of the challenges 
and the frustration, you know. 
 
Government talks about . . . And when a government talks 
about their direction and what’s going on, whether it’s roads 
and safety and, you know, one mayor was very concerned 
about, you know, a bus accident that happened. And she shared 
that from the floor, her frustrations. And you know, when you 
have the safety of our roads that are taken very serious, those 
leaders, it’s not just about travelling when you’re going to 
sports activities, that our schools travel all over the North. It’s 
about making sure tourists . . . You want tourists to travel on 
our roads. They talked about that. They want to make sure that 
those tourists come to visit the North. It’s beautiful. They have 
a lot to offer. They want to talk about economics and they want 
to be a part of that. They talk about the goals that need to be 
there and they make suggestions. And they’re saying, our roads 
have to be safe. They have to be safe for not only residents, but 
tourists coming in. 
 
You talk about economics and you talk about industry, the 
mining area, forestry. If you’re going to make sure that you 
want governments, local governments to be a part of the 
partnership and be a part of the economy, you have to make 
sure that our roads are safe, that they’re the best roads that 
individuals could have. And you know, we talk about those 
challenges but, you know, there’s many challenges. I just talk 
about what was in the meeting going on, and I like what they 
had to say. They’re willing to work with government. They 
have a role to do and they lobby government, and they say they 
know that role and they will work hard and they will do what 
they need to do. So I give them credit for, you know, the 
leadership they do and the lobbying they do. And you know, 
some of them are frustrated. And I heard that clearly, that 
they’re frustrated. They’re not going to give up. They realize 
that they have a role to do. The people have asked them to come 
forward and, you know, raise the issues. 
 
But you know, I look at northern Saskatchewan and I think 
about some of the health issues. And when I talk about 
travelling on the roads, a lot of residents have to travel down 
south for appointments, whether it’s travelling for appointments 
like dialysis, specialists, mental health support, addictions, you 
know. And some of the families in northern Saskatchewan have 
had to deal with . . . And I’m talking about health issues. And 
when you’re dealing with situations . . . And I have attended 



5664 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

funerals of the leadership, and talked about this. And this is 
tough. We talk about the plan, and what’s this government’s 
plan for addictions, mental health? You know, we see youth 
suicide in northern Saskatchewan amongst our Aboriginal 
people. It’s so hard to watch families bury young people that, 
you know, had so much to offer, and for whatever reason, you 
know, they ended their life. 
 
And I was listening to one of the chiefs talking and the council, 
that I went to a service to pay my respect to the family, and you 
know to hear . . . We have to talk about it. That’s what the chief 
said to the community. They had young siblings that were there. 
There was about four of them and they were young, probably 
from 21 to 14 years old. And the community and the leadership 
talked about, we have to talk about it. No more can we hide it, 
and we should talk about it and we need to do better. And 
they’re going to do all they can to raise those concerns with 
government. They’re going to do all they can locally, with the 
communities, with the supports that are there, but it isn’t 
enough. 
 
Government has to do a better job when it comes to youth 
suicide in this province, but amongst Aboriginal people we see 
the numbers. They’re terrible and, you know, they’re alarming, 
and it’s time that we work together in a positive way with the 
leadership, the government, to try to deal with the situation. 
 
But having said that, you know there are so many issues that 
face northern Saskatchewan. And I’m not saying that . . . 
There’s many success stories too — many. Good partnerships, 
opportunities for individuals, and some of the big corporations 
are doing well, but it’s about everyone doing well. And I know 
our leader talks about that. He wants to make sure 
Saskatchewan families are doing well. It’s not just about 
individuals, big corporations. It’s about all of us doing well. 
Whether it’s my grandchildren, whether it’s the members’ 
opposite grandchildren and families, we want everyone to do 
well. And this province needs to do that, and it has an 
obligation to do that, and the government has not done that. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And there’s challenges and I realize . . . We’re going to raise 
some of those, and my colleagues have raised many issues in 
this House. And as they’ve responded to the Throne Speech 
they have shared some of those challenges that they’ve heard 
from residents who ask us to bring those concerns forward. And 
we do that. 
 
You look at the housing crisis in northern Saskatchewan and 
there are different areas where, you know, it’s not just about 
affordability. There are those challenges. It’s about the 
overcrowding. There are many challenges facing Saskatchewan 
residents, and we know that. But I think about the Cumberland 
constituency that I represent and what I’m hearing when I go to 
the doors, and you see families. Sometimes they’re so 
overcrowded. You look at the houses and you wonder how can 
so many people . . . You look at, I guess, to say about the 
repairs that are much needed. They’re so badly needed. They 
need programs that government can assist with, whether it’s 
federal, provincial. And they talk about that, that they’re 
needing help and they’re not getting it. 
 

When you have a government, we were hoping that would 
change the plan and, you know, maybe some of their goals 
would be to correct some of the errors that they have made 
along their way. One of them was scrapping the RPO [rental 
purchase option] program, rental option purchase program, for 
many northern residents who use that. This government stopped 
it. 
 
Some of them saw a vision, when you have so much money, 
that maybe, you know, they would drop. Instead of charging 30 
per cent, they would go down to 25, even 20 per cent for 
northern residents. When you’re isolated and the cost of living 
is so much higher than anywhere else . . . and rural areas feel 
some of that impact too. I understand that. The bigger centres 
are, you know, the urban as well. 
 
But having said that, there’s so many challenges when it comes 
to northern Saskatchewan for some of our families who are 
trying to work and pay their rents, pay the utilities, utility rates 
that are out there. You see some of the challenges that, you 
know, the utility rates that some of the families are paying, the 
cost of living, whether it’s, you know, your power, your heat, 
the food that you need to provide, the clothing. Everything’s 
going up and the cost, you know, of making ends meet. 
 
And when, you know, and what’s alarming is sometimes when 
those citizens send letters to ministers or they raise their 
concern sometimes, some of the response they get back, it’s 
pretty sad when government says, well you choose to live there 
in that area; you can move. Like what kind of answer is that to 
seniors or anyone else who wants to stay where their 
community, their family are, and the culture, and they want to 
stay there and share with their children, you know, the trap 
lines? So we see the cost of living being a huge issue for many 
northern families. 
 
But you know, we talked about highways and, you know, the 
maintenance. People want to travel on safe roads. We’ve talked 
a little bit about that. 
 
You know, we talk about our trappers and I want to, you know, 
I know the trappers have many concerns. I attend many of the 
trappers’ meetings, hear the issues, and sometimes they just 
want to have an opportunity to make sure government hears 
what their concerns are and their ideas are and how they want to 
work with industry to make sure that their trap lines are 
respected, but to make sure they’re moving in a positive way. 
They realize . . . And you know, I’ve heard many trappers say, 
we’re not about . . . we don’t want to stop industry; we want to 
work with them. We want to make sure there’s jobs for our 
families, you know, that we can provide. 
 
And there’s different ways to do that, who live on traditional, 
you know, lifestyle. The knowledge, they are the knowledge 
keepers of the land, the herbs, the medicines that they collect, 
the way of life. To listen to some of the elders and those that 
live off the land the way they do, I mean they’re so proud and 
they want to pass it on to their grandchildren, the next 
generation. They want to make sure. But they’re very frustrated 
that a government that doesn’t consult doesn’t take the 
information when industry goes in there and doesn’t consult 
them. 
 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5665 

And you talk about government’s process, you know, too, and 
how the Supreme Court has ruled. Clearly this government and 
all governments, the Crowns, have an obligation to make sure 
First Nations, Métis, traditional land users, northern individuals 
who live off the land are consulted and the chiefs and council 
are consulted and, you know, some of the challenges there. So I 
was hoping, you know, and I know some are hoping the vision 
would have been to move in that way, that the government 
would say, we’re going to make sure that we consult with First 
Nations leaders, Métis leaders, with municipal leaders to make 
sure that we’re doing the right thing. 
 
Now you know, that hasn’t happened, and I was hoping that 
would happen. And again we go to a government, for some 
reason, that’s not doing a great job of that and needs to do a 
better job. We hope they will take note of that. 
 
You know, and I’m going to go over their list when you talk 
about the let-it-burn policy. Many of the traditional land users, 
whether commercial fisherman, talk about the let-it-burn policy, 
government calls the let-it-burn policy, and that’s how they 
refer to it. They’ve asked for a review. They’ve asked for 
government to sit down with them and consult and hear what 
they have to say and their input as trappers, as fishermen. And 
the government chooses to ignore them and not take the advice 
of them because they’re worried about the land and, like I said, 
the wildlife. 
 
Once you burn an area, whether it’s caribou, whether . . . You 
look at the medicines, the fur that they trap. Once it’s burnt and 
it’s burnt out, it takes forever to get it back, and they, you know 
. . . I’ve heard story after story, whether it’s their cabins, 
whether where they’ve been for five, six generations, burns. 
 
So there’s so many issues facing them, and I know they share 
that and they want the government to hear that. They want the 
government to do a better job when it comes to the let-it-burn 
policy, when it comes to consulting First Nations, Métis, and 
the traditional trappers and fishermen. And I can’t . . . I have to 
make sure I express that from their side of it. They want the 
government to do that, and the government needs to do a better 
job. 
 
You know, you think about I guess one of the other area, and I 
think the lack of . . . I was in Creighton at a meeting, and 
community living was the discussion. We were hoping in this 
budget . . . Because I’ve heard many challenges for community 
living in Creighton area, we were in a meeting. Frustration from 
parents who have adult children but also many young families 
who will need a service of, you know, community living, a 
group home in the Creighton area. They’re asking and they’re 
frustrated, and they’re asking for help and supports. They 
thought they were going to get a group home years ago, and it 
doesn’t sound like that’s a priority. So that was one goal they 
were hoping that might be in this government’s Throne Speech 
would be a goal to, you know, achieve that. We’ll see. We’ll 
push for that, and maybe government can deal with that. 
 
So when I think about those individuals and residents that need 
a group home for, you know, individuals, we were hoping 
community living would work. And they can do that, and that’s 
what they want for their loved ones. And we’ll continue to work 
on that. I know they’re not going to give up. And whether it’s 

more meetings, they’re going to do whatever they need to lobby 
this government to deal with that. 
 
When I think about education in the classroom and more 
supports that we need, there’s so many supports. And 
individuals were hoping, you know, these goals, vision would 
have more supports in the classroom for individuals or the 
teachers, support our teachers. They do a great job, you know, a 
great job of taking care of our children and giving them a 
quality education. 
 
And I know we don’t . . . And I talked to some of the teachers 
on Friday to hear some of the . . . They want to feel respected. 
They want to feel that they have input. They want to feel like 
government’s hearing what they have, and that they’re valued. 
And they want to make sure that . . . They put a lot of time in 
and years into an education. They should be compensated 
properly. That’s all they ask for sometimes. They’re asking to 
be compensated fairly. And that’s not much to ask when you’ve 
put the years that they’ve put in for their education and getting 
the degree that they get. 
 
I think about jobs, and many jobs, First Nations, we talk about 
that. Our youngest population of young people under the age of 
25 is our First Nations. And an opportunity at, and a fair 
education they want. We know that there’s a problem with that, 
with the funding, federal-provincial. I think government, 
provincial government, could have an obligation there. Let’s 
hope the government will move. 
 
And I mean I’ve seen where they’ve put out certain photo ops, 
and they do very little when it comes to that. True commitment 
would be great to help them with the funding. And when you 
look at our funding for First Nations students — at 6,500 versus 
what the province gets — there are those issues that need to be 
dealt with and First Nations, through education but then 
post-secondary and making sure that they have opportunity to 
jobs. And a lot of them live on First Nations communities, so 
what type of jobs do they have? Well more needs to be done. 
 
You know, you think about the environment, and I think about 
the environment, and you look at protecting our waterways. I 
hear some of the elders and our community leaders, they’re 
very concerned about protecting the waterways. And I’ve been 
to some of the . . . The First Nations have held, you know, a 
conference on protecting the waterways, and they’ve been great. 
And what they worry about is pollution and the way of life, the 
fish, whether it’s commercial fishing that they do, whether they 
. . . for sustenance. They talk about an industry and they want it 
protected. The animals drink the water. We need the water to 
survive. And they’re very concerned about it, and you hear 
those challenges. You know, where do we go? 
 
So there are those issues and, you know, we see in this Throne 
Speech with the environment, and government has an obligation 
I think to meet with our First Nations and to talk to some of our 
elders. Elders have the knowledge. They’re the keepers of the 
land, the trappers are. And I would advise government to do 
that. And government hasn’t done that enough, and maybe it’s 
time that the government does that, you know. 
 
I think about many of the other issues that are facing northern 
Saskatchewan, and I talked about the mayors and infrastructure 



5666 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

needs. They expressed that they need more supports. Yes 
they’re getting, you know, funding from government, but we 
see record revenue this government is having. Municipalities 
want their share.  
 
They have challenges, infrastructure, but if they have to, you 
know, raise their utility rates for many of the residents that 
they’re supposed to provide the service for . . . And I talked 
about whether it’s telephone, whether it’s power, energy. 
There’s many challenges facing . . . you know, the cost of 
living. And many families are feeling the brunt of that. And 
they hear the government talk about how great everything is 
and everything’s going good. And yes, you know, in some areas 
it probably is and that’s great, but there are many that are 
suffering. Because of the economy, the way it is and the cost of 
living, they’re just struggling, whether it’s rents . . . And I’ve 
talked about that. But that is many Saskatchewan residents in 
the Cumberland constituency are having those challenges. 
 
So you know, I think about the press release that the leadership, 
New North, put out. And they were just talking about a few 
issues that they’re talking about. They talked about many of the 
issues, whether it’s roads, whatever issues their infrastructure 
. . . Whatever issues they raised, they want government to take 
it serious, and they’re going to do all they can do. And I 
commend them that they’re going to lobby, you know. They’ll 
work with government, and I’ve said that. 
 
But you know, when I think about Mayor Jolibois, you know, 
from La Loche . . . And I want to say this quote from this press 
release from her. “We want to send a clear message to 
government. We will not be treated as second-class citizens on 
this or any other issue,” she said. She wanted to make that . . . 
Now that’s very clear. She wants the government to realize they 
don’t want to be treated like second-class citizens in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We see the resources coming out, and that’s good. We hope the 
province does well. They want everyone to do good 
economically, but they also want to make sure that they’re 
treated and their issues are treated serious from government. 
And when they meet . . . And not just a meeting and you have a 
meeting and you’re not taken serious. They’re frustrated, some 
of the leaders, and they’re going to do whatever they need to do 
to get the government’s attention. I commend them on that. You 
know, it’s time for some action, and they’re going to hold the 
government to account. 
 
And the government can go around and, you know, say what it 
is and put up the billboards and spin it the way they want. There 
are challenges facing northern Saskatchewan that government 
has an obligation to do, and I’m hoping, you know, I’m hoping 
that this government will take those challenges serious, will do 
what’s needed and hear the concerns that many Saskatchewan 
families are facing in northern Saskatchewan. I think about the 
Cumberland, you know. I know that I can go on. There’s many 
issues that they have raised. You know, we’ve got a short 
amount of time to share this. 
 
[15:15] 
 
But I’m going to get a little bit into a quote that I want to make 
sure that people understand. And when we talk about record 

revenue, for years this government has enjoyed record revenue. 
And they talk about whether it’s inherited, i.e. you hear it back 
and forth. 
 
It doesn’t matter, doesn’t matter to families back home who are 
trying to put clothes on their kids, who are trying to pay the 
rent, seniors who are trying to cost, you know, the medications 
that they need. It doesn’t matter about that. They don’t care 
about the comments that we make back and forth, who did 
what. They’re the ones struggling back home. They’re the ones 
struggling with their families to make them eat . . . to put food 
on the table to provide for their loved ones. They’re the ones 
that are really struggling. 
 
When you look at those seniors, you look at individuals. You 
know, we talk about poverty and the challenges that many 
families face. Yes there are some families doing really good, 
and we’re happy for them. We are. You know, good. But there 
are many families left behind by this government’s decision not 
to deal with some of the situations. 
 
It isn’t that they didn’t have the resources and the money. They 
do. I’ve talked about that. They have a record revenue. It’s 
amazing. I hear people talking. What are they doing with all the 
money? It’s amazing when you hear people saying, what are 
they . . . questioning government. What do they do with all the 
money? 
 
Well we’ve seen some of the things that are going on, whether 
it’s smart meters . . . We’ve seen the lean process. You look at 
the lean. They spent $40 million on the lean. At the end of the 
day you look at those dollars and think, let’s let the northern 
people and the people in our province spend that money. Let’s 
give them suggestions instead of wasting it, the government 
wasting it. Let’s get the good suggestions in so this government 
will do what they need to do with the peoples’ dollars. It’s the 
taxpayers’ dollars, taxpayers’ dollars. And they want 
government to do the right thing with them, not to waste them. 
And when they start wasting them and they . . . Trust me, the 
people of this province will send a message. 
 
And the government can sit there and make all the comments 
they want. They can say what they want. When the people of 
Saskatchewan will have enough, they’ll send a message. And I 
hear them. They always heckle about that. That’s why there’s 
only nine over here. Well you keep doing what you’re doing 
with your lean, with your smart meters, and you will get a 
message by the people of this province. Trust me, you will. You 
will get a message. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to, 
for the record, you know, say this. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has record revenue for seven years. It is time that 
they govern all the province and not pick winners and losers. 
And this is why I mentioned all the different things, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, why I will not be supporting the motion, the throne . . . 
And I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me the 
opportunity to share a little bit about the Throne Speech and 
some of the concerns that face northern Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5667 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s truly an honour to stand in this House on my feet 
and speak to the Speech from the Throne which is called 
“Keeping Saskatchewan Strong” because I think it’s important 
that we all work together to do so, and I think it’s important to 
all members of the House that we keep our province strong and 
we ensure that it is a great place for the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Before I begin, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t thank 
my constituency assistant Susan Dunne. She has been with me 
now for several years, and she does an awesome job in looking 
after the front back home. And she treats all constituents of 
every stripe with a great deal of respect and helps out everyone 
that she possibly can. 
 
I also want to thank my ministerial staff, both the staff that I 
had at the beginning of the year which was in the office of 
Crown Investments Corporation, SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority] and SGI. They were exceptional staff, 
as is the staff I have now that I have returned to Social Services. 
And without them, quite frankly we couldn’t do our jobs. So I 
want to thank all of those individuals. They are truly . . . I’m 
truly a very lucky minister to have such supportive staff. 
 
Lastly I want to thank my partner. I recently, this summer, got 
engaged to a very tolerant man, someone that I’ve known most 
of my life. And I want to thank him so very much for putting up 
with me and the scheduling and all of the lack of time, quite 
frankly, that we can have together because ministerial duties do 
take a lot of time. And sometimes you have to set your personal 
life aside, and he is a very, very patient man that way. 
 
So when I look at the Speech from the Throne — one that I’m 
very, very proud of that was read here in this House by the 
Lieutenant Governor — I think we all recognize that 
Saskatchewan is indeed a very strong province. We have sort of 
shed those days of past where we were a have-not province, 
where basically people were apologizing they were from 
Saskatchewan and they didn’t want to admit or come back 
home. We have now people coming back home. We’re very, 
very proud to say that we’re from Saskatchewan. There’s no 
more comments of, the last person who leaves the province 
please turn off the lights. 
 
We have become extremely strong. We’re among the lowest in 
our unemployment rates. We’re among the highest in our 
average income. We have record-high export sales. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we have the highest population that we have ever seen 
before in this province of more than 1.125 million people. Mr. 
Speaker, that is largely thanks to the people of our province. 
They are extremely diligent people. They work very hard, and 
there is a lot of pride within our province. So we want to thank 
the people of our province. 
 
But I also want to put on record a quote of a provincial leader, 
one that I think everybody in this House knows. And what that 
leader had to say was, the acid test, and I quote, of any 
government: is this population growing, or is it decreasing in its 
population? Are we getting people to come here because there 
are jobs and hope and opportunity for the future, or have we 

faced massive jobs lost, massive outflow and exodus of the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
I just want to just point out the beginning of that quote, the acid 
test of any government, and then say the person that said that, 
Mr. Speaker, was Roy Romanow. And if that indeed is the NDP 
acid test of any government, then I think we’ve passed that test 
and they failed miserably in the years that they were in 
government. 
 
From 1991 to 2007, in the 16 years that we had an NDP 
government, Saskatchewan population dropped by 2,500 
people. Our population has been growing year over year under 
this government, and we are setting record highs again and 
again. We were bold enough to set a goal of population growth, 
one that the NDP mocked at the time. And now they have gone 
silent on that fact. 
 
As I said, largely a lot of our success is largely due to the 
people of Saskatchewan and the good work that they do. But 
one area that is a government responsibility is fiscal 
management of our dollars, of the government dollars. As the 
member from Cumberland pointed out, these are taxpayer 
dollars, and fiscal management is extremely important. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to say that under our 
government we have now had two major credit rating agencies, 
both Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s, give us an AAA credit 
rating, which is the highest credit rating that you can receive 
and the only time in the history of this province that two major 
credit rating agencies have given us that AAA rating. Moody’s 
made that announcement, Mr. Speaker, in September of this 
year. And in its release the agency said its AAA rating, and I 
quote, “. . . reflects the province’s fiscal discipline and 
sustained low debt levels which underscores prudent financial 
management practices.” 
 
Now if you would have listened to the speakers previously, the 
members from the NDP who keep saying that, you know, 
there’s lots and lots and lots of money. Just spend, spend, 
spend, spend, spend, spend, spend because we have all these 
challenges. And I agree, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of 
challenges and we need to set priorities. But one of our 
priorities, Mr. Speaker, is to continue with spending with 
responsibility. We need to have steps forward as we can afford 
to. We need to do it within a balanced budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was the minister of CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], I had the privilege 
of going to Toronto and having meetings with a number of 
investment bankers. And my question to them was, when you 
look at our province and you look at loaning money to the 
province for different initiatives or whatever, what is it that you 
look for? What kind of sets our interest rates or availability to 
different investment funds? And I was told by each and every 
bank that I went to that there was three main things that they 
looked for, and one of them was a diverse revenue stream. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we have that in our province. We have oil, gas, 
potash, and agriculture. 
 
I don’t whether the Leader of the Opposition, the NDP, realize 
that because I know although he has never ever given a plan of 
how he would move our province forward or even keep it 



5668 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

strong for that matter, he keeps talking about more eggs and 
more baskets. We have a number of baskets with eggs in them, 
Mr. Speaker. So it would be very interesting for him to actually 
elaborate on what other eggs and baskets he’s interested in. 
 
The second thing that they said that they were looking for is, are 
you paying down debt or are you accumulating further debt. 
And again they acknowledged that our province has written 
down the debt by over 40 per cent in our core operating 
funding. And, Mr. Speaker, people are noticing, investors are 
noticing, and investment creditors are noticing that that debt 
load is coming down. And again that hasn’t happened for some 
time within our province. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, what they’re looking for is, are you 
balancing your budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to 
say that year over year we have balanced our budget. There’s 
been some tough decisions. There are challenges. There are 
always more needs out there. There’s always more work that 
needs to be done, but we’re still going forward with a number 
of programs, and we’ll continue to prioritize. But the bottom 
line, Mr. Speaker, we need to balance that budget both in the 
core operating and in the summary financials. And we are going 
to continue to do so. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a growing economy, which is a 
significant contrast to the years of the NDP where we had a 
declining economy. And what we do with those resources and 
the decisions that we make going forward is what will keep 
Saskatchewan strong. There’s a lot of benefits to growth, Mr. 
Speaker, as opposed to the cost and the loss of decline that we 
had under the NDP. 
 
You know, if we can continue to grow and to spend wisely, to 
spend responsibly, then we’ll be able to do things such as what 
we’ve done now over the last seven years. We’ll be able to 
build more schools instead of closing them. We’ll be able to 
increase the funding for health care. We’ll be able to have more 
doctors and more nurses. We’ll be able to set targets. We’ll be 
able to meet those targets, unlike what happened in the past 
NDP years. 
 
We’ll be able to reduce surgical wait times which was not 
something, again wasn’t a goal that was set by the previous 
government. We were able to set that goal, and we were able to 
meet it in many cases. 
 
A growing economy means that there’s more money for 
spending on post-secondary institutions. There’s record funding 
going to our universities, to our technical schools, Mr. Speaker. 
It means there’s more money for highways which was neglected 
for far too long. It means that we can have more money for 
municipal revenue sharing. And the list goes on and on, Mr. 
Speaker, on where the money’s gone. 
 
I know the previous speaker from Cumberland said, you know, 
people are asking where’s the money going. And here’s the list, 
Mr. Speaker. He only needs to open the books and take a look 
and see the number of areas that our government has prioritized 
and where the money has gone. 
 
In most of those areas, there is more work that needs to be done. 
You can always cite that case, that highway, that person, that 

their needs haven’t been totally met yet. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
go back again and again; we will do so within a balanced 
budget. 
 
We need to prioritize. We need to be mindful of where the 
money is going, and we need to have money also to address 
catastrophic situations such as the flooding that we’ve had over 
the last couple of years. Where does the money go? Well quite 
frankly our government stepped up and helped a lot of 
communities to address their flooding challenges. 
 
The bottom line is we’re taking steps forward. We are not 
having the situation that the previous government had, where 
they were planning for a student population decline, where they 
basically were not spending even a fraction of the amount of 
money that should be spent on our highways, and they were just 
allowing them to crumble. We are not sitting in a situation 
where we just sort of hid and didn’t set any goals or priorities 
within health care and allowed nurses and doctors to leave. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to address specifics 
within my own ministry because I think in the Ministry of 
Social Services, and Housing, we have taken a number of steps 
forward, knowing that there is always more that needs to be 
done. But we’re working within a balanced budget. 
 
And I’m going to start just by talking about the housing 
portfolio. I remember well sitting in opposition, and we were 
running into basically a crisis in housing, Mr. Speaker. The 
vacancy rates in our major centres was becoming less and less 
and had fallen, quite frankly, in some of our major cities to less 
than 1 per cent. And it was very interesting how the NDP 
handled it. And the Social Services critic, the member from 
Saskatoon Centre was sitting at the cabinet table at that time 
when the housing situation was becoming more and more 
problematic. And so they struck a task force, Mr. Speaker. They 
struck a task force of cabinet ministers. There was Judy Junor, 
Kevin Yates, and Frank Quennell. And they went off and they 
had invitational consultations and they had a report, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I know the NDP like to cry out of transparency and open 
reports, but nobody saw that report other than the NDP cabinet 
table. And they never made it public. They never allowed 
anyone else to see it, and nor did they act on it in any way until 
the very, very final hour before the 2007 election. 
 
And it was kind of interesting because I remember the news 
article at that time, and it says, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, “The 
NDP cabinet awoke from its slumber this week to discover a 
housing crisis in Saskatoon.” And it went on to say, and I quote 
again, “This is crisis management in the Land of Nod.” And 
that’s indeed what the NDP’s priorities were at that time and 
how they reacted to the crisis in housing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they lost that election. And when we formed 
government, we realized that housing was a priority that needed 
to be addressed and very, very quickly. So I’m very proud to 
say that our government has seen housing starts that have been 
more and more each and every year. We’ve contributed to a 
number of housing builds ourselves as government, as well as 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5669 

we have implemented a number of programs to partner with 
both municipalities and the developers. 
 
Now I know that the members opposite have some issues with 
working with private industry. They find that a problem. But 
quite frankly, private industry has stepped up to the plate in a 
big way. They have come forward; they are building houses, 
Mr. Speaker. They are building houses within the continuum of 
just not high-end but also moderate-income housing. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re building, more than ever before, rental 
housing. And that has significantly changed the housing climate 
that we have seen in our province for quite some time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have invested $475 million since 2007 to 
develop over 8,300 units within our province. We have invested 
114 million to repairs and upgrades to the existing housing. So 
that is 603 projects in 206 communities. We have seen, as I’ve 
said year over year — and 2013 alone was 41 per cent higher in 
our housing starts than the 10-year average— and we have seen 
multi-unit rental starts since 2007 increase by 560 per cent 
higher than the last seven years of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s astounding of how well these programs that 
we’ve implemented have worked, and how industry and 
municipalities have partnered with us, which is hugely why 
they have worked, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We introduced Headstart on a Home, which has . . . We’re 
seeing 1,329 homes are either complete or under construction 
under that program. We set a goal of 1,000 new homes. We’ve 
surpassed that, and we’re sure we’re going to surpass 1,500 as 
well. 
 
What does that mean? Well that means, Mr. Speaker, that the 
vacancy rates that were falling under 1 per cent when the NDP 
were in government are now on average across our province 3.3 
per cent, which is considered a much healthier market. So the 
programs are working. We’re working in partnership with 
industry and municipalities, and that has been a priority of our 
government. What does it mean to wait-lists quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, for our major cities? It means that since 2012, Moose 
Jaw’s wait-list for social housing is down 81 per cent, 
Saskatoon’s is down 63 per cent, Regina’s is down 58 per cent, 
and Prince Albert’s is down 16 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
priority of our government. That is where some of our money is 
going. 
 
We also have, Mr. Speaker, the most vulnerable, the citizens 
who for whatever reason can’t afford a house. They are 
struggling with the day-to-day . . . It may be addictions. It may 
be mental illness. And, Mr. Speaker, what we have done for 
those individuals to bridge them, to hopefully get help to them 
in the meantime? We have increased our shelter spaces by 101 
per cent, Mr. Speaker, since the days of the NDP. 
 
We’re no longer using, massively using hotel rooms as those 
emergency shelters, Mr. Speaker. We are establishing with our 
great community-based organizations so that maybe we can 
initiate the community’s support and help them perhaps 
overcome the challenges that they are facing. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I have no doubt when Health has completed their consultation 
process for a mental illness and drug addictions strategy, there 
will be other suggestions about what more we can do to help 

those that are most vulnerable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the NDP were in power, hotel use has 
dropped by 65 per cent. That’s largely because of the initiatives 
that we have undertaken as a government. So the member from 
Cumberland should know that that is where some of our money 
is going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, disabilities is another area of responsibility that I 
have, and when I was Social Services . . . In 2007 shortly after 
we formed government, I was minister of Social Services at that 
time, and I was absolutely appalled at how that file had been 
neglected over the years of the NDP. They had at the time — 
and I know there has been some dispute over this 440 wait-list 
— but it was a moment in time, there was 440 individuals who 
were waiting for supports, either housing supports or program 
supports or both, that basically were just on a wait-list and 
ignored. And I know one individual that I met at the time, she 
was a woman that was in her 80s and she was supporting her 
adult daughter. And she was very distressed because she knew 
that she . . . The whole task was becoming extremely 
overwhelming and she wasn’t sure how many more years she 
could look after her daughter. So she was one of those 
individuals that quite frankly was helped, and there were many 
more, when we decided that we were going to eliminate that 
440 wait-list. And we have done so for almost all of the 
individuals on that list. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have also increased the supports for other 
individuals that have emerged into the situation where they 
need help. Either they are families that have moved to our 
province that have an adult child that has disabilities or else 
they are individuals that have aged out of the education system. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to be of a government, be part 
of that government that has decided this is a priority, that we 
need to make individuals with disabilities our priority and that 
we need to do a lot more to help support them. So, Mr. Speaker, 
when the NDP ask where did the money go, that’s where the 
money’s going, Mr. Speaker. It’s for individuals and families 
with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we introduced the SAID [Saskatchewan assured 
income for disability] program. I was minister at the time. And 
the NDP had no problem, even though individuals with 
disabilities were asking to please be taken off the social 
assistance program. That was a stigma involved with it. They 
wanted more dignity, and that’s what we did, Mr. Speaker. We 
set up their own income support program and we have 
enhanced that program so that they can maintain more of their 
earnings if they have a part-time job than in other programs. So, 
Mr. Speaker, that is where our government is spending our 
money. 
 
The other area of responsibility I have, Mr. Speaker, is in child 
and family services. Again when I was minister the first term or 
when we first formed government in 2007, we had a very, very 
sad situation in our province. Between 2000 and 2007 the 
caseloads of children coming into care had grown by 53 per 
cent and the NDP again didn’t seem to know that there was a bit 
of a crisis going on. And there was a report put out by the then 
children’s advocate called A Breach of Trust. I remember that 
report. I remember it well. I had to do a lot of media interviews 



5670 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

on it. And it was a report of situations that was in the child 
welfare system while the NDP were in power. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you can believe it, there was a foster home 
that had 21 children in their care. Mr. Speaker, that’s not 
acceptable and there was a lot of work that needed to be done 
on this file. There’s a lot more work that still needs to be done, 
but I’m very happy to say that our government has increased 
funding to the child and family services by 113 million despite 
the fact that we are now seeing a decline of children of care — 
which is unheard of across our country — and that decline is 
due to the work that our government has put in in finding 
family members that can help take these children that come into 
care, and putting a lot more effort into that. We are putting 
more effort in supporting families before they go into crisis. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have now established a number of 
supported group homes for our young teenage children so that 
they don’t necessarily have to come in and crowd our foster 
homes. And quite frankly, a lot of our youth prefer that setting 
because they don’t like the structure of a foster home. So it isn’t 
right for all situations but it is right for many. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’d love if the members opposite could 
tell me how much funding when they were government that 
they gave to Street Culture right here in Regina. None. And, 
Mr. Speaker, Egadz is an organization that is doing just 
yeoman’s work for us in Saskatoon, and it would be interesting 
if the NDP would answer to how much funding they gave that 
organization. And it wasn’t much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve invested a lot more money into our child and family 
services. I’m quite proud of it. So when the member opposite 
asks where’s the money going, Mr. Speaker, that’s where it’s 
going. And as the resources are available, I’m sure more money 
will go in that direction because that’s a priority of our 
government. 
 
We’ve been able to reduce the overcrowding in foster homes by 
a 45 per cent reduction, which is significant. We have fewer 
children in our care, which is significant. And now, quite 
frankly, a lot of our homes that do have more than the 
recommended four children, they are sibling groups. And I will 
defend that, Mr. Speaker, that if we can possibly keep sibling 
groups together, we will try to do so. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the last area of responsibility that I have is 
income assistance, and I know the NDP were calling on a 
poverty reduction strategy. And I’m sure they never had one, 
nor did they have a plan for one but they feel our government 
should have one. And we agree, quite frankly. We are moving 
again in the right direction. There’s been a number of steps that 
we have made as a government to help reduce dependency 
within our province, and some of those initiatives are working. 
I’m very, very proud to say that we have the second-lowest 
income dependency rate in Canada and as a percentage of 
population, since the NDP were government. They were at 5.7 
per cent of population were dependent, and today we are at 4.9. 
So we are going in the right direction, Mr. Speaker, but we 
recognize that more needs to be done, and we’re quite frankly 
ready and willing to start that work along with the individuals 
and groups that work in the area of poverty. 
 
We have 23,000 less people living with low incomes than when 

the NDP were in power, and we have 8,000 fewer children 
living in low-income families than we were under the NDP. 
And I think that some of those reduction in poverty incidences 
is due to programs. We’ve done some great program increases 
in education, both in providing child care spaces, in expanding 
our pre-kindergarten program. We have definitely put a more 
identified focus on First Nations education and graduation rates. 
We’ve greatly expanded adult basic education, and the list goes 
on and on. 
 
[15:45] 
 
We’ve expanded our supports for seniors. We have tripled the 
seniors’ income plan. The NDP just allowed it to languish year 
over year over year, never ever increased it. We have tripled 
where it was during the days of the NDP. We have put in 
additional supports for families such as the active families 
benefit. We have eliminated the provincial tax on children’s 
clothing. We introduced the reduced drug program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have looked at areas where we can help the 
most vulnerable and introduced the COR [centre of 
responsibility] and Hub model, something which is being 
watched very carefully in other provinces in Canada because it 
is showing reduced rates of crime and health issues and other 
things that is a problem for these most vulnerable individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the first ever in Canada, a social impact 
bond called Sweet Dreams in Saskatoon which is supporting 
single moms to help them give them a hand up. Mr. Speaker, 
we have, the first time in decades, built the first transition home 
for women who are living with domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re doing with the money that we 
have. And we recognize more needs to be done, so I’m looking 
forward to working with the stakeholders and the individuals 
that have done a lot of work already in the area of poverty to see 
where there are gaps, see what more we can do. So I want to 
thank them for the work they’ve done, and I look forward to our 
continuing working together. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that I have identified a number of areas 
— and there’s many, many more — where our government has 
prioritized, and where we’re spending our money, and how 
we’ve moved this province forward with the individuals and all 
of the leaders that we have in our province. Because they 
definitely are working with us in supporting those initiatives, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so now we need to continue to work together and keep our 
province strong. With that, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion 
and I will not support the amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an honour 
to be able to speak to the Speech from the Throne that was 
delivered on this, the opening fourth session of the 
twenty-seventh legislature. It’s unfortunate we don’t have more 
members from the opposition here to hear this riveting speech, 
but I’ll carry on anyway. 
 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5671 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the recent attacks, I want to offer our 
thoughts and prayers to those in Quebec and Ottawa that have 
been affected by cowardly acts of terror. It is during moments 
like these that we are reminded of the bravery and sacrifice to 
all those who serve in uniform to protect Canadians and our 
institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to assure the people of Saskatchewan 
that our government, the RCMP, and the brave men and women 
in uniform are continuing to work in keeping Saskatchewan 
people safe. I would also like to thank our Sergeant-at-Arms 
and his security crew for the excellent job they do, along with 
the rest of the legislative staff in this magnificent building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get into the Throne Speech, I would like 
to recognize some very important people in the Cut 
Knife-Turtleford constituency. Mr. Speaker, first of all I would 
like to recognize my office staff. Cheryl Hume is my 
constituency assistant, and Maureen Paron is our casual 
assistant. These people are dedicated and very sincere in their 
everyday duties. They keep the office very organized and, more 
importantly, they keep me organized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank my wife, Valerie, for her 
support and keeping the home front intact. Without her 
commitment I would not be able to do this job. She is my wife, 
but truly my best friend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, June employment hit a record high of 577,000 
people working in our province. Saskatchewan’s population is 
now at an all-time high of over 1.125 million people. That 
represents an increase of more than 123,000 people in the past 
seven years, a far cry from the previous seven years when 
Saskatchewan’s population actually was declining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province remains on track to reach the 
population target set by our government of 1.2 million by 2020, 
while Statistics Canada has predicted Saskatchewan’s 
population could surpass 1.5 million by 2038. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in July unemployment hit a record low of 3.2 per 
cent, the lowest unemployment ever recorded. In September 
Saskatchewan had the lowest unemployment rate and the fastest 
rate of job creation anywhere in Canada. Saskatchewan people 
are earning more than ever before and they are keeping more of 
what they earn, thanks to lower taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has a balanced budget. During this 
session our government will again demonstrate its commitment 
to sound financial management by delivering its eighth 
consecutive balanced budget because of our cabinet and 
treasury board’s commitment to sound financial management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Moody’s recently upgraded Saskatchewan’s credit 
rating to a AAA, their highest possible rating. In providing the 
upgrade, Moody’s said Saskatchewan’s AAA rating “reflects 
the province’s fiscal discipline and sustained low debt levels, 
which underscores prudent financial management practices.” 
Mr. Speaker, this Finance minister knows how to stretch a buck. 
 
Since 2007 Saskatchewan’s exports have increased by 63 per 
cent while manufacturing shipments have climbed by more than 
50 per cent. Mr. Speaker, our government will not stick its head 

in the sand. To further support our exporters, our government 
will maintain its emphasis on international engagement, 
particularly in Asia, the fastest growing region in the world. 
Our government will continue to support STEP [Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership], which carried out 42 trade 
missions to 27 countries in 2013. And the comprehensive 
European trade agreement, CETA [Canada-European Union 
Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement] will open 
many new markets for Saskatchewan exports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this unprecedented growth requires a skilled 
labour force. To address this situation, our government has 
invested heavily in adult basic education services and is 
working to eliminate the wait-list for adult education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the upcoming fiscal year, we will increase the 
number of training seats by 775, eliminating the 2012 wait-list 
and bringing the total number of seats to 9,355, an increase of 
nearly 60 per cent since 2007. Also this government will boost 
the number of apprenticeship seats by 300, bringing the total 
number of seats to 7,000, an 86 per cent increase since 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recently travelled to Minot, North Dakota, and 
visited Senator Randy Burckhard. He was keenly interested, 
like many others from around the world, on Boundary dam 
power station near Estevan as SaskPower opened the first 
commercial power plant in the world with a fully integrated 
post-combustion carbon capture system. More than 90 per cent 
of the carbon dioxide emitted at Boundary dam 3 will be 
captured and stored for use in enhanced oil recovery operations 
in mature oil fields. This is the equivalent of taking more than 
250,000 vehicles off Saskatchewan roads each year, and was 
developed right here in Saskatchewan under this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take some time to talk about Cut 
Knife-Turtleford constituency — the constituency located 
between two thriving cities, The Battlefords and Lloydminster. 
With a cold, wet spring and a long harvest season, crops were 
better than average, and with prices starting to increase, it 
should be another successful year. Cattle prices are high and 
ranchers are very happy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost all towns have new businesses and 
population growth. There is a positive attitude wherever you go. 
New cars and trucks, boats, RVs, [recreational vehicle], and 
many new pieces of farm equipment can be seen around the 
countryside. Almost all farmers now have a semi or a B-train 
for hauling grain. There are welding rigs, drilling rigs, 
flush-bys, service rigs, coil tubing rigs, and many other pieces 
of equipment needed in the oil and gas sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Husky Energy is developing three new thermal oil 
plants in the Vawn, Edam area, Rush Lake north of Paynton, 
and many others in the planning stage according to President 
Asim Ghosh. Husky will spend over $1 billion in the upcoming 
years with a 10-year plan of thermal injection plants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Serafina oil is also building a plant at Vawn and 
one on the drawing board for the Meota area. There will be over 
400 workers needed at these sites. There is also a new loading 
dock at Lashburn developed by Altex in the RM [rural 
municipality] of Wilton which will ramp up and load close to 
350 oil cars per day within the next year. 



5672 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, a new 24-unit assisted living complex has been 
built in Edam. A full complement of physicians in Turtleford 
and the CEC [collaborative emergency centre] is operating very 
well in Maidstone along with a full complement of physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Meota, Edam, Turtleford, Maidstone, Lashburn, 
Cut Knife, and Neilburg are all developing new residential and 
commercial lots. Restaurants and all service type businesses are 
thriving. The attitude is great. There are good jobs and our kids 
are staying in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week when I travelled from my home in the 
resort village of Metinota to Maidstone through Turtleford, I 
counted 17 oil rigs working, and construction of a new pipeline 
from Rush Lake to Maidstone which ties into the existing 
Husky pipeline. It is very busy in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago I attended the official opening of 
the state-of-the-art RCMP detachment in Lloydminster on 
Wednesday, and on Thursday I was involved in a sod-turning 
event for a new RCMP detachment in Maidstone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RCMP play a significant role in our province. 
The RCMP have always been an important part of the fabric of 
our province, and I’m happy they will continue to be our 
provincial police service well into the future, thanks to a 
renewed 20-year policing agreement that came into effect April 
2012. Mr. Speaker, also in a province that has numerous small 
towns, RCMP officers are respected and trusted fixtures in the 
community. By working together with our policing partners, we 
will continue to ensure Saskatchewan citizens can live, work, 
and raise their families while feeling safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in June of this year, when the Premier asked me to 
serve as Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure, he specifically asked me to investigate 
opportunities and options for TMS [thin membrane surface] 
highways across the province, something that the NDP had 
neglected during their last term in government. Mr. Speaker, 
these TMS roads were built in the early ’50s and ’60s, and they 
cannot support today’s heavy truck traffic. They are narrow, 
they aren’t designed for modern safety standards, and they 
don’t hold up well in spring or wet years like we’ve seen lately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve made considerable progress in upgrading 
these roads. We’ve upgraded about 500 kilometres of TMS 
highways since 2007, but it would cost more than 4 billion to 
upgrade the remaining 5000 kilometres of TMS roads. Mr. 
Speaker, many of these highways have very low traffic despite 
accounting for about 20 per cent of the entire provincial 
highway system. TMS highways support less than 6 per cent of 
traffic volume. Nevertheless they still support economic activity 
in rural areas and play a role in supporting the quality of life 
that we all enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been meeting with RMs, town councils, and 
area transportation planning committees to ensure future 
highway investments provide the best value possible. I know 
the officials at the ministry have also put in many hours 
investigating and analyzing this challenge. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
hope that the outcomes of these efforts will be a new strategy 
for TMS highways that provides options that address 
poor-condition TMS highways. 

Mr. Speaker, one of our primary areas of focus for the growth 
plan is increasing our exports and enhancing our international 
competitiveness. Exports are the foundation that our economy is 
built on; in fact, about two-thirds of all economic activity in 
Saskatchewan is derived from exports. Mr. Speaker, the key 
sectors of our economy — agriculture, energy, mining, forestry, 
biotech, and manufacturing — are all export orientated. The 
growth plan isn’t all about exports, infrastructure, or the 
economy. In the end, it’s about Saskatchewan’s people, making 
sure that everyone benefits from our prosperity. That’s why we 
need to make sure we have the safest, most efficient 
transportation infrastructure possible for shippers, commuters, 
emergency services, and tourists alike. A world-class 
transportation system really is an important factor in the high 
standard of living overall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2014-15 budget is the largest highway budget 
in the history at 664.5 million. We have invested 4.3 billion in 
our first seven years, an 82 per cent increase over the last seven 
years of the NDP. Since 2008 we have improved over 8600 
kilometres of provincial highways. We have expanded primary 
weights by more than 61 per cent since forming government. 
We’ve invested 41.5 million in bridge and culvert repair in this 
year’s budget, a 274 per cent increase from the 2007-08 budget, 
the NDP’s last budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize some of our government’s 
accomplishments in the Highways ministry: twinning between 
Saskatoon and Prince Albert on Highway 11; twinning between 
Saskatoon and Clavet on Highway 16; twinning between 
Saskatoon and Delisle on Highway 7 in progress; passing lanes 
between Balgonie and Fort Qu’Appelle on Highway 10; passing 
lanes between Rosetown and Delisle on Highway 7 in progress; 
the completion of the St. Louis bridge. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
getting close to starting construction on what will be the largest 
transportation infrastructure project in the province’s history, 
the Regina bypass project. All these projects truly are the vision 
of a strong, innovative government with a high standard of 
fiscal responsibility. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is strong. This strength comes from 
our people, their hard work, their determination, their ingenuity, 
and their generosity. These Saskatchewan values will keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the 
amendment and I will be supporting the Throne Speech. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Corrections and Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure for me to join with all of my colleagues here today in 
the debate in support of the Speech from the Throne. But first, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take this opportunity to offer 
thoughts and prayers to those who have been affected by the 
recent acts of terror in Quebec and Ottawa. We all know, Mr. 
Speaker, that all Canadians have been affected and impacted. 
All of my colleagues have spoken on this and expressed their 
deepest sympathy and enduring respect. We must continue to 
remember, Mr. Speaker, never forget what the men and women 
in uniform do for our country in protecting our democracy. 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5673 

In grave moments such as these throughout our history, we 
reflect on the institutions that make Canada a very, very special 
place. Our system of parliament, independent courts, and our 
vibrant civil society are the foundation of a very strong society 
founded on principles of freedom and diversity and are all 
underpinned by the rule of law. I also want to assure the people 
of Saskatchewan that our government, along with the brave 
men and women in uniform, are continuing to work in keeping 
Saskatchewan people safe. It is a priority of our government, 
ensuring the safety of our communities and our citizens. We are 
working closely with our federal, provincial, and territorial 
partners to monitor the situation. Our officials will continue to 
be in contact with policing and national security partners to 
monitor recent events and monitor any developments relevant 
to Saskatchewan. 
 
On Wednesday, September 22nd, we had the honour of having 
Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan, address 
us at the opening of the present session. The speech highlighted 
our strong growing province, the strength and determination of 
our people, and outlined our plan to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
We will be focusing on the economy because with a strong 
economy, our province and its people are strong. Our people 
have always been a source of strength and a source of great 
leadership. It provides a broader tax base and more resources to 
invest in things that are important to the people of the province 
like health care, housing, education, and infrastructure. We are 
working hard to ensure Saskatchewan remains the best place to 
live, work, and raise a family. 
 
As part of our plan for 2014-15, the Ministry of Justice outlined 
its plan to grow neighbourhoods by promoting safe 
communities, reducing crime, and improving public confidence 
in the justice system through prevention, intervention, and 
suppression. While we are pleased with our accomplishments so 
far, we recognize more needs to be done to ensure 
Saskatchewan continues to benefit from the opportunities and 
meet the challenges of growth. The ministry will work with 
other ministries and community partners to achieve greater 
success in the delivery of programs and services. 
 
Our success with our building partnerships to reduce crime 
program, or BPRC, underscores the importance of these 
partnerships and the necessity of a unified approach. Through 
our Hub and COR model, we are changing how business is 
being done. We are bringing together community leaders, 
educators, social workers, police, and community-based 
organizations to work together collaboratively in finding local 
solutions to create safer and healthier communities. 
 
The Hub is a made-in-Saskatchewan solution that aims to assist 
individuals at risk by getting community agencies, health and 
education providers, and the police around a table to offer 
coordinated help to those most at risk of falling through the 
cracks of our system. Discussions are on a case-by-case basis, 
and the focus is on intervention and prevention. 
 
Hub implementation is premised on the fact that no one agency 
has the necessary resources or expertise to independently 
respond effectively to the continuing, expanding, and complex 
social issues facing many Saskatchewan communities. The Hub 
model is a reallocation of existing government and community 

resources whereby, collectively and collaboratively, immediate 
crisis response is offered. The goal of the Hub is to connect 
individuals in need to services within 24 to 48 hours. 
 
CORs, or centres of responsibility, explore long-term solutions 
to social issues identified by the Hubs and increase 
collaboration in resource support between the Hubs in the 
region. The COR is a group of experienced human service 
professionals seconded from the police, corrections, social 
work, education, addictions, and mental health. These 
specialists provide analysis and recommendations on trends, 
gaps, and reoccurring issues to determine sustained and 
system-wide solutions. 
 
In the Throne Speech, we committed to expanding the Hub and 
COR crime reduction model because it is working. Community 
Mobilization Prince Albert has been in operation the longest 
and has seen significant results. In 2011, year over year 
compared to crime rates in 2010, which would be prior to the 
Hub, overall crime rate has decreased by 18 per cent. Violent 
crime has decreased by 38 per cent. And I’m excited that our 
COR and Hub model is being emulated in other provinces 
throughout Canada. Several communities in Ontario have 
implemented a Saskatchewan-inspired Hub model along with 
communities in Alberta, Manitoba, and Nova Scotia. 
 
And the NDP supports BPRC, or building partnerships to 
reduce crime. At an Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
Committee meeting held on April 22nd, 2013, MLA and former 
Justice minister John Nilson said, in reference to the Hub, “And 
so I appreciate what you’ve described and because I think that 
is where the solutions lie.” 
 
And communities throughout the province also agree. We have 
10 active Hubs, and Meadow Lake and Melfort will become the 
next communities to establish their own Hub model. With the 
increased number of Hubs, we expect to announce the 
establishment of two more CORs in the near future as well. 
 
We are working towards a full continuum of crime reduction 
initiatives. We are focusing on driving down the demand on our 
justice system through prevention and intervention by 
addressing the risk factors that contribute to criminal behaviour. 
This includes recognizing the impacts of mental health and 
addictions. By engaging with the police and health system, we 
can bring about those better outcomes and reduce the role of the 
criminal justice system in the lives of persons with mental 
illness. 
 
We also have an untapped resource that can be accessed 
through jobs and literacy. By addressing the employability of 
persons, whether they are in our system or outside our system, 
while contributing much-needed production capacity from 
within our correctional environment, we can truly make a 
difference in the quality of life for many individuals, families, 
and communities. We are also supporting our policing partners’ 
suppression efforts. Our government has added 173 new 
provincially-funded officers since we took office in 2007. 
 
As of April 1, 2012, Saskatchewan and Canada signed a 
20-year provincial service agreement for continued service of 
the RCMP. This year the total RCMP budget is approximately 
170.9 million. Our government is providing 14.2 million in 



5674 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

municipal policing grants this year that support the much 
needed targeted policing initiatives such as SHOCAP or serious 
and habitual offender comprehensive action plan in Saskatoon, 
Regina, and P.A. [Prince Albert]; combined forces special 
enforcement unit that consists of three specialized teams that 
focus on dismantling organized crime; serious violent offender 
response that targets violent offenders before they reoffend; the 
Internet child exploitation unit. 
 
Last year the Saskatchewan ICE [Internet child exploitation] 
unit opened 212 new investigations, executed 83 search 
warrants, and laid 156 charges of various child 
pornography-related offences. Three child victims were also 
rescued from abusive environments as well. 
 
Our government recognizes also the challenges the province is 
facing due to the increasing costs of policing. That is why 
Saskatchewan is taking a lead role in the national effort to 
address the economics of public safety. We are also continuing 
our work with SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities], SUMA, and the RCMP and the Saskatchewan 
Association of Chiefs of Police to design a model that will 
complement existing policing services by addressing low-risk, 
high-priority public safety concerns at the local level. 
 
The joint SUMA and SARM task force on the administration of 
justice, which determined in the year 2000 that all residents of 
Saskatchewan were responsible to pay for policing, has been 
invited to reconvene and look at a variety of issues dealing with 
policing and the funding of such policing. 
 
And I want to respond to the recent reports that highlight the 
conditions in our correctional facilities. Our government is 
investigating, when the previous government did not. We are 
investing 24 million for an addition at the Prince Albert 
Provincial Correctional Centre. This new living unit will add 
144 new bed spaces. Mr. Speaker, we are looking at reducing 
the demand in our system, but we are well aware of the fact that 
we also must address the current situation in Saskatchewan. 
 
But that’s not all we did. In 2009 we added the first new bed 
space since the late 1980s: 5.5 million was spent on a 90-bed 
dormitory at the Saskatoon Provincial Correctional Centre. At 
Pine Grove provincial correctional centre for women, 13.4 
million was invested in a 30-cell living unit that added 60 new 
bed spaces. It opened in October of 2013. In February of 2014, 
the new White Birch female holding facility opened in Regina. 
By investing 1.8 million, we converted a vacant unit at Regina’s 
Paul Dojack Youth Centre. Previously the Pine Grove 
Correctional Centre in Prince Albert was the only women’s 
facility in the province, and most recently our government 
announced the Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford 
replacement project which includes a 96-bed correctional 
facility. 
 
There are many, many competing issues that we as elected 
officials must consider in our decision-making process. So 
when we can present a balanced approach as laid out in this 
year’s Throne Speech, we can feel confident that we are being 
accountable to our constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working hard to keep Saskatchewan 
strong. We are developing our resource sector to ensure 

sustainability. We are supporting free trade by fostering existing 
relationships and developing those much needed new 
opportunities. We are investing in education and post-secondary 
education to build a skilled workforce.  
 
We are building schools, hospitals, and highways to address the 
many years when there was no capital investment. We are 
looking at new, innovative ways of doing things, whether it’s 
social impact bonds or P3s [public-private partnership]. We 
continue to invest in what’s important to the people of 
Saskatchewan — health care, those less fortunate, the 
environment, and our parks. And we will continue to support 
our First Nations, municipal, and agricultural communities. 
 
As the MLA for Regina Wascana Plains, I am delighted with 
the recent grand opening for the new $22 million Emerald 
Ridge Elementary School in White City. As one of the 
fastest-growing areas of the province, this investment is much 
needed and very much appreciated. 
 
Further, the commitment this government has made to the west 
Regina bypass that includes interchanges at Pilot Butte and 
White City-Emerald Park is critical to this ever-growing area. 
By using a P3 funding model, this project will progress in a 
timely fashion. We did not have and do not have in this 
particular area 20 years to wait. It needs to be done as soon as 
possible. 
 
[16:15] 
 
It is an honour serving the people of Regina Wascana Plains, 
but I have a lot of people I need to thank for their continued 
support — my family, Jackie and Joette in my constituency 
office, my constituents and constituency association, my 
government staff and colleagues. 
 
This is indeed a very exciting time to be in Saskatchewan. We 
are laying the groundwork to successfully deal with the ongoing 
pressures of our growing and prosperous province. We are 
working hard to represent the people of our province in the 
legislature, and we are committed to keeping Saskatchewan 
strong. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I along with many others want 
to declare my full support for this year’s Throne Speech. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour to rise in this Assembly and 
speak to the Speech from the Throne in 2014. Mr. Speaker, this 
has been, I believe it’ll be my 19th Throne Speech that I’ve 
listened to. And as my colleagues indicate, yes that’s been a 
few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 2014 has been a year of decision making for 
many, but it was a decision-making year for me as well. And I 
do want to put on the record, Mr. Speaker, because there was 
some confusion back in the month of April when I announced 
that whenever the next provincial election will be, which we 
know as events unfold from the federal government, from 
what’s occurring in Ottawa, we know that the election in 
Ottawa may occur next fall. It seems like that’s what their date 
will be in October, as they’ve stated. And as a result of that of 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5675 

course, the next provincial election will be in the spring of 
2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated that I will not seek re-election in 
2016, but unfortunately some printings occurred that said that I 
had resigned. And, Mr. Speaker, I had not resigned, and in fact 
I’m very honoured that the Premier has asked me to serve as 
Deputy Premier and Minister of Finance for at least till March 
18th when I will be delivering the next budget. So, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very thankful, I’m very thankful to the Premier showing 
confidence in me and wanting me to continue working on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to express my gratitude to many 
people because it’s not only the ongoing events that occur 
within our constituency or within this great building. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m sure I’m a lot like you, very impressed to walk 
into this building on a daily basis. It’s an honour to work here. 
It’s an honour to serve the people of Saskatchewan, and I’m in 
awe of the magnificence of this building on a daily basis. So 
you know I believe there will be a time when there will be 
maybe a tear that will come from my eye as I leave this 
building, but it is an honour to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to express my gratitude to my staff in Canora at the 
constituency office. As a member of the Executive Council 
cabinet, we don’t always get back to events and to things that 
are occurring in our constituency. And as a result of not being 
able to get back to Canora-Pelly, my constituency staff has to 
handle many of the situations. I’d love to have a, you know, a 
hands-on approach but it’s just not practical. So I want to thank 
Carol Sleeva and Michele Wiwchar for the outstanding work 
that they do and, you know, keep me informed on a regular 
basis about concerns that people bring to my office. 
 
And I do want to stress that, Mr. Speaker, because there are a 
number of people who believe that when concerns are raised at 
the office, there’s always the follow-up phone call, well did you 
actually inform the member? And the answer is yes, I can 
assure you that our staff do that on a regular basis. They want to 
make sure that the ministers, who are busy, are also informed 
on the day-to-day activities that occur back in our offices. 
 
I also want to extend my appreciation to . . . You know, the 
ongoing pressures that happen with every ministry but 
especially in mine, as Deputy Premier and Minister of Finance, 
there are many, many different calls that come in. There will be 
calls that will come in as Deputy Premier. There will be calls 
that will come in regarding my responsibility for what I refer to 
as the Ukraine file, and there are things that will happen of 
course with regards to Finance. So my staff here in the 
legislature, led by my chief of staff of course, Dawn Popescul, 
and my senior administration person who’s been with me for 
seven years since I became a cabinet minister, Jane Johnston, is 
just a . . . just does a phenomenal job for me in ensuring that I 
have a great understanding of what’s going on and able to 
handle the day-to-day activities. 
 
I also want to thank my two other staff members, Natalie 
Pepper, and Rozalia Kasleder who just joined our staff. And I 
know that she’s experiencing a tremendous amount of . . . a 
steep learning curve is maybe the best way that I’ll describe it, 

and again I know she’ll do just a phenomenal job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk a little bit about some of the great 
things happening in Canora-Pelly because there are so many 
exciting activities. There are exciting activities occurring in 
infrastructure builds. There are exciting activities that are 
occurring in daycare. There are exciting things that are 
happening with regards to education. And I’m going to spend a 
few moments just highlighting some of those things that are 
occurring within my constituency. And I know from listening to 
the Throne Speech debates from ministers, every, every 
constituency had some very positive things. 
 
It’s surprising when you travel the constituency and listen to all 
the positive things, and then you listen to the opposition 
opposite and you sort of, well, are we really in the same 
province? But I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s because they were so 
used to planning for decline, so used to a province that was in 
fact going downhill, and now they’re just not able to fully 
understand that, indeed, our province is moving forward and 
moving forward quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the people in my constituency, 
especially those around the two provincial parks. I’m very 
fortunate to have the Duck Mountain Provincial Park and the 
Good Spirit Provincial Park in my constituency. Those are of 
course around the two lakes, Madge Lake for Duck Mountain 
and Good Spirit Lake for the other provincial park. But there’s 
been some great things that have happened there because of the 
initiative shown by this government and the leadership shown 
by ministers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the expansion. And I was fortunate to be involved 
in announcing that expansion at Duck Mountain, at Madge, 
where we’re going to actually be investing over $300,000 in the 
expansion of a boat launch. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think, you 
know, when you think about monies being spent on a boat 
launch and the building of a new road off the highway to allow 
tourists to come in, to allow the safety factor to be recognized, I 
think what you’re seeing is a great example of what’s occurring 
around the province. We have to meet that challenge. 
 
We have to ensure that there is a second sewage disposal 
station, that there is a road to bring in tourists directly to the 
lake, because that is exactly what is happening, an increased 
amount of usage. An increased amount of usage over at Good 
Spirit Lake also necessitated the building of almost what I’d 
refer to as a two-lane boat launch to ensure that we can meet the 
growth and demand and the usage of that lake as more and 
more people are coming into that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about one initiative that really did 
not involve government expenditure. And it’s something that’s 
occurring right now at Madge Lake, and many might know that 
there has been a church camp. It’s called the St. Michael’s 
church camp on Madge Lake. It’s been there for about 50 years, 
and they do a summer program with children from, I’ll say, 
from even outside of this province. Many students come to the 
church camp on a regular basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two families have spearheaded this project and 
have looked at the facility and indeed, Mr. Speaker, it is old and 
it is showing its wear. And they decided that it was time to 



5676 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

renovate that, to actually rebuild and create a brand new 
structure. So, Mr. Speaker, a $1.5 million project has been 
planned, and of course because it’s within a provincial park, 
there were the necessary approvals that had to be given by 
Parks, Culture and Sport. And I want to thank the Minister 
Responsible for Parks, Culture and Sport for leading that and 
making sure that, you know, nothing was overlooked but indeed 
government bureaucracies were not an obstacle. 
 
And the result, Mr. Speaker, is that a new, almost 11,000 square 
foot church camp is being built with $1.5 million. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the largest amount of financial commitment has come 
from the Broda family and the Hudye family. Both have 
donated significant dollars to ensure that this project is built, 
and indeed there will be even things like money in lieu of, and 
by that I’m meaning the actual donation of equipment. And it 
was interesting to see in the Kamsack paper just a couple of 
weeks ago, Cas Broda who has been recognized provincially 
with awards. His picture was taken as he was stepping out of, I 
think it looked like a backhoe or a track hoe. And again all 
volunteer work, all donations that are coming in from so many 
people are there to ensure that this camp is going to be ready for 
next year. Its first phase at least will be ready next year. 
Nothing to do with the financial dollars from government, but 
indeed government ensuring that this project can happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our Throne Speech this year on page 7, the 
Throne Speech announced the reintroduction of what used to be 
called SIGI, S-I-G-I. And that, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention 
it because the last initiative, the last SIGI program, the town of 
Canora and the town of Preeceville both took advantage of that 
growth initiative and accessed dollars from SIGI. And as a 
result of that, they have developments that have moved forward. 
And I dare say, Mr. Speaker, that as SIGI moves ahead again, 
there may be communities in my constituency that will take 
advantage of that program as well. Grant money at no interest is 
always of interest to a municipality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the interest that we see in the province of 
Saskatchewan isn’t just that local interest that has been there for 
a while. Now we’re seeing people so encouraged that have lived 
in Canora-Pelly for a long time. But I want to make mention of 
a family and, you know, there is the ThinkSask commercial that 
features this family. The Jeff Sznerch family from Alberta 
moved to Saskatchewan and they purchased an existing 
operation about nine miles south of Canora. And the reason 
that, of course, they’ve moved here is they wanted to expand 
their operation and that wasn’t possible in Alberta. 
 
But they have come here to Saskatchewan and some of the 
reasons why they came to Saskatchewan, to that area located 
within my constituency, is that the daycare in Canora is close to 
the family. The schools in Canora are close to their family. 
There are job opportunities for the lady in question, Mr. 
Speaker, but also they are very comfortable living here in 
Saskatchewan. And they’ve moved here to have more time with 
their family and their two children are of course growing very 
much, but enjoying the sports, enjoying the recreation. The 
statement made by Jeff, and I quote, “Our future in 
Saskatchewan is very bright. Now when people say where we 
are from, we say Saskatchewan,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that’s a great example of people that have looked at 

Saskatchewan and have determined that it’s a place to be. And 
that’s a goal of our government. That’s a goal of the Throne 
Speech, to make Saskatchewan the best place to live, the best 
place to work, and of course the best place to raise a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the exciting things happening throughout 
Saskatchewan but also in my constituency is, as I’ve been 
involved with the Education file in the past, involves the student 
enrolments across the province. Student enrolments are 
growing, and as the minister announced today of course we are 
ensuring that additional dollars will go into all school divisions, 
all 28 school divisions. But, Mr. Speaker, you know one of the 
exciting things to see as the minister noted today, I believe we 
have over 173,000 students. 
 
[16:30] 
 
That wasn’t always the plan, Mr. Speaker, and again when I 
look back at the beginning of my teaching career back in 1972, 
you know, there were many more students in this province for 
funded enrolment. I believe the province recognized about 
243,000 students in 1972-73 — 243,000 students. Keep in mind 
that the minister today indicated that we’re now back up to 
173,000. So indeed the student enrolment declined rapidly. It 
declined rapidly for many years and in fact, Mr. Speaker, one of 
the tables that I happened to find which was released by the 
former government back in 2003 projected the enrolments. And 
I’m not going to go over all of the years but, Mr. Speaker, for 
the year 2013-14 which was the last year of the chart, the 
government at that time, the NDP, projected that our enrolment 
would be down to 142,000 — 142,000 — whereas today the 
minister responded that indeed we have 173. 
 
So let’s think about that for a minute, Mr. Speaker. What if 
indeed we would have reached 142,000 students? Well I think 
that the 47 projects that we have moved forward, the huge 
infrastructure projects, wouldn’t have happened. There 
wouldn’t have been a need to look at developments in the city 
of Regina or Saskatoon or Martensville or Warman, because we 
indeed wouldn’t need those 18 schools that we’re going to build 
over the next few years. We wouldn’t have employed the same 
numbers of teachers that we do today, and the same number of 
educational assistants and all of the professionals that do such a 
great job in our schools. We wouldn’t need as many of them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very clear — to us at least — that 
growth is essential, that growth is what’s going to lead to more 
people in the province of Saskatchewan, the ability for us to 
meet the needs of a growing province, whether they be in the 
area of building more schools, employing more professionals to 
indeed educate all of our children, but all of the other things that 
are needed in a growing province. 
 
That infrastructure, that health care that my colleague next to 
me speaks about on a regular basis when he talks about the 
health care dollar, is the services that we provide that we didn’t 
provide years ago. The utilization factor that continues to rise 
— not on an annual basis, it probably rises on a weekly basis — 
and the Minister of Health has to be responsible and understand 
what kind of pressures that puts on the ministry. 
 
Well the minister might be recognizing that there might be a 
need for some additional dollars but, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5677 

that. Over and over again, we’ve met that challenge by 
allocating, you know, well over $4 billion to the Ministry of 
Health. And as a result of that, I think we have people that are 
understanding that our wait-lists are going down, that our 
surgery wait-list is declining. Those are all very positive things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the initiatives that we introduced when we 
became government just — I think it was about two or three 
years ago; it was after a period of time — was something called 
the rink affordability grant. Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that 
in many . . . Any member of the legislature who has rural 
communities would know that in many of our smaller 
communities, the curling rink and the skating rink are the 
centres of a lot of activity during the winter months. And we all 
were pressured, especially I know I was when I was in 
opposition, by many community leaders to say, please help us 
out, the increasing costs of operating that local community rink. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again we have to recognize that for many, 
many years the population of Saskatchewan was declining. I 
spoke about the declining student enrolments, but also there 
was a shifting of population, more so to the urban centres but 
also moving, where people were moving out of the province of 
Saskatchewan and going elsewhere. 
 
So it was much more difficult for those left behind to continue 
operating these facilities. So, Mr. Speaker, we introduced 
something called the community rinks affordability grant where 
a facility can apply for a grant of $2,500 per facility. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m really pleased to indicate that every community in 
the Canora-Pelly constituency has taken advantage of that last 
year. Last year, Mr. Speaker, in fact the total number of dollars 
awarded to the different groups that operate the facilities in 
Canora-Pelly constituency was $57,500 dollars. 
 
And this year, Mr. Speaker, I understand that with the potential 
of another . . . And I say another because the first First Nations 
project actually made their application last year. We probably 
will be having a second First Nation apply this year. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the potential for this year is that there will be $60,000 
allocated to facilities in my constituency. So I want to say thank 
you to the minister. The minister who actually began that 
program a long time ago has of course made sure that that 
continues to be a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a little bit of time talking about the 
initiatives in the province of Saskatchewan, some of the 
changes that have occurred over the last year, the very positive 
changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve mentioned a little bit about population and 
said of course we need to grow. We need to ensure that the 
province continues to move forward. And if you . . . I remember 
very clearly because it was on budget day, which was March 
19th of this year, when Stats Canada indicated that 
Saskatchewan had grown by almost 20,000 people in the year 
2013 — 20,000 people in 2013. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re over 1.1 
million people. That’s the first time in our province’s history. 
And of course our population has been continuing to grow at 
that impressive pace. 
 
One of the key drivers of the population growth of course is 
international immigration. People are coming to Saskatchewan 

from other countries. Mr. Speaker, we’ve come a long way 
since my first year here in this Assembly, which was 1995. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to put on the record that the 
population change from 1996 to 2000 was about 3,600. So there 
was a growth. It was about 3,600. So when you look at that 
period of time, that growth was about 700 net international 
migrants a year for that period. That’s how many international 
migrants came into the province of Saskatchewan for that 
five-year period. 
 
Now compare that, Mr. Speaker, to 2006 to 2010, when there 
were roughly 32,000 net international migrants to the province. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an average of about 6,400. So under the 
former government, 700 per year; under our government, 6,400 
per year.  
 
What does that mean? Well, Mr. Speaker, population growth 
means opportunities. It means more children in our schools. We 
have more immigrants, as I’ve just pointed out, but of course it 
also means we might have more challenges. And more 
challenges are always I think much more useful to a 
government than the challenges of decline. So I think that the 
government is moving in a proper direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes on employment 
growth because as we’ve increased the population, the 
opportunities have also increased in numbers. Mr. Speaker, we 
have . . . We’re leading the nation. We’re leading the nation 
with the second fastest rate of employment growth and the 
lowest unemployment rate in Canada. In September, Mr. 
Speaker, 574,800 people were employed in Saskatchewan, and 
our province’s unemployment rate was 3.5 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the lowest among the provinces, and it’s well 
below the 6.8 per cent recorded nationally. Consistently, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate has been the 
lowest for many, many years — for nearly two years, Mr. 
Speaker. Full-time jobs are on the rise and jobs are available in 
every corner of the province. 
 
Let’s again do a little comparison, Mr. Speaker — 1995, 
448,000 people were employed in Saskatchewan in April of that 
year. So nearly 575,000 people employed today compared to 
448,000 in 1995, Mr. Speaker, a growth of 28 per cent since 
1995. And I think that speaks very . . . is the reason, Mr. 
Speaker, those numbers are the reason why our province is the 
envy of many of the other provinces. We continue to grow. We 
continue to create opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province is blessed. We have economic 
diversity. We know last year, Mr. Speaker, that a sector of our 
economy which is very, very important to Saskatchewan had its 
best year ever. And that of course, Mr. Speaker, is the 
agricultural sector. The agricultural sector in Saskatchewan last 
year produced a tremendous crop and contributed tremendously 
to the overall economy of the province. But one of the other 
areas, Mr. Speaker, of course are in the non-renewable resource 
sector. And we’re blessed with diverse resource base. We have 
oil and we have natural gas, potash, uranium, forestry, and 
many other precious metals as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are a leader. We are a leader when people 
recognize that Saskatchewan supplies 15 per cent of the world’s 



5678 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

uranium and about 30 per cent of the world’s potash. And of 
course in that particular resource we hold about 50 per cent of 
the world’s reserves. We are the second-largest conventional oil 
producer in Canada. So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at all of 
those positives, all of those growth, we understand why our 
economy is as diverse as it is. 
 
I mentioned the tremendous crop in agriculture last year, Mr. 
Speaker, but you know, one of the statistics that people don’t 
understand is, as our farmers have diversified and as they 
looked at growing other crops, our province is the world’s 
largest exporter of mustard, flaxseed, lentils, dried peas, and 
canary seed — and I repeat, Mr. Speaker, the world’s largest 
exporter of those products. In 2013 our province was the largest 
per capita exporter in Canada, with the value of our exports 
totalling $32.2 billion. Mr. Speaker, our Premier is going to be 
off on a mission to India, and there he will promote 
Saskatchewan’s strengths in energy, agri-food, and innovation, 
as well as profile business opportunities in the province for 
investors from India. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a government we’re also committed to 
expanding trade within Canada, building on the success of the 
New West Partnership and seeking to dismantle trade barriers 
within the province. It’s very difficult to understand why 
sometimes we have a greater obstacle with trade going across 
provincial borders than we have going across an international 
border, and of course by that I’m referring to the United States 
of America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the exciting things that happened in 2014 in 
Saskatchewan was around debt, Mr. Speaker. So that might 
have prompted maybe anyone who is listening to me to raise 
their eyebrows and say, well what do you mean? How can debt, 
how can debt have prompted a response? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
since our government took office, we’ve been very mindful of 
ensuring that we take control of the debt that was left, the $6.8 
billion that was part of government operational debt. And we’ve 
been very fortunate to pay down a very significant portion of 
that debt, and in fact $3 billion of that has been paid off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what occurred not, I believe it was, about two 
years ago was for the first time, Standard & Poor’s had given 
the province of Saskatchewan its very first AAA credit rating. 
So, Mr. Speaker, that was tremendous benefit to us because as 
debt matures, it has to be refinanced in many cases, and with an 
improved credit rating of course the interest rates are lower. The 
interest in different financial institutions acquiring 
Saskatchewan’s debt, as it is referred to, was increased. 
 
But also, Mr. Speaker, another thing happened in September of 
this year is that the second, one of the largest bond rating 
agencies in North America, Moody’s, upgraded Saskatchewan’s 
credit rating to also a AAA. So, Mr. Speaker, with now a AAA 
credit rating from Standard & Poor’s and from Moody’s, we 
along with Alberta, British Columbia, and of course Canada are 
the only jurisdictions in the country with Moody’s highest 
credit rating. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the press release from Moody’s, I want to 
quote a statement that was made when they indicated that 

Saskatchewan had now qualified for a AAA rating. And the 
quote was this, “. . . reflects the province’s fiscal discipline and 
sustained low debt levels, which underscores prudent financial 
management practices,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has emphasized that we need to 
live within our means. We need to ensure that the budgets are 
balanced and that we are not spending monies that we don’t 
have. And if we are able to, we reduce our debt. 
 
As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, the AAA ratings, as I’ve 
already mentioned, have enabled the province of Saskatchewan 
to literally save hundreds of millions of dollars of interest costs. 
And as a result of that, we’ve been able to allocate those things, 
allocate those things to building and improving more highways, 
building more schools, building hospitals, building long-term 
care facilities. A very significant amount of growth in this 
province is because we have been able to pay down debt and 
receive that type of evaluation from the bond rating agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also spend a little bit of time on lower 
taxes because again, Mr. Speaker, our desire has always been to 
lower the amount of income tax that people have paid, and 
we’ve made significant reductions in the income tax that 
individuals pay. We also made significant changes to the 
amount of property tax — the education property tax — that 
individuals pay. And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, a family 
of four with an income of 75,000 will pay less in total 
provincial taxes and utilities than their counterparts in any other 
province in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to ensure that we as a province are able to compete, 
are able to compete with other provinces, are able to 
demonstrate that the province of Saskatchewan is a great place 
to live and you can indeed build a future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the Minister Responsible for Advanced 
Education has already talked about the graduate retention 
program. But, Mr. Speaker, that is a very key program, and I 
know the more younger folk that I talk to, the more I find out 
that many people are indeed taking advantage of the graduate 
retention program. The member from Saskatoon Greystone and 
I were . . . I recall having a conversation with him years ago 
when we were talking about what program should we put in 
place to retain students, to encourage students to not only stay 
here in Saskatchewan but maybe come back. And that’s when 
the idea I think about the graduate retention program came up. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I won’t go into what the GRP [graduate 
retention program] is — you know, the amount of dollars that a 
student can reclaim after being employed in Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in those early years — I guess 2008, 2009 — 
we were talking about well, maybe we’ll be having to have a 
commitment, a financial commitment of $20 million, 30, 40. 
Mr. Speaker, the commitment now is over $80 million on an 
annual basis. And, Mr. Speaker, I have had many people come 
to me and say, thank you; it is one of the reasons why I returned 
back to this province as I had, you know, trained and took a 
program in another province. And they’ve come here to work. 
And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, about 50,000 
post-secondary graduates in the period of time from 2008 to 
2012, have taken advantage of that. 
 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5679 

Mr. Speaker, I know time is passing by very quickly, but I do 
want to talk a little bit about the future. You know, when we 
look at the Throne Speech and the kinds of things that have 
been described there, as we look at initiatives that we’re going 
to put forward, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that those 
initiatives are indeed going to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
Because I think that’s critical. 
 
There is no desire by anyone that I talk to, unless I listen to my 
colleagues in the opposition, to want to return back to the days 
when it was decline, when there were things that were moving 
in the opposite direction. So, Mr. Speaker, a big part of that 
involves careful management of the province’s finances while 
continuing to make important investment. I think that’s critical 
as we look at the need to ensure that we continue to spend 
money where it is needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is why, you know, when you look at the public 
accounts that were released not too long ago, summarizing the 
last fiscal year, you’ll see increased expenditures. You’ll see 
increased expenditures in areas like Social Services, where 
indeed the SAID program and the SAP [Saskatchewan 
assistance plan] program and the TEA [transitional employment 
allowance] program, all of those programs had greater 
utilization which really means that we’re indeed ensuring that 
people who are less fortunate, that we meet those challenges. 
We saw greater spending in health care as we looked at 
ensuring that we meet the needs of those people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, beyond those personal services, those things 
that are needed for individuals, we also need to ensure that our 
infrastructure continues to be improved, whether it’s to continue 
to fix or build highways. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about 
new initiatives in Highways, the twinning of additional 
highways. The highway out from Regina through to Weyburn, 
on to Estevan, that twinning is going to occur over the next 
number of years. 
 
We’re looking at passing-lane initiatives that need to continue 
to be a reality. Mr. Speaker, we did a project on Highway 10, a 
passing-lane project on Highway 10, where government 
financed the construction of eight passing lanes, four in each 
direction, from Balgonie to Fort Qu’Appelle. Mr. Speaker, I can 
honestly say I’ve had many, many people talk to me, but not a 
single person has expressed disappointment in the construction 
of those passing lanes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have to recognize that we’re going to be 
continuing to invest dollars in infrastructure. We’re going to be 
continuing to invest dollars in building new schools. Minister of 
Education has talked about all of the projects that we have 
under way now or have already been completed in the last 
seven years. We’re going to continue to look at those long-term 
care facilities that we’ve built from the ground up, brand new 
ones. But we also are going to look, ensure that we look at the 
maintenance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to express my appreciation to the 
Minister of Health for a couple of things that occurred, one in 
my constituency and one in the community where I live, and 
that of course is Canora, and Invermay. In Canora, Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately there was a physical structure that, well, for lack 
of a better word, failed, and the ceiling needed to be replaced. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it has been replaced, and now the dining 
room area is a great looking place to meet the needs of servicing 
many, many people who live in the Canora long-term care 
facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even a larger project occurred out at Invermay to 
ensure that that facility remains a viable entity for the next, you 
know, 25 years probably, because of the dollars that the 
Ministry of Health invested into ensuring that that specific 
building met the challenge that of course it had faced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are very specific measures that are outlined 
in the Throne Speech. And you know, Mr. Speaker, when we 
talk about the options paper and the public consultation on 
private liquor retailing in Saskatchewan, that was one of the 
initiatives that we’re going to undertake. It was interesting to 
see, Mr. Speaker, how, you know, the members of the 
opposition and others reacted negatively to all of the liquor 
vendors that have been around for decades, that indeed the only 
profit that is coming into government comes from a public 
government liquor store. So that would mean that all of the 
liquor vendors — and I dare say I think there’s 194, something 
like that — that none of them were producing any profit. Well 
we know, Mr. Speaker, that just simply is not true. 
 
And while we need to ensure that we consult with the people of 
the province, that we move forward, we need to ensure that of 
course our facilities are as efficient as possible. And that is why 
some of the changes occurred in the last few months from the 
minister that is responsible for that file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also announced a new-growth tax incentive 
for exporting manufacturers who create new jobs, including 
new head office jobs here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that is 
something that we want to ensure happens on a regular basis. 
We want to be able to attract. We want to be able to attract 
businesses. We want to be able to attract head offices. And 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, if the new-growth tax incentive does result 
in a business moving here and creating jobs that currently don’t 
exist here in the province of Saskatchewan, that will be a 
benefit to all because we will have the revenue sources from 
taxpayers, additional taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another highlight of the Throne Speech is the 
continued promotion of Saskatchewan to international markets. 
That is critical, Mr. Speaker. And it doesn’t matter whether 
you’re talking about our agriculture-produced products, our 
commodities, or whether you’re talking about manufactured 
products from the province of Saskatchewan, the world needs 
what we produce. 
 
And it was interesting speaking with the heads of mission that 
were here — well over 50 heads of mission were here in 
Saskatchewan — and listening to the Ambassador from Japan 
talk about now canola oil and canola oil entering his country. 
And of course that canola oil, much of that canola oil is coming 
out of Saskatchewan, in fact right out of the area that the 
member for Yorkton represents. And it’s a tremendous benefit 
to the area and to trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many more things in the Throne 
Speech that are so positive for the people of Saskatchewan, but 
I think I want to conclude by saying, the world needs what 



5680 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

Saskatchewan has, and whether it’s food or whether it’s fuel or 
whether it’s fertilizer, those are three very, very important 
products. 
 
This is a great province to raise a family, start a business, to 
work, to live, to ensure that people can build that life that they 
want. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been very pleased to be a part of 
this government that has moved initiatives forward to ensure 
that people recognize that Saskatchewan is a leader. 
Saskatchewan is a leader not only within Canada, but can be an 
entity which prepares and focuses on international trade and 
international co-operation. So, Mr. Speaker, there is no question 
that I will be supporting the Throne Speech presented in this 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to stand today and respond, take my turn responding to 
the Throne Speech. It’s a document that I think has a number of 
elements in it that I not only can support, but I can talk about in 
an awful . . . in detail. But as I said, it is an honour to be here 
today, Mr. Speaker. And I know that my time is short running 
up to dinner here, but this is my first Throne Speech as the 
Minister for Parks, Culture and Sport, and I’m pretty proud of 
that. 
 
And before I begin, I’d also like to take the opportunity to echo 
some of my colleagues’ responses in relation to the Throne 
Speech. I thought they did an admirable job, and I’m proud to 
be a part of this government and proud to have an opportunity 
to speak further, and I hope I have the opportunity a little later 
here. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to necessarily thank 
everybody, but I can continue after dinner if that’s okay? I’d 
like to thank my colleagues again for all of their help. It’s been 
fantastic. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, the 
House is recessed to 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5649 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5649 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5649 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5650 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5650 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Western Canada Conference on American Sign Language 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5650 
 Scholarship of Honour Recipients 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5650 
 Remembering Betty Pickering 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5651 
 2014 Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5651 
 Volunteer Heritage Language Teachers Awards 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5651 
 Habitat for Humanity Build in Moose Jaw 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5651 
 National Down Syndrome Awareness Week 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5652 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Smart Meter Program 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5652 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5652 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5654 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5654 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5655 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Supports for Learning 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5656 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5657 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 607 — The Buy Local Day Act 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5657 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5657 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5658 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5662 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5667 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5670 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5672 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5674 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5680 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


