




















































Hansard: May 06, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 59A  TUESDAY, MAY 6, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5299 

 May 6, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to table the report from the Advocate 

for Children and Youth. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be asking for 

leave for an extended introduction, but I understand you may 

also want to proceed in advance of any of the other members of 

the House, something to which we would be happy to agree. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction, with the Speaker starting off. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is 

my pleasure to bring to your attention that seated within this 

Chamber are a number of special guests. We are pleased to have 

with us today some of Saskatchewan’s Olympians, 

Paralympians, coaches, and officials from the 2014 Sochi 

Winter Olympics and paraplegic games. By leave of the 

Assembly, I call upon the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition for remarks, and then I will recognize the members 

of the Assembly as they introduce their constituents. I recognize 

the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I clearly didn’t 

make it to the podium with that particular effort on procedure 

this morning, but you, sir, would have received the gold medal. 

So we thank you for that introduction this morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the best days here at our Legislative Assembly 

happen when the very best of the province of Saskatchewan, 

our values and our greatest resource, our people, are on full 

display at the Legislative Assembly. We politicians do not 

always rise to that task or measure. But the people of the 

province always do, and we have had the occasion again this 

spring to honour Saskatchewan volunteers, to honour those who 

are everyday heroes. 

 

And today is no exception, Mr. Speaker, to that rule of 

Saskatchewan people offering to this Assembly what is best 

about our province because this morning we were able to 

honour the Olympians, the Canadian Olympians who hail from 

the province of Saskatchewan. There were 19 

Saskatchewan-born, Saskatchewan-raised athletes who made 

the national team. As I mentioned outside in the rotunda, that’s 

about 7 per cent of the Canadian team when we actually only 

constitute 3 per cent of the Canadian population. So again we 

thank the athletes for ensuring that Saskatchewan was punching 

above its weight even in a national effort. 

But also joining us today . . . And, Mr. Speaker, we have the 

athletes themselves are on the floor of the House. It’s nice to 

see we finally have the right McMorris on the floor of the 

Legislative Assembly today. We have the athletes that are here 

today, but very, very importantly we also have family members 

and friends. We have coaches with us today. We have those 

who have helped to make dreams comes true and help these 

athletes on their amazing journey. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they did represent us with such great class and 

energy and enthusiasm. They made us all very proud to be 

Canadian but also very proud to be from Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. It was true at the Olympic Games in Sochi. It was true 

at the Paralympic Games in Sochi, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they will all be introduced individually by their respective 

members of the House, but again as we did this morning earlier 

in the rotunda, I just want to say to all of them, through you, 

Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for your example, for those 

that you’ve inspired, including everyone in this building and 

those beyond the walls of the Legislative Assembly. Thank you 

for representing us as you did. I know many are going to 

continue their Olympic dreams and journeys and maybe some 

are going to . . . Colette might take a bit of a break from an 

amazing Olympic career. 

 

But we want to thank each and every one of you. To the 

coaches and the volunteers and the officials, thank you as well 

for your representation of the province. And to the members of 

the families here that are also represented, thank you for the 

support that you gave that facilitated literally dreams to come 

true, the province to be represented, and Canada to be 

represented at the highest level and the biggest stage in sports in 

the world. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming this 

amazing delegation to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

join with the Premier on behalf of the official opposition in 

extending a thank you to the Olympians and the entire Team 

Canada that’s here today, Mr. Speaker, and that contributed so 

greatly to the fantastic showing that we had at the Sochi games. 

 

You know, Saskatchewan is often put on the map because of 

the things that we have — our resources, our landscape — but 

during the Olympics, we were put on the map because of who 

we are. And who we are was so beautifully demonstrated 

through the determination, through the class of the Olympians 

from Saskatchewan. 

 

And so we want to say thank you to you for providing that 

example, for representing Saskatchewan so well, and thank you 

for the inspiration that you have provided and will provide to 

young and old in the province. I know you’ll be busy travelling 

the province, meeting with schoolchildren, and passing on that 

dream of what it means to be an Olympian, but more 

importantly what it means to carry the Olympic spirit. So thank 

you for being here today, and thank you for the example that 

you’ve given for all of us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 



5300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2014 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 

to introduce to members of the House Para-Nordic cross skier 

Colette Bourgonje. Colette might just be the most decorated 

athlete here. She’s competed in seven Winter Paralympic 

Games as a sit-skier, and as a wheelchair racer in three Summer 

Paralympic Games. Throughout her illustrious career, she has 

won 10 Paralympic medals — three silver and three bronze. 

 

In 2010 she became the first Canadian to win a Paralympic 

medal at home games. She is also the only athlete in the world 

to compete in each of the seven Winter Paralympic Games. 

Colette recently announced her retirement from the competition. 

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I’d like to thank 

her for her contributions to the Paralympic sport, to 

congratulate her on the outstanding athletic career, and to wish 

her the best of luck in her future endeavours. 

 

Colette was born in Saskatoon and currently lives in Prince 

Albert. Porcupine Plain is her hometown. Colette, thank you so 

very much for joining us today, and welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’m privileged to introduce snowboard coach Adam 

Burwell. Adam attended the Sochi 2014 winter games with the 

Canadian Olympic team as a coach for slopestyle 

snowboarding. 

 

In addition to serving as Mark McMorris’s friend, coach, and 

mentor, he’s also a Saskatchewan-based filmmaker. Adam is 

co-owner of Living Sky Media Group, a film and video 

production company based in Regina. He also owns and 

operates Grassroots Wakeboard, a wake sport school and camp 

located at Katepwa Point Provincial Park. Welcome to the 

Legislative Assembly, Adam. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

honoured today to introduce long-track speed skater Kali Christ. 

Kali started speed skating at the age of seven in Regina, her 

birthplace and hometown. She saw the sport on TV and decided 

to give it a try. She made her Olympic debut at the 2014 Winter 

Olympic Games in Sochi. She was also Saskatchewan Sport’s 

Female Athlete of the Year in 2011, and has been awarded 

long-track rising star honours by Speed Skating Canada. Kali 

says the most influential person in her life and her career is her 

mom. 

 

Welcome to your Legislative Assembly. Thank you very much, 

Kali. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all members of the House, I am privileged to 

introduce to you today bobsledder Ben Coakwell. Ben grew up 

in Moose Jaw surrounded by competitive sport. He played 

hockey, lacrosse, and football, eventually playing football for 

the University of Saskatchewan where he was also a member of 

the university’s athletics team. 

 

His interest in bobsleigh was sparked when he learned a CFL 

[Canadian Football League] player switched from football to 

bobsleigh. He attended a camp in March 2012 and made the 

national team. Since childhood, he has dreamed of competing at 

the Olympic Games. This year his dream came true. Welcome 

to your Legislative Assembly, Ben. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured to 

introduce to you figure skating judge Karen Howard. Karen 

became a certified figure skating judge at the age of 16, the 

youngest age one can be certified. In 2009 she became an 

Olympic-certified judge and since then has been hoping for an 

opportunity to judge the Olympic Games. She got that chance at 

the Winter Olympic Games in Sochi. 

 

Judging is a volunteer position. She does it on top of her day 

job as a teacher at Cochrane High School here in Regina. 

Welcome to your Legislative Assembly, Karen. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. It’s a pleasure to 

introduce to the members Brittany Hudak. Brittany was 18 

when she met Paralympic athlete Colette Bourgonje who 

introduced her to the sport of cross-country skiing. Brittany had 

always been active but hadn’t yet found the sport that would 

become the focus of all of her efforts. She found that sport in 

skiing. 

 

The 2014 Winter Paralympic Games in Sochi were her first. In 

December 2013, in her International Paralympic Committee 

World Cup debut at Canmore, she was the top Canadian 

finisher, placing fourth in the 5-kilometre women’s standing 

race to qualify for the Paralympics. 

 

She lives in Prince Albert. Brittany, welcome to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

introduce to the members long-track speed skater Marsha 

Hudey. Marsha grew up in White City and has been speed 

skating since the age of four. Her father, a competitive speed 

skater himself, thought it was an activity that the whole family 

might enjoy, which was good thinking on his part. She has an 

undergraduate degree in community rehabilitation and disability 

studies from the University of Calgary. The 2014 Winter 

Olympic Games were her Olympic debut. Marsha, welcome to 

your Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you and 



May 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5301 

through you, it is my pleasure to introduce to you sledge hockey 

assistant coach Curtis Hunt. Curtis is well known here in 

Regina. He is a former head coach of the Regina Pats as well as 

a former NHL [National Hockey League] hockey coach. He 

joined the national sledge hockey team as an assistant coach 

during the 2012-13 season. The 2014 Paralympic Games in 

Sochi, Russia are his debut as a coach at the Paralympics. Curtis 

helped lead Canada’s sledge hockey team to a bronze medal 

finish. He was born in North Battleford and currently resides in 

Regina. Welcome to your Legislative Assembly, Curtis. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of Assembly, it’s 

my pleasure to introduce Wayne Kiel. Wayne is the wheelchair 

curling assistant coach and assistant team leader. Wayne helped 

lead Team Canada’s wheelchair curling team to its third straight 

gold medal at the 2014 Winter Paralympic Games. 

 

When Wayne is not coaching Paralympic athletes to gold 

medals, he works very hard for the curling Sask high school 

performance coaching team, Mr. Speaker. Wayne is from 

Balgonie, his hometown. I know he’s got a number of family 

members here, which is always great to see, and other members 

from Balgonie I believe are in the Assembly as well. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like all members to welcome Wayne to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, I’m very pleased to introduce to you today 

Ms. Susan Lang. Susan volunteered at the 2014 Winter 

Olympic and Paralympic Games as a curling statistician. Susan 

is an accomplished curler herself. She was a senior women’s 

provincial champion in 2010 and a three-time provincial 

intermediate provincial champion as well. 

 

She’s currently the marketing and development manager for 

CurlSask. She is the former curling club manager for the Regina 

Callie Curling Club and has more than 30 years of curling 

volunteer experience. Before starting her career in the curling 

world, she worked as a market manager at SaskTel for 20 years. 

She lives in Regina. Susan, welcome to your Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I am pleased to introduce to members, on 

behalf of the member for Moosomin, pairs figure skater Paige 

Lawrence. Paige just lives across the road from my 

constituency. Paige was born in Kipling and raised in Kennedy, 

Saskatchewan. Hockey and figure skating being the most 

popular winter sports in these Saskatchewan communities, 

Paige was four the first time she skated on ice. She has been 

skating with her partner, Rudi Swiegers, for nearly a decade. 

The most influential person in her career — her mother. 

 

I’d also like to acknowledge the coach of Paige and Rudi, 

Patricia Hole. She lives in Manitoba, but we like to think of her 

as an honorary Saskatchewanian. In addition to coaching and 

mentoring Paige and Rudi, Patricia has opened her home to 

them. She has more than 35 years of experience coaching. 

Patricia, thank you for joining us today. And Paige, welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m privileged 

to introduce to all members of this honourable Assembly 

curling technical official Ken McArton. The 2014 Winter 

Olympic Games are the second games that he’s officiated. Ken 

has been officiating for more than 25 years and is one of the top 

curling umpires in the world. In 2012 he received the Male 

Official Sask Sport Award. Ken is from the town of Dilke, 

where of course he still resides. Ken, welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly and to our many guests, I’m pleased to introduce to 

you today speed skating coach Todd McClements. Todd was 

one of the coaches for Team Canada’s long-track speed skating 

team at the Winter Olympic Games in Sochi. Saskatchewan 

Olympian speed skater Kali Christ is one of his many students. 

 

Todd comes from a speed skating family. He’s a 

third-generation speed skater. He grew up skating in Saskatoon, 

his hometown. Todd, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

introduce to members snowboarder Mike, or Mike . . . Mark 

McMorris. I was so excited about introducing you, Mark. Mark 

won a bronze medal in slopestyle snowboarding at the Winter 

Olympic Games in Sochi, the first Olympic Games to include 

this type of snowboarding competition. 

 

This is the first time competing in the Winter Olympics, but 

Mark is no stranger to international events. He won the World 

Cup slopestyle competition at age 16. 

 

Mark was five years old when he first tried snowboarding while 

on a family holiday in Lake Louise. His parents bought him his 

first snowboard two years later at the ripe old age of seven. 

Growing up, he spent a great deal of time snowboarding on 

makeshift hills in his family’s backyard and Regina parking lots 

and I’m sure everywhere else he could find. He also frequented 

Mission Ridge in Fort Qu’Appelle. For many years, Mark was 

also an avid wakeboarder competing for Saskatchewan, and was 

named to the national team. 

 

He cites his older brother Craig and his parents as the people 

who’ve had the biggest influence on his career. Welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly, Mark. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 



5302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2014 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you. I’m honoured to introduce to 

you today biathlete Scott Perras. Scott was born and raised here 

in Regina. He attended the U of R [University of Regina] before 

deciding to pursue his career as a biathlete full-time. At 15 he 

took up biathlon, a sport that combines riflery with 

cross-country skiing. He didn’t start training seriously until 

about age 18, but he’s certainly made up for that, since he tells 

me he continues to train six days a week, twice a day. 

 

Scott had a career season in 2012-13 leading him to be named 

Biathlon Canada’s Male Athlete of the Year. The 2014 Winter 

Olympics were his first Olympic Games. Welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly, Scott. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 

to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I’m pleased to 

introduce to you today bobsledder Graeme Rinholm. Graeme 

was born in Camrose but has close ties to Saskatchewan. He 

graduated high school in Rosthern and attended the University 

of Saskatchewan where he completed his Bachelor of Science 

degree with high honours, I might add, in biochemistry. 

 

He was a member of the university’s athletic team and became 

involved in bobsleigh at the age of 24 after attending an 

identification camp the summer after finishing his indoor track 

season. The 2014 Winter Olympic Games are Graeme’s first as 

an athlete. Graeme, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to introduce to members bobsledder Lyndon Rush. Lyndon was 

born in Saskatoon and grew up in Humboldt. He played football 

for the University of Saskatchewan for five years, graduating in 

2004 with a Bachelor of Arts degree. 

 

He took up bobsledding at 24 years of age. I guess for obvious 

reasons bobsledding is not one of those sports that you start 

when you’re five or six. He took up the sport when Bobsleigh 

Canada called him and invited him to attend a development 

camp. I had the privilege of meeting with Lyndon in Humboldt 

last year when he met with an arena full of students, and he’s a 

great ambassador for those students. 

 

Lyndon is a two-time Olympian. At the 2010 Winter Olympic 

Games in Vancouver, he was part of the first Canadian 

four-man bobsleigh team in more than 40 years to win an 

Olympic medal. The team won bronze. Lyndon, welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s my pleasure to introduce to you today 

pairs figure skater Rudi Swiegers. Rudi was born in Cape 

Town, South Africa, but his family moved to Canada in 1996 

and he grew up in the Kipling area. 

 

In South Africa you do hear, “a cold front from Cape Town,” so 

snow and ice are in his background. Rudi started figure skating 

at age 10 to improve his ice hockey skills, but what started as a 

training method turned into a passion. He and Paige Lawrence, 

who he calls his good luck charm, have been skating together 

for almost 10 years now. 2014 was his Olympic debut. Rudi, 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

I recognize the member for Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is my honour to introduce to you today 

bobsledder Chelsea Valois. Chelsea was born in Carrot River 

and grew up in Zenon Park. She attended university here in 

Regina. She competed in pentathlon and heptathlon for the 

University of Regina’s athletics team, winning a silver medal in 

heptathlon in the 2009 Canada Games. 

 

Her teammates at the U of R encouraged her to try bobsled. At 

her first camp, she posted an incredible push test results along 

with the best rookie results in the country. She was selected for 

the Canadian bobsled team for the first time in 2012. And she 

enjoyed a fantastic rookie season, winning both the world 

championship and overall World Cup titles with pilot Kaillie 

Humphries. Welcome to your Legislative Assembly, Chelsea. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 

introduce Para-Nordic ski coach Kaspar Wirz. 

 

Kaspar has led Canada’s Para-Nordic team to great international 

success over the last 20 years. He has helped the team win 24 

Paralympic medals. The 2014 Winter Paralympic Games are 

Kaspar’s sixth time coaching Canada’s Para-Nordic team. He’s 

from Switzerland, but makes his current home in Saskatoon. 

Welcome to your Legislative Assembly, Kaspar. 

 

The Speaker: — I would also like to recognize at this time the 

athletes, coaches, and officials who could not make it today: 

Hayley Wickenheiser, Ryan Getzlaf, Patrick Marleau, Chris 

Kunitz, Mike Babcock, William Dutton, Mark Wheler, Andrea 

Bundon, Kurt Oatway, Brad Meier, and Lucas Makowsky who 

had to leave, who was here but had to leave earlier. 

 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members, I would like to introduce a fairly large 

delegation seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these are individuals who came to the legislature today 

because of their concerns about traffic safety along Highway 1. 

They come from the communities of Emerald Park, Balgonie, 

White City, Edenwold, Stone Point Estates, Avonhurst, Vibank, 

Davin, and Pilot Butte. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals are concerned about safety along 

the road. In fact some have lost immediate family because of 

the dangerous situation. I would ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these individuals to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming this delegation of 



May 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5303 

students and advisers as well who have come to the Legislative 

Assembly with very important matters to present before the 

province and the government, and for discussion and dialogue, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to congratulate them for doing this, for getting engaged 

in the public policy process, Mr. Speaker. This is how change is 

effected in Saskatchewan, in a democracy that we’re happy to 

be a part of. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would join with the Leader 

of the Opposition in welcoming them to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave 

to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways has requested 

leave to make an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 

that it’s going to be a necessarily extended introduction, but I 

want to introduce a number of people and say a little bit about 

them, so I guess that would be extended. 

 

There’s not too many times, I don’t think, since I’ve been 

elected that politics and your personal life kind of fit hand in 

hand, and today certainly is one of those days. I have a . . . 

Hmm, I said I wasn’t going to do this. I have a number of 

people in the gallery that I’d like to introduce that have had 

quite a significant role to put one person on the floor . . . 

actually to put two people on the floor of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The first one: I’ve been elected for 14 years and I haven’t had a 

chance to introduce my wife. She doesn’t like the public 

attention, but I am going to introduce her today. Cindy’s had a 

tough time raising three boys, Craig and Mark and myself. Mr. 

Speaker, for anybody that happened to see the documentary 

kind of chronicling Mark’s life, they would realize that the boys 

left home pretty early, and that’s tough for a mom when you 

lose control of them at an early age. Not only because it was 

lost to a non-traditional sport — perhaps if it was hockey it 

wouldn’t have been so tough — but a lot of people wondered, 

when Mark would be going and Craig would be going off 

snowboarding, and most people would just do that on their 

vacation but not kind of pursuing a major career. So not only 

was it a non-traditional sport but it was also a dangerous sport 

and a sport that took a lot of travel. But if it wasn’t for her 

acceptance on that, they wouldn’t be sitting here today. And so 

thank you, Cindy, for that. 

 

Okay, I think that was the tough one. Now I think they get 

easier from here. Sitting beside Cindy is her mother, Anne, or I 

guess maybe two . . . or no, sitting up in the gallery is her 

mother, Anne, who is an avid follower of the legislative 

channel, Mr. Speaker, knows pretty much everybody in this 

Assembly, and knows . . . Probably when I go over for a 

Sunday supper I have to answer just as many questions there as 

I have had to in the House, Mr. Speaker. But she’s been a huge 

supporter of the boys too. Maybe not so much of a reality TV 

show called McMorris & McMorris — that’s a little tougher for 

a grandma to understand and to accept — but has been very 

supportive. 

 

Also seated beside her is her sister, and it is Sister Imelda 

Grimes who has been very . . . a big part of the boys’ life as 

well, has been very accepting and acknowledges their life may 

be not the traditional life, I guess, as many aunts or great-aunts 

would see their nephews travelling, but has been very 

supportive. 

 

Also I see Barb March-Burwell who’s there, who is Adam’s 

mom and has watched our boys grow up because half of the 

time when they were growing up was at their place, Mr. 

Speaker, as the boys have been good friends all their life. 

 

Also I want to acknowledge, even though she’s not here, my 

mom, who really has given the boys their athletic prowess. My 

mom I think was waterskiing at 70. We had to hide my dad 

away because he didn’t accept that. He didn’t like that. But the 

athletic prowess definitely came from my mom, who I know 

watches on a regular basis too. Mom got a little bit of air time 

through the Olympics, and I don’t mean the air time that the 

boys were getting, but she was on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation], watching. She’d pull an all-nighter. It’s been a 

long time I think since mom pulled an all-nighter, but she 

pulled an all-nighter as of course the 14-hour time change and 

watching Mark. And it was kind of an interesting process to be 

able to watch Mark compete but listen to her other grandson, as 

with Anne, do the colour commentating. So hi, Mom. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Also I want to introduce, seated in the gallery is a good friend 

of Craig’s, Marie-France Roy, or as Don Cherry would say, 

Roy. Marie-France Roy, who is also well known in the 

snowboard industry, very well known, competed for many 

years. Over the last four years, she’s been riding in the 

backcountry. Over the last two years, she’s been producing or 

filming for her own film called The Little Things, which is a 

film all about sustainability of backcountry riding, is very well 

known in the snowboard circles and is from Quebec, living in 

Whistler. And we wanted to welcome her to this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

And finally but not least is our other son Craig who some may 

recognize the face from McMorris & McMorris. Some may 

recognize the voice because he was a colour commentator for 

all four snowboard disciplines for CBC at the Sochi Olympics. 

 

I tell you, it was kind of an interesting time to look up the slope 

and watch Mark come down spinning and then kind of listen to 

what Craig was doing, his own spinning, on the broadcast, Mr. 

Speaker, coining phrases like — and I hate to say it but there 

was a bit of a website following some of his different sayings 

— like in boardercross, if you’re not rubbing, you’re not racing. 

That’s a classic one. Or you’ve got to give ’er a little more 

mustard, Mr. Speaker. Those were all kind of some of the 

phrases that he was coining. But, Mr. Speaker, there was one 



5304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2014 

more I was going to . . . Oh I think the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, Shellbrook-Rosthern always liked when 

he talked about them tapping the doll as they were going by, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway it was a real thrill. I’m glad that they’re all here. This 

is the one time that I can honestly say that politics intersects 

personally, and I would like all members to welcome them here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly and everybody 

in attendance, I would like to introduce to you 42 grade 10 

students from the Yorkton Regional High School in Yorkton. 

They’re seated in the east gallery. Accompanied by them, their 

teacher, Mr. Perry Ostapowich, who does a great job of 

engaging the kids, his students, with the political process and 

understanding what happens in this province and in this 

building. With him is somebody that’s very well known to this 

Assembly as well — his father sits a couple of seats to my left 

— Mr. Grant Bjornerud. And also who is missing in action 

again, out in the bus, Mr. Pat Rawlick, ex-RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] and the bus driver. He’s a friend and 

he’s one that’s never afraid to give me some counsel or offer 

some input. 

 

Some honourable mentions, Mr. Speaker. The kids quite often 

engage me on Twitter and Facebook and by sending emails to 

get some special mentions. So a few that didn’t actually contact 

me, but I know them well because they’re friends of my family 

and myself is Liam Thomson, Madison Leister, and Mackenzie 

Lautamus, who very nicely Facebooked me a picture from 

downstairs already. Along with them, some emails were sent by 

my new friends, Afton Hicks, Tamara Bartley, Josh 

Rohatynsky, Callie Reid, and Tessa Datema. So I ask all 

members to welcome these members to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 

pleasure today to introduce a group of grade 7, 8, and 9 students 

from Northwood Christian School in Leoville, Saskatchewan. 

They’re sitting in the west gallery, accompanied by their 

teacher, Ms. Natalie Boese, and parent chaperones, Lorne and 

Jolene Friesen and Orlin and Joyce Reimer. I look forward to 

meeting with them after the proceedings of the House and 

would like to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure, to you and through you, to introduce someone who’s 

very important in my life. And I always promise I won’t ever 

get choked up when my kids are here, but I can’t help it, Mr. 

Speaker. My 16-year-old daughter, Hennessey Chartier-Ford, is 

here in your gallery today. She’s spending a few days here with 

me. We don’t often get any alone time. We love her little sister, 

Ophelia, very much, but the reality is Hennessey and I have 

very little opportunity just to spend some time with the two of 

us. And so it’s been pretty special having her here for the last 

couple of days. 

 

Hennessey is a great student. She’s in grade 10 at Holy Cross in 

Saskatoon. She’s an accomplished dancer, and a great 

badminton player, of which I’m particularly proud. Badminton 

was my sport a very long time ago. So I’m living vicariously 

through my 16-year-old, Mr. Speaker. But more than anything, 

I’m an incredibly proud mother and really glad that Hennessey 

is here with me today. And she’s let me know that she might 

stay another day. She likes it here quite a lot, Mr. Speaker. And 

I also have to say it’s pretty great for her to be here today on the 

day where all the Olympians are here, a little bit of extra 

inspiration, and just wonderful for her to see all that they’ve 

contributed and have an opportunity to connect with them. So 

with that I would . . . Sorry that was an extended introduction, 

Mr. Speaker. My apologies. But with that I’d like to ask my 

colleagues here to join me in welcoming Hennessey to her 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave for 

an extended introduction, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to 

colleagues. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I would like 

to introduce some very special guests to the Legislative 

Assembly seated in your gallery. Twenty-nine high school 

students have travelled from various parts of northern 

Saskatchewan to participate in the annual youth mentorship 

program — maybe just give us a wave; there they are. While in 

the capital, Mr. Speaker, these students will learn about the 

history of Saskatchewan and their provincial government. 

They’ll explore post-secondary education and training 

opportunities, and they’ll learn about possible careers with the 

government. 

 

Yesterday they had the opportunity to tour the University of 

Regina and the First Nations University of Canada. They met 

with the Lieutenant Governor, the Honourable Vaughn 

Solomon Schofield, toured the RCMP training academy, and 

they visited the Royal Saskatchewan Museum and Government 

House. This morning they toured the Legislative Building and 

participated in a model parliament session. Today they will also 

meet some of the members of the Legislative Assembly and 

members of the public service. 

 

Seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have students 

from Senator Myles Venne School in Air Ronge; Twin Lakes 

Community School in Buffalo Narrows; Canoe Lake School in 

Canoe Narrows; Charlebois Community School in Cumberland 

House; Nisto Awasisak Memorial School in Cumberland House 

— I hope I said that correctly — Father Gamache Memorial 

School in Fond-du-Lac; and Minahik Waskahigan School in 



May 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5305 

Pinehouse Lake. Accompanying the students, Mr. Speaker, are 

their teachers and some chaperones and ministry officials from 

the Provincial Capital Commission. 

 

I had the honour and privilege, Mr. Speaker, of meeting with 

the students yesterday at Government House and had lunch with 

them. And seated at my table, I was with Mr. Ron Crowe who 

is the head of the North American Indigenous Games coming 

up here in the capital city later this year and had a great 

conversation with some of the students. I said, I understand 

you’re coming to the legislature tomorrow; are you excited 

about that? Yes. I said, well did you know the Olympic athletes 

are going to be at the legislature tomorrow? Really? Then they 

got very excited. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members please join me in 

welcoming these guests to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — I request leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join my colleague in recognizing the students from 

northern Saskatchewan, and just to point out to the people that 

are listening that one particular group that hails from 

Fond-du-Lac which is about 75 kilometres from the Northwest 

Territories border. And for them to make the huge journey, 

coming all the way down to southern Saskatchewan and seeing 

how the Assembly works and visiting all the different sites, it is 

quite a journey, Mr. Speaker, and I really want to recognize 

them. 

 

One of the privileges that I have as the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] for Athabasca is meeting many people, 

wonderful people. But I can’t claim being the first person to 

speak Cree in the Assembly because I think people like 

Lawrence Yew spoke Cree for the first time, and I think Mr. 

Goulet who was also an MLA spoke Cree. But I do have the 

privilege of being the first MLA to speak Dene. 

 

So I want to say to the people of Fond-du-Lac that are here 

visiting that: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 

 

And what that is, Mr. Speaker, is just saying that I’m from a 

community called Patuanak, is where a lot of my roots are. It’s 

a Dene community. But to also say to the Cree kids that are 

here: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

I’m just saying that I’m very glad that they’re here and that 

there’s nothing to fear here, that this is their Assembly, much 

like the Olympic athletes that are here today. And I want to say 

it’s an extreme pleasure to welcome the students from 

Fond-du-Lac, from Buffalo Narrows Twin Lakes School, Canoe 

Lake, and of course Pinehouse, and to tell them I’m certainly 

glad you’ve come to visit us here and we hope you have many 

more visits in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

present a petition against Saskatchewan health care laundry 

privatization. And we know that in May 2013 the Government 

of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize health care 

laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a for-profit, 

Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linens. I’d like to read the 

prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 

Government of Saskatchewan to reverse the misguided 

decision to privatize Saskatchewan’s health care laundry, 

which will result in the devastating loss of over 300 jobs in 

the communities of Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, 

Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon. 

 

And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 

misuse vital taxpayers’ dollars by taking money out of 

Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 

an Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 

privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 

risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 

over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 

ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 

outbreaks in health care facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition are largely from the 

city of Weyburn. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

about Highway 123. This highway provides the only access to 

the communities of Cumberland House and Cumberland House 

Cree Nation. This highway was voted by Saskatchewan 

residents as Canadian Automobile Association’s worst road in 

the province last year, and the highway is still waiting for major 

upgrades and repairs. Mr. Speaker, the people are very 

concerned for their safety. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the upgrades, repairs, 

and maintenance on Highway 123 is important to northern 

residents and must be undertaken immediately. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is signed by many good people of northern 

Saskatchewan in the Cumberland House area. I so present. 

 



5306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to 

present a petition. Many northern residents benefited from the 

rental purchase option program, known as RPO [rental purchase 

option]. These families were supposed to have been very proud 

homeowners in their communities. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

this government stubbornly ignored the call to maintain this 

program. Instead it cancelled the rental purchase option and that 

means the dream of home ownership is destroyed for many 

families in the North. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Saskatchewan 

Party government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option 

for responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own home and building 

communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition that I’m presenting today has 

been signed by many residents of northern Saskatchewan 

communities and all throughout the province. And this 

particular page has been signed by residents of Beauval, 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a 

petition calling for improved safety on Highway No. 1, and the 

undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan bring to 

our attention the following: that Highway No. 1 corridor 

between Regina and Balgonie has become unacceptably 

dangerous, as attested to by the number of traffic collisions, 

many involving personal injury and death. 

 

They point out that the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure 

consultant’s study, Highway No. 1 East traffic signal review 

final report January 2011 concluded that the 2010 traffic 

volumes warranted signals at specified intersections. Traffic 

volumes have increased substantially in the intervening years 

due to commercial and industrial development and increased 

population. They point out that intersections with dozens of 

vehicles waiting to enter at rush hour are unacceptable and 

dangerous. Drivers daily must risk their lives and those of other 

motorists just to get on and off the highway. In the prayer that 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, they: 

 

Respectfully request that the Government of 

Saskatchewan, until the overpasses are built along this 

corridor: (1) immediately install traffic lights at 

appropriate locations along Highway 1 between Regina 

and Balgonie, (2) immediately reduce speed limits to 

appropriate levels within this corridor, and (3) take steps 

to ensure that speed limits are enforced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this first batch of petitions of a group of petitions 

that were signed over three weeks, of which hundreds more to 

come, Mr. Speaker, were signed by citizens from Regina, 

Rouleau, Vibank, Yorkton, Pilot Butte, White City, Balgonie, 

McLean, Edenwold, Zehner, Stone Pointe Estates, Yorkton, 

Preeceville, Emerald Park, Indian Head, Qu’Appelle, and 

Francis. I so present. 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am rising today to 

present a petition for real action on climate change. And the 

residents of the province of Saskatchewan who signed this 

petition wish to bring to our attention the following: that 

Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions 

per capita in all of Canada; that Saskatchewan’s emissions have 

continued to grow to 74 million megatonnes as reported by 

Environment Canada in October 2013 and show no signs of 

decreasing; that slashing programs such as the Go Green Fund 

and the EnerGuide for Houses energy efficiency program set 

the province on a backward course; and that since 2009, the 

Government of Saskatchewan has reduced climate change 

funding by 83 per cent including another 35 per cent cut in the 

2014-15 budget. So in the prayer that reads as follows, they are: 

 

Respectfully requesting that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan enact a real plan and allocate appropriate 

funding in the provincial budget to tackle climate change 

by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, helping families 

transition to energy-efficient homes, and encouraging 

everyone in the province to take real action to protect the 

environment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition 

are from the communities of Humboldt and Muenster. I so 

submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to recognize 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week, held 

from May 5th to 11th this year. NAOSH [North American 

Occupational Safety and Health] strives to relay the key 

message that workplace injuries impact everyone, and we must 

do whatever we can to reduce harmful and life-changing 

workplace incidents to zero. Saskatchewan has the 

second-highest workplace-related injury rate in Canada. Last 

year there were over 37,000 injuries despite continuing efforts 

to improve on-site safety conditions. 

 

This week a number of activities are taking place as part of the 

awareness campaign. This provides an opportunity to empower 

workers to take concrete steps in securing their own protection 

while promoting a workplace culture of balance between 

employees and employers. Even though many companies see 

the value in managing their occupational health and safety 

responsibilities, it often takes a serious workplace injury or 

fatality before organizations understand the real costs of cutting 

corners. 

 

NAOSH Week is a celebration of the safety work that takes 

place all year long. It reminds us that safety should be 

considered a priority every week of the year. This year’s theme, 

Make Safety a Habit, is a powerful reminder of this. 



May 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5307 

Mr. Speaker, the North American health and safety week’s 

goals require commitment from workers of all ages and abilities 

but also employers and government. Workers deserve to be 

safe, and we must collectively stand for nothing less. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Southwest Resident Establishes Scholarships 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize the significant contributions of a local businessman in 

southwest Saskatchewan. Last week there was an event held at 

the Swift Current composite high school where the Prairie 

Healthcare Scholarship was awarded to its first six recipients. 

 

The scholarship is funded entirely by Eldon McIntyre and his 

family. Now Eldon is a very humble man and has a typical 

Saskatchewan story. He started working in the oil patch near 

Gull Lake at a young age, went back to school to complete his 

grade 12, and eventually worked his way up to become 

president of Jarrod Oils. 

 

This year Eldon is donating $400,000 to students from across 

the Prairie provinces who are studying in a health care-related 

field. He plans to grow that donation to $1 million per year. 

When asked why he decided on health care for the scholarship, 

Eldon said, “Well I just felt that as we are all aging, we’re going 

to need more and more to look after the aging people. I just 

wanted to give back from the good fortune I have.” 

 

Congratulations go to the first six recipients: Cheyenne Shulze, 

Caitlin Wotton, Cole Kritzer, Annette Haugen, Kaitlyn 

Neustaeter, and Sidney Stock. And thank you to the McIntyre 

Family Foundation, to its managing trustee, Carla Carlson, and 

most importantly to Eldon for his phenomenal donation of 

$400,000 this year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Saskatoon Business Promotes Fitness in Schools 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in this 

House to recognize the collaborative work of Joel Pedersen and 

Fitness 2J2 with the students of St. Mary’s School in my 

community. Joel Pedersen owns Fitness 2J2, a 

community-based health and wellness business that organizes 

and facilitates inclusive exercise programs for all abilities and 

ages. Joel works with urban, northern, and rural groups as well 

as with individuals. Joel is originally from Fond-du-Lac and is a 

member of the Dene Nation. He has served as an infantry 

sergeant major with the Canadian Armed Forces and currently 

is a police sergeant with the Saskatoon Police Service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Joel has been an important community leader 

whose many programs include an after-school fitness program 

that turned into a running group at St. Mary’s School. When 

Joel started this program at the beginning of the year, many of 

the students were not able to jog the 125-metre track without 

stopping. Under Joel’s guidance, each student completed last 

year’s 5-kilometre Bridge City Boogie. This not only 

empowered the students, but promoted community interest and 

support. True to Joel’s business principles, many of the 

participating kids continue to run and remain active. 

 

Starting in June, some of the students of St. Mary’s Wolf Pack 

running team will join other kids from separate and public 

school divisions for a summer running initiative which 

culminates in an honour run between Saskatoon and Batoche in 

July for Back to Batoche Days. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

recognizing the important work of Joel Pedersen and Fitness 

2J2, as well as congratulating the children of St. Mary’s school 

for their successful fitness initiative. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Battlefords Resident Honoured by Canadian Red Cross 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today it is 

my pleasure to stand to recognize a resident of The Battlefords 

who has just received the Canadian Red Cross Rescuer Award. 

Gregg Sheppard is the very deserving recipient of this 

humanitarian award which was presented to him by Laura 

Beddome from the Canadian Red Cross. 

 

At the awards ceremony, Ms. Beddome highlighted Gregg’s 

effort in using his Red Cross first aid skills in helping to save 

the life of his brother-in-law, and in another situation 

attempting to save the life of an elderly gentleman, both of 

whom had suffered heart attacks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Gregg has been a long-time member of our 

Battlefords search and rescue team and was quick to point out 

that the training he received in that organization provided him 

with the skills and knowledge to assist in these two situations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this former Boston Bruin star has always been a 

very active volunteer in our community, having been involved 

with the Kinsmen rodeo committee, Relay For Life, KidSport, 

Ducks Unlimited, the Wildlife Federation, so it is no wonder 

that he has dedicated so many hours to volunteer time in search 

and rescue. 

 

He was very appreciative of this recognition and in true humble 

fashion he said, “You don’t expect those things. You just react 

to the situation.” Ms. Beddome had this to say at the ceremony: 

“I am very pleased we were able to recognize Gregg, who 

exhibited the power of humanity by voluntarily responding to 

assist two people in two separate emergencies.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s people like Gregg Sheppard that make this 

province such a great place to live, and I feel privileged to call 

him a friend. I would ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating Gregg and thanking him for taking the initiative 

to learn the skills that were so important in these two 

emergencies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Wynyard Monarchs Win Provincial Title 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 



5308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2014 

today to talk about a championship hockey team from 

Wynyard. The Monarchs had a great season. First up, they won 

the Highway Hockey League. In the final game they beat the 

Bethune Bulldogs to capture the league championship. At the 

same time they were also entered the provincial senior A finals 

which they’ve been beating teams on the way up. The final 

series was against Lanigan. The final game was played March 

29th in Lanigan, with the Monarchs taking it 4 to 3 in the end. 

 

The Monarchs attributed their win to a very dedicated crowd of 

fans who have supported them throughout the year. Many of 

these fans travelled that evening to the final game in Lanigan to 

cheer on their team. After their victorious game it was reported 

that hundreds of fans that attended the game in Lanigan created 

a trail of lights down the highway as they brought their team 

home to Wynyard where many of them ended up at the 

Wynyard Civic Centre to further celebrate their first-ever senior 

provincial A championship. 

 

The Wynyard Monarchs had a great season this year with a 

solid hockey team guided so well by coaches Tayler Jorden, 

Aaron Lindall, manager Wayne Madigan, trainer Chris 

Anderson. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this just confirms once again when it comes 

to hockey, that Arm River-Watrous is a constituency of 

champions. I would like to offer the whole team my warmest 

congratulations and ask that members join me in offering them 

the best of our wishes today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Women Entrepreneurs Week 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to 

announce that our government has proclaimed May 5th to 11th 

Women Entrepreneurs Week. Saskatchewan’s women 

entrepreneurs are large contributors to the growth of our 

economy and are great role models to Saskatchewan’s young 

women. Through their hard work and dedication, they play an 

important leadership role and create new opportunities and jobs 

in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to a report by Industry Canada, 15 per 

cent of small businesses in the Prairies are owned by women. 

This is a growing and positive trend towards economic growth 

in both our urban and rural communities. 

 

It is organizations like Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan 

that have contributed to the growth in women entrepreneurs. 

And since 1995 they have contributed more than 29 million in 

loans to women who want to start a business in our province. 

Along with financial support, they also provide training and 

mentoring support to help women-owned businesses succeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Women Entrepreneurs of 

Saskatchewan for all the work that they do to support our 

women entrepreneurs. And I ask that all members join me in 

recognizing Women Entrepreneurs Week by showing support to 

local women-owned businesses. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

Response to Regina Bypass Project 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 

Highways announced the Regina bypass project. It will be a 

public-private partnership with $200 million of federal funding. 

This is the largest transportation infrastructure project in our 

province’s history, valued at $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And how did the NDP [New Democratic Party] respond to this 

important project? They didn’t. According to today’s 

Leader-Post, the NDP could not even be reached for comment. 

They had no comment on the largest transportation project in 

the province’s history, one that will benefit the economy and, 

most importantly, vastly improve traffic safety. Unbelievable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s their problem. On one hand, they can’t 

oppose such an important project for Regina and surrounding 

area. But on the other hand, they can’t support this project 

because their ideology won’t let them. So they hide and say 

nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this NDP leader is willing to speak out on 

important issues such as Christmas tree storage, but when it 

comes to a project of vital importance to Regina, he says 

nothing. Mr. Speaker, that’s not leadership. It’s a party and a 

leader that is so bound by ideology and special interests that 

they simply can’t bring themselves to support a project that is 

clearly beneficial to Regina and Saskatchewan. 

 

Will the NDP leader take off the ideological blinders, stand up, 

and support the Regina bypass project? Will he do that today? 

We’re about to find out. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Poverty Reduction Measures 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been calling 

on this government to develop and implement a comprehensive 

anti-poverty strategy. There have been many calls for this over 

the years, Mr. Speaker, from many different groups and 

organizations, and today the Children’s Advocate has joined 

that call. He says that Saskatchewan needs a comprehensive 

anti-poverty strategy. Mr. Speaker, the opposition would be 

very pleased to work with the government to make that a 

reality. 

 

My question is for the Premier: will he agree that Saskatchewan 

would benefit from a comprehensive anti-poverty strategy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to comment on the work that the child advocate has 

done when it comes to poverty and the talks that we had today. 

Mr. Speaker, since 2006 we’ve cut the number of low-income 

people in half in this province. We know that now it’s down to 

5.3 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s always more work that we can be doing. 

We are open to new strategies, things like the discussions with 



May 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5309 

Poverty Costs, the disability strategy, the mental health and 

addictions strategy, the fact that we have a housing strategy. 

 

And today in the paper, Mr. Speaker, we had a discussion. 

There was an article on the Hub in Prince Albert. There’s 10 

other like hubs across the province, and we know that this is 

doing a good job when it comes to working with issues that we 

need to do in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are talking about poverty and, most 

importantly, we’re talking about the action that we have to 

reduce poverty in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government shouldn’t be so 

dismissive of what the Children’s Advocate has to say. Here’s 

what he says, “. . . we do not have an overarching poverty 

reduction strategy to tackle these issues in a more 

comprehensive way. At the moment, Saskatchewan is one of 

only two provinces without a coordinated and focused strategy 

. . .” The advocate goes on to say, “A poverty reduction plan 

could provide an overarching framework in which to address 

poverty in a more focused, measurable way.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: why won’t he just 

agree that an overarching framework is needed to address 

poverty in a coordinated, focused, and measurable way? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we announced our strategy 

for growth a while ago, and in there we talked about the 

importance of having everybody involved in the growth of our 

province. Mr. Speaker, we met with people like Upstream, 

organizations like Poverty Costs, and we understand that 

everybody has work to do and that we can be doing more to 

ensure that people are involved in the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve done things like increased the number of 

spots in adult basic education by 48 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve also ensured that there’s more money for things like the 

Hub and COR [centre of responsibility] and for the child and 

youth agenda. Mr. Speaker, we’ve given more money to our 

seniors for things like the seniors’ income plan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, people on SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability] are benefiting from the work that we’re doing. 

 

There’s always more work that we can be doing in this area, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we’re working together as a 

government to ensure that everyone is part of what we’re doing 

in our province when it comes to growth. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can meet with groups 

and that’s good. There may be individual projects that have 

merit, Mr. Speaker, that everyone in the province can agree to 

that are good. But what the Children’s Advocate is saying, is 

that the overall, the overarching framework to properly address 

poverty is missing and this government should have an overall 

strategy. The advocate is calling for that. 

 

And they can heckle, Mr. Speaker, about child poverty if they 

want to, but what the advocate is saying, strategy is important 

because it affects vulnerable children. Sixty per cent of 

non-Aboriginal children in our province live in poverty. That’s 

incredibly shocking and bad, Mr. Speaker, but it gets worse. 

Thirty per cent of Métis and non-status First Nation children in 

our province live in poverty, and 64 per cent of First Nations 

children in Saskatchewan are living in poverty. We are failing 

miserably, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to giving Saskatchewan 

children the very best start in life. And they can heckle all they 

want, Mr. Speaker, but they need to listen to the Children’s 

Advocate. 

 

Again to the Premier: what will it take for him to realize, and 

for his government to realize that Saskatchewan needs a 

comprehensive anti-poverty strategy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what the member opposite 

should know is that we can do all the talking in the world, what 

we really need is action. And that’s what we’ve been doing in 

the last number of years. We’ve reduced the number of 

low-income people more than any other province in Canada, 

including those with poverty strategy.  

 

It’s all about talking, Mr. Speaker, and what we’re doing is 

action. We’ve reduced the number of children in low-income 

families by more than any other province. Saskatchewan has the 

third-lowest percentage of seniors in Canada. Since 2006 the 

number of people living on low income has been cut by half. 

 

We know there’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

we’re working together through organizations like the child and 

family committee and through organizations like the Hub. Mr. 

Speaker, we can have the members opposite talking about 

another report that they want to have on the shelf or we can 

actually have action. That’s what we’ve been doing as a 

government, and we will continue to do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why the minister 

and this government is so dismissive of what the Children’s 

Advocate is saying. We know that the human cost of poverty is 

massive, Mr. Speaker, and that ought to be enough to convince 

this government that a comprehensive anti-poverty strategy is 

needed, especially when we’re talking about vulnerable 

children. But, Mr. Speaker, we know that poverty also costs 

government and costs society a tremendous amount, a lot of 

money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Estimates say poverty costs Saskatchewan 420 million in higher 

health costs, 720 million in increased social assistance, up to 

120 million in increased criminal justice costs, and billions and 

billions in lost economic opportunity. Yet Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, is one of only two provinces that does not have a 

comprehensive poverty reduction strategy. My question to the 

Premier: why is he being so stubborn on this issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 



5310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2014 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Leader 

in the Opposition is why does he insist on a strategy when he 

really wants action. What we really need to do is to ensure that 

we have fewer people living in poverty. That’s why we have . . . 

That’s why we spent money to ensure that children have the 

care that they need, that we have . . . We increased our 

minimum wage. We have the highest amount of average 

earnings per week in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s work to do across ministries to ensure that 

people have jobs, that people have the education they need, that 

we’re looking at things like hot-spotting, that we’re putting 

together a plan that involves action across government, and 

while the members opposite can only talk about paper. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Traffic Safety on No. 1 Highway 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, many residents, businesses, and 

communities east of Regina have been justifiably raising the 

alarm about unsafe travel conditions on Highway No. 1, and 

representatives of those communities have joined us here today. 

While yesterday’s bypass announcement is certainly welcome, 

completion of it four years down the line doesn’t make 

travelling east of Regina any safer right now, today. And that’s 

what local residents and businesses in the area, young people 

and family need from this government. They need action to 

improve safety today. To the minister: is he listening? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I certainly am listening and have been listening. I’ve 

had the opportunity to represent partially that stretch of corridor 

for a number of years as the MLA from that area, Mr. Speaker, 

and now, it’s an interesting twist, as the Minister Responsible 

for Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very aware of some of the collisions that have 

happened over the last number of years. That’s why our 

government has taken steps to try and increase the safety on 

many of those intersections. Mr. Speaker, we’ve added 

deceleration or exit ramps. We’ve added acceleration or 

entrance ramps, Mr. Speaker. We’ve put up illuminating lights 

that light those intersections through the night. We’ve put up 

flashing amber lights. We’ve put up radar signs that show what 

speed you’re going. We’ve taken a number of steps, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Having said that, we’re still monitoring it. We know that there 

are more . . . you know, that there have been collisions, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why the Minister Responsible for SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] has introduced a bill 

that would look at photo radar as another form of enforcement, 

Mr. Speaker, because I know lots are calling for the reduction in 

speed, but what we’ve got to do first of all, make sure the speed 

is being properly followed at its posted limit now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, according to SGI’s own statistics, 

this is one of the most dangerous stretches of highway in the 

province. There have been more injuries on this route than any 

other section measured by SGI. As local residents know, this 

stretch of highway has seen 24 collisions involving personal 

injury, including another fatality just over a month ago. 

 

And since SGI collected that data, the region has grown with 

new service stations, restaurants, and hotels. The traffic keeps 

growing, but the government is neglecting the basics when it 

comes to highway safety. So again to the minister: why is this 

government refusing to put in place traffic signals, reduce speed 

limits, and increase enforcement on one of the most dangerous 

stretches of highway in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we are not ignoring that 

area. Since 2011 we’ve put in roughly $7 million worth of 

improvements. Having said that, we are still monitoring it. We 

still need to make sure that people can enter and exit that stretch 

of highway as safely as possible. That’s why it was a significant 

announcement, Mr. Speaker, a significant announcement to see 

the federal government partner with us as a provincial 

government to put overpasses. And we’ll eventually put 

overpasses in many of those intersections so we get away from 

the grade crossings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, I would just be cautious. We want to look at all 

the options, whether it’s a reduction in speed, whether it is 

traffic lights, Mr. Speaker. But I would be careful to make sure 

that those changes that we make do not have unintended 

consequences, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will tell you after 20 years of traffic safety experience, 

teaching thousands of kids in the car, class 5 15-year-olds, and 

tens of thousands of adults through defensive driving, Mr. 

Speaker, that traffic lights have never stopped a vehicle. People 

stop vehicles. And we have the most accidents at intersections 

that have traffic lights. I’m not saying they can be ruled out 

completely but, Mr. Speaker, there can be unintended 

consequences. And we want to make sure that isn’t the result of 

some of these changes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the communities are speaking out 

very clearly, and they’re speaking out yet again today. They 

want a reduced speed limit in the area, better signage, and at 

least a couple of traffic signals until the overpasses are built. 

And they won’t be deterred until this danger is addressed. 

 

Reduced speed and traffic signals will almost certainly be put 

up during construction in any event, so area residents cannot 

understand why this government refuses to do so now. Again to 

the minister: why will he not commit to what these local 

residents are asking for — traffic signals, reduced speed limits, 

and better enforcement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 



May 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5311 

answer, I’ve had many years of experience, and I’m sure no 

traffic expert. Not at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a contingent within the Ministry of Highways as well 

as with the ministry of SGI that look at these intersections. 

They study these intersections, and they would make 

recommendations as to what is the safest, calming, whether it’s 

traffic lights, whether it’s speeds, or whether it’s just 

illuminating the intersections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that the volumes are increasing, and so it’s an 

ever-changing environment. But, Mr. Speaker, I have to take 

advice from experts at the Ministry of Highways or from SGI, 

Mr. Speaker, that study this on an in-depth, what we would call 

traffic experts. Yes, I have experience, but I need their advice as 

well. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we know the volumes are 

increasing. They’re increasing around the province. And you 

just have to talk to people in the Estevan area or the Kindersley 

area. You can go around the province, Mr. Speaker, and there 

are issues. But ultimately, Mr. Speaker, we are going to do what 

we can possibly do, and we’re asking drivers to do what they 

can do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Support for Children in Care 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Children’s Advocate released his annual report today, and it 

shows that child and family services is facing an appalling 

shortage of staff and resources. And as in previous years, the 

advocate says that caseworkers are overworked with far too 

many cases and unable to properly look out for vulnerable 

children. To the minister: will she give caseworkers the 

resources they need to properly protect our province’s most 

vulnerable children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

I really thank the child advocate for his report. It’s important 

that we understand that our most valuable and vulnerable asset 

is our children. Mr. Speaker, today we talked about prevention 

and intervention when it came to the work that we’re doing. 

 

And I think the member opposite is aware that we have hired 90 

new caseworkers, and the children in care, the numbers are 

down for the first time in over a decade. Mr. Speaker, the 

February numbers when it comes to caseworkers was just 

shown to me today, and we show that 80 per cent of social 

workers have between 10 and 20 cases. That’s down 

considerably from a few years ago when it was around 40. 

 

We know that there’s always more work to do because the cases 

dealing with our children are complex, and in a province the 

size of Saskatchewan, there’s a need to travel and to ensure that 

the supports are available. Mr. Speaker, through our child and 

family committee, we’ve put an additional $62 million into 

services for children in the last number of years. Mr. Speaker, 

this is an important item to us and it always will be. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister should listen, 

actually listen to what the Children’s Advocate has to say. He 

says the structured decision-making system for children 

protection services has, and I quote, “. . . great potential to 

improve outcomes for children and families, but it won’t be 

implemented effectively until the caseloads of protection 

workers allow them to meet SDM standards . . .” Here’s what 

he says, and I quote, “We remain deeply concerned that Child 

and Family Services will not be able to meet compliance with 

these standards and improve families’ outcomes without 

investing significant additional resources in child protection.” 

 

So to the minister: when will this government starting taking 

the recommendations of the advocate seriously? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I assure you that we take 

all the recommendations from the Children’s Advocate very 

serious. We take every case involving children very seriously. 

Mr. Speaker, the structured decision-making tool is actually an 

opportunity for workers to look at a new type of assessment to 

determine the needs of the children and that we have to spend 

more time and money, which we are doing, to ensure that 

workers can look at, use this tool. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tool was implemented across the entire 

province. We have two First Nations — Lac La Ronge First 

Nations and Peter Ballantyne First Nations — are using the 

structured decision-making tool. And we have eight other 

agencies, the First Nations agencies, that are interested in using 

this tool as well. This will give them an opportunity to 

determine the risk that the children have and to make sure that 

we are implementing and providing supports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to our children, the extra money 

that we’ve been investing — not spending, investing — through 

the child and family agenda gives us a chance to put this $62 

million into the hands of the people that are working with our 

children. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we know that in just the last four 

years 81 vulnerable children have died. These were children 

who were in the care of Social Services or who had just left the 

system. And those deaths don’t include the deaths of natural 

causes. The Children’s Advocate talks about two tragic deaths 

of very young children, and he notes that the workers for these 

children had caseloads in excess of 40 vulnerable children. 

 

He says, and I quote, “. . . this caseload pressure critically 

impacted the quality of their work and their ability to comply 

with the standards in policy.” That’s why the Children’s 

Advocate is calling for manageable caseloads for child 

protection workers. 

 

To the minister: will she commit to reverse her cuts to child and 

family services and implement the recommendation today? 

 

[14:45] 



5312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the member 

opposite doesn’t want to leave the impression that there’s been 

cuts to the number of front-line workers in this family, in this 

government. There’s 90 new front-line workers. There is cuts 

to, there is cutbacks in some of the work that we’re doing 

within the ministry themselves, but when it comes to having 

money for children and the front-line workers and the support 

they need, it’s been there. We have 90 new front-line workers. 

Mr. Speaker, we have the structured decision-making tool, and 

we are looking at the caseloads as well. 

 

I told the member opposite a few minutes ago that we have cut 

the number of caseloads down from . . . between 10 and 20 now 

is the average across the province. At one time there was 40, 40 

caseloads for each one of the workers. We’ve cut that, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to continue to work with the child 

welfare experts to determine what the right caseload number is 

across the province. There’s always more work to do when it 

comes to this area, but I assure you our children are the most 

important asset we have in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Effects of Indoor Tanning 

 

Ms. Chartier: — The Health minister confirmed recently that 

this government will not be considering a ban on tanning for 

youth under the age of 18. The minister said he doesn’t want to 

leave people with a false sense of security that a tanning ban 

will eliminate skin cancer because people will still be exposed 

to the sun. And he said he is worried that such a ban could be a 

slippery slope leading to an outright ban on tanning. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, both of those excuses are absolutely 

ridiculous. A ban on youth tanning would significantly reduce 

the incidence of skin cancer, and the ministry’s slippery slope 

argument is nonsense. No other province with a youth ban has 

mused such a thing. 

 

To the minister: why won’t he just do the right thing and follow 

the lead of nearly every other province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve taken the position that awareness and education need to 

be the key to the information that we provide to the public, 

particularly to parents and to their children, of the dangers of 

any overexposure of UV [ultraviolet] rays, whether that be from 

outdoors from the sun and overexposure during the summer 

time hours, which we’re all hoping, Mr. Speaker, are going to 

arrive here soon in the province, but certainly as well the 

dangers too that are posed to any individual, whether they be 

youth or otherwise, of overexposure of UV rays due to indoor 

tanning. 

 

So we take the position that awareness and education and 

working with our partners needs to be the approach that this 

province takes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, one of his partners, the 

Canadian Cancer Society is pushing for a ban on youth tanning. 

The Saskatchewan Medical Association has passed a resolution 

supporting such a ban. The Canadian Medical Association 

supports it, and so does the World Health Organization. 

 

To the minister: how can he stubbornly dismiss the advice of 

such highly regarded organizations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the position of this government, and I want to quote 

the position, is to “Work with partners to increase education and 

awareness about the health implications of indoor tanning beds, 

especially for young people.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s not only the position that this 

government takes. In fact that is a direct quote from page 19 of 

A Rooted and Growing Vision, the tree book that was published 

by the NDP in 2011, that was written by the Leader of the 

Opposition. By their own policy — if it still is the policy of the 

day because they’ve scrapped their website of all such policy, 

but I believe it would still be the policy of the day because it 

goes back to 2011 — is to work with partners on awareness and 

education. And that’s the same approach, the approach that the 

members opposite put forward as their policy is the same 

approach that we’ve put forward today as the government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Youth under the age of 18 are not allowed to 

tan in Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Prince 

Edward Island, New Brunswick, Quebec, Ontario, and British 

Columbia. And the Alberta government has said it will bring in 

such legislation, but the Saskatchewan government is 

stubbornly lagging behind. 

 

Again to the minister: why won’t this government just do the 

right thing and implement a ban on youth tanning like most 

other provinces already have? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Well I think it’s very obvious to the member opposite what the 

position of the government is. In fact the member opposite will 

know when she was a member of the NDP — she was in 2011, 

late in the year in 2011 — and at that time other provinces had 

already moved towards banning. Yet they put out, as a policy 

under the pen of the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place, and I quote, “Work with partners to 

increase education and awareness about the health implications 

of indoor tanning beds, especially for young people.” It’s the 

position of the NDP. It’s the position of this government. I’m 

not sure why the member opposite has a problem with their own 

position. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 



May 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5313 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, experts recommend it. Most 

other provinces have done it. But for some reason, this 

government refuses to ban youth tanning, and their excuses for 

inaction do not make any sense. A ban on youth tanning would 

significantly reduce the incidents of skin cancer and save lives, 

and this government knows that. 

 

When I’ve asked the minister what advice he’s received from 

his experts in his own ministry on this issue, he refused to 

answer. So to the minister: what do the experts in the Ministry 

of Health have to say to you about youth tanning? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I did provide that 

information. We had a good exchange in estimates in the last 

couple of weeks. Certainly I would assume that the same 

experts, Mr. Speaker, within the NDP are still there today. In 

fact the Leader of the Opposition is sitting in the front row 

when he authored a policy paper that was adopted by the entire 

party opposite that says, and I quote: “Work with partners to 

increase education and awareness . . .” 

 

Certainly that was the policy that was taken, put forward, and 

adopted by the members opposite. I don’t think that the policy 

has necessarily changed. And certainly you won’t find any 

information on their website because they’ve scrubbed all 

information related to the 2011 election. They’ve scrubbed the 

tree book off of the website. They’ve scrubbed the Regina 

Manifesto off the website. I’m not sure today if they even have 

any policy on anything. 

 

But at that time in 2011, late into the year 2011 when the policy 

document was put out, it was awareness and education. That is 

the position that this government takes as well. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairperson of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and present its fifth report. I move: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Crown 

and Central Agencies Committee: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report that it has considered 

certain estimates and to present the fifth report. I move: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Carrot 

River Valley: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committee this afternoon and this evening, 

I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that this House be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:55.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5299 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................... 5299, 5301, 5302 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5299, 5302 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5299, 5302 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5300 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5300 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5300 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5300 

  Makowsky...................................................................................................................................................................... 5300, 5302 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5300 

  Tell ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5300, 5301 

  McMorris ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5301, 5303 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5301 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5301 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5301 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5302 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5302 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5302 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5302 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5304 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5304 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5304 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5304 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5305 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5305 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5305 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5306 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5306 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5306 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5306 

 Southwest Resident Establishes Scholarships 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5307 

 Saskatoon Business Promotes Fitness in Schools 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5307 

 Battlefords Resident Honoured by Canadian Red Cross 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5307 

 Wynyard Monarchs Win Provincial Title 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5307 

 Women Entrepreneurs Week 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5308 

 Response to Regina Bypass Project 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5308 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Poverty Reduction Measures 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5308 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5308 

 Traffic Safety on No. 1 Highway 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5310 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5310 

 Support for Children in Care 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5311 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5311 

 Effects of Indoor Tanning 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5312 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5312 

 

 



 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5313 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5313 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


