
























































Hansard: October 29, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 5A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 29, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5589 
 October 29, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to introduce a number of guests to you 
and through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 
joining us in your gallery. They are made up of representatives 
from the Canadian Diabetes Association and the Saskatchewan 
Association of Optometrists. And when I say their name, I’d 
maybe just ask if they could give us a wave so that we know 
who’s here this afternoon. 
 
From the Diabetes Association, Warren Wagner who is the 
regional director for Saskatchewan; Andrea Kwasnicki, the 
regional director for Manitoba; Brie Hnetka, the senior manager 
for programs and partnership; Ellen Williams, the coordinator 
for community engagement. 
 
Janet Bradshaw, Clint Davies, Peter Dickinson, Rochelle 
Fiolleau, Bill Gowen. Mr. Speaker, Melissa and Tim Johnson 
and their children Salem and Emma, and I think I’ve actually 
had the opportunity to introduce them on a previous occasion, 
so it’s great to see them back at their Legislative Assembly. 
Georgia Jooristy, Robert Lydiate, Diana Orser, Dwayne 
Tomkewich, Renee Mochnacz, and Bob Gawley, and they are 
all CDA [Canadian Diabetes Association] advocacy volunteers, 
and I want to thank them for being here this afternoon. Many of 
them will be joining us for a reception later this evening, as well 
Dr. Rhea Anderson who’s vice-president of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Optometrists. 
 
Earlier this month we had the opportunity to announce that 
we’re now going to provide coverage for an annual eye 
examination for diabetic patients, and that’s thanks to the 
relationship that we do have with the Canadian Diabetes 
Association and the Saskatchewan Association of Optometrists. 
And I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming all 
of these guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister on behalf of the opposition in welcoming 
these guests today, folks from the Canadian Diabetes 
Association and from the Saskatchewan Association of 
Optometrists, so Mr. Warren Wagner and Andrea Kwasnicki 
and all the advocacy members, and of course Dr. Rhea 
Anderson. 
 
Thank you for all that you do in ensuring that we as legislators 
have a good understanding of the issues around the need for 
support and around the need for different policies. So thank 
you, and for all the work that you do in supporting families and 
individuals who have diabetes. I know there are a number of 

members actually in the House who live with diabetes, and I 
know that they appreciate the support and information that you 
provide. So thank you for all that you do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you, 27 grade 7 and 8 
students from MacNeill School here in Regina. Accompanying 
our students is their teachers: Mrs. Klein, Ms. Frisen, Mr. 
Grant. So please everyone welcome these fine students to their 
Legislative Assembly. And I will be meeting and having a nice 
visit with them after. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ice cream, you get ice cream. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Stop it, you guys. That’s just . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members, I’d like to introduce a few individuals 
seated in the galleries today. 
 
In the east gallery is Mr. Brett Estey who is a U of R 
[University of Regina] grad and had worked for the Canadian 
Cancer Society and is a huge Riders fan as well and watches 
politics very closely here in the province. So nice to see you 
today, Brett. 
 
And in the Speaker’s gallery, two very important individuals to 
me, Mr. Speaker, my mom and dad. Chris Broten and Anne 
Broten happen to be in Regina today and thought they would 
come watch the proceedings for the afternoon. Both fairly 
recently retired, enjoying life, and also staying fairly busy 
helping out with grandkids in our family and in my sisters’ 
families as well. So we’re very appreciative for all that you do. 
Wonderful to have you here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
House today, 19 grade 10 students from Churchbridge School. 
They’re accompanied today by their teachers: Laura 
Sveinbjornson, Reg Leidl, and educational assistant Cindy 
Basken. And I’d ask all members to welcome these students and 
their teachers from Churchbridge here today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers defaulting on 
fixed-price contracts. And we know that in September this year 
this government walked away from a new 48-unit low-income 
affordable housing project here in the city of Regina, allowing a 
private developer to instead take control of and rent the units at 



5590 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

full market price. Mr. Speaker, a local political commentator 
wrote this about the government allowing a private developer to 
default on a fixed-price contract, and I quote: 
 

It is the latest indication that the Premier seems unwilling 
to do anything to displease business even when he knows 
business is . . . 

 
The Speaker: — I believe the member knows that he should 
not be provoking debate in the prayer of a petition. Will you 
please get to the question? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly take the following action: 
cause the government to recognize that there are indeed 
desperate homeless people in our province and to 
immediately reverse its policy of now allowing private 
developers with whom the government has close 
relationships to default on fixed-price contracts for 
affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
the unacceptable danger caused by actions and failure to plan by 
that government with heavy-haul trucks on Dewdney Avenue. 
This petition calls on that government to immediately act to 
ensure safety for those using Dewdney and along Dewdney. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed today by concerned residents from 
right along Dewdney Avenue here in Regina. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of better health care in Saskatchewan. And 
the folks who signed this petition want to bring to the 
Legislative Assembly’s attention a number of issues. We know 
that emergency room wait times in Saskatchewan have doubled 
since 2010, that’s only four years ago; where the government’s 

own statistics show that patient safety is getting worse. The 
government’s own surveys show the majority of doctors, 
nurses, and other front-line health care workers are frustrated 
with the quality of health care. We know that chronic 
short-staffing is a problem throughout our health care system, 
and the Saskatoon City Hospital is underutilized with patient 
rooms used as manager’s offices, where an independent report 
shows that $2.2 billion of repairs are needed in hospitals and 
care facilities. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

These individuals respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to recognize health care is 
getting worse under its watch and begin fixing the basics 
by listening to health care workers, patients, and their 
families, properly maintaining hospitals and care projects 
and focusing resources on front-line care instead of 
spending millions on its lean pet project. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the folks who have signed this petition are from 
my riding of Saskatoon Nutana in Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Graduation Ceremony 
at Centre for Northern Governance and Development 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to bring recognition to a number of accomplished 
grads of the International Centre for Northern Governance and 
Development at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
I was invited to give the keynote address, Mr. Speaker, at a 
ceremony on October 25th, and I must say that I was quite 
thrilled to see so many proud and smiling faces there, faces 
from all throughout the North. There were graduates from many 
northern communities, including La Loche, La Ronge, Meadow 
Lake, Cumberland House, Sandy Bay. And many First Nations 
were there as well, Mr. Speaker, the graduates from Sucker 
River First Nations, Sturgeon Lake First Nations, and the Flying 
Dust First Nations. 
 
I’m sure members here today are very aware of the remarkable 
program that is offered there at the universities, the master’s 
degree in northern governance and development. This program 
is the only one of its kind in North America, and offers training 
to northern residents in a combination of different subjects 
including northern studies, political science, public policy, and 
Native studies. This innovative approach across many subject 
areas ensures that graduates have the skills they need to be 
leaders in our northern communities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I hope that all members here will join me to 
celebrate and to send congratulations and good wishes to these 
new graduates. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5591 

National Diabetes Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, next month is National Diabetes 
Awareness Month. Diabetes can have a significant impact on a 
person’s life. That’s why awareness and education are so 
important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has taken important steps to 
support people living with diabetes and their families. We’ve 
improved access to diabetes medication, devices, and supplies. 
The Saskatchewan insulin pump program was expanded in 
2012 to provide coverage for residents up to 25 years of age. 
This past July, two rapid-acting insulins previously covered 
under exceptional drug status only were added to the formulary. 
 
Just recently we have expanded the coverage for annual eye 
examinations to include adults with diabetes in addition to all 
children under 18. Receiving an annual eye examination is 
essential to help monitor and prevent vision loss, a possible 
complication from diabetes. This new service is part of the 
recent agreement with the Saskatchewan Association of 
Optometrists. It will help remove financial barriers and ensure 
timely access to vision care for everyone living with diabetes in 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we value collaboration with our partners such as 
the Saskatchewan Association of Optometrists and the 
Canadian Diabetes Association. I would like to take this 
opportunity to thank them for their contributions and express 
appreciation for their continued partnership. Thank you to the 
leadership, staff, and volunteers for all their work to improve 
the lives of people living with diabetes in our province. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

2014 Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it was my distinct honour to 
attend the 2014 Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards in 
Saskatoon last night. The arts community was out in full force, 
celebrating the amazing accomplishments of all the short listed 
nominees. The Saskatchewan Arts Board put on a great show 
with musical, spoken word, film, and dance performances to 
round out the awards ceremony. 
 
Zachari Logan of Saskatoon was chosen for the Emerging Artist 
Award for his stunning visual creations. Heather Cline of 
Regina, a great visual artist in her own right, received the Arts 
and Learning Award for her televised arts education programs. 
Richard Gustin of Regina received the arts Volunteer Award for 
his work with the Yorkton Film Festival. Celebrated poet Sylvia 
Legris of Saskatoon was selected for the Saskatchewan Artist 
Award. Angus Ferguson of Dancing Sky Theatre in Meacham 
took home the award for individual leadership, and my 
constituency’s Friends of the Broadway Theatre received the 
organizational leadership award. To top it all off, the lovely and 
delightful Thelma Pepper received the Lifetime Achievement 
Award for her heart-rending photographic exhibitions. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Mr. Speaker, there were many memorable moments last night 
— too many to mention — but I was struck by the universal 
thanks and appreciation these creative Saskatchewanians 
expressed for our Saskatchewan Arts Board. It is an inescapable 
reality that the work of the Arts Board and other creative 
agencies is essential to a thriving creative community. What 
was also apparent was the pride of place, the deep roots these 
artists have in their communities and this province. 
Congratulations to all the nominees, and to the Arts Board for 
making it possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Terry Fox Ride 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to rise today to recognize and to thank the Battlefords 
Quarter Horse Club for their successful Terry Fox Ride which 
was held on September 20th of this year. 
 
This year’s ride was hosted by Deb Flegel at her Hidden 
Meadows Ranch over some beautiful terrain along the Battle 
River. After the ride, we enjoyed a delicious meal prepared by 
the organizing committee. This year we had approximately 50 
riders, from preschoolers to seniors, riding horses of all shapes, 
sizes, and colours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all familiar with the annual Terry Fox Run 
or the Terry Fox Walk, but this club has, for the last 32 years, 
held an equine ride. Organizers tell me that to the best of their 
knowledge, theirs is the only equine ride in Canada, and 
certainly the only one that has run continuously. This year we 
raised $2,833 and that means that over the years, this ride has 
generated over $67,000 for cancer research. 
 
One year we were very proud to have Betty Fox, Terry’s 
mother, join us riding in a carriage to recognize the uniqueness 
of this Terry Fox fundraiser. I’ve enjoyed participating in this 
ride for nearly all of the years it’s been running, and it was great 
to see so many horse enthusiasts having fun while raising funds 
for such a worthy cause. 
 
I’d like to ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating the Battlefords Quarter Horse Club on another 
successful Terry Fox Ride, and wish them great success in 
continuing this long-standing tradition. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Construction Starts on Kelvington Health Care Facility 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of joining the 
ministers of Health and Rural and Remote Health, local 
residents, and officials to start the construction on the 
Kelvington and District integrated health care facility last 
Friday. This event marked a significant milestone on our 
journey to achieve better health, better care, and better value for 
the residents of Kelvington and surrounding areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this renewal project will renovate and expand the 
existing Kelvindell Lodge and replace the Kelvington Hospital. 
The new facility will offer 45 long-term care beds, seven acute 



5592 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

care beds, and seven multi-purpose patient rooms. Mr. Speaker, 
we understand for many, long-term care facilities are their 
homes. Modern infrastructure is needed so they can live more 
comfortably and safely in their own communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to recognize the 3P [production 
preparation process] team who worked on the design of the 
Kelvington and district health facility. They recently received 
the provincial Award of Excellence at the Health Care Quality 
Summit. While maintaining the quality of the new facility and 
ensuring patients’ needs will be met, the team cut the project 
costs by close to $7 million, bringing down the price tag to $15 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the dedication and strong teamwork from the local 
municipalities, from the staff, the Kelvington and District 
Health Care Facility Foundation, the Kelsey Trail Health 
Region, Mitch and Brenda Gawron who donated the land, and 
the Ministry of Health made this project a reality. Mr. Speaker, 
we want to thank all of those involved for their vision, ensuring 
health care facilities in Kelvington in the future. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

2014 Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have the 
pleasure of announcing the recipients of the Lieutenant 
Governor’s Award this week, which was attended by our 
Minister Docherty, bringing greetings on behalf of the 
government. 
 
This prestigious award celebrates the contribution, 
achievements of individuals, groups, and organizations in the 
arts, right here in Saskatchewan. This year’s lifetime 
achievement recipient was Mrs. Thelma Pepper of Saskatoon. 
Thelma was introduced to photography at a very young age and 
still passionate at the age of 94. 
 
Saskatchewan artist Ms. Sylvia Legris from Saskatoon 
published multiple volumes of poetry. Sylvia continues to 
enrich the arts community throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
The Emerging Artist recipient of this year was Zachari Logan 
of Saskatoon, who uses large-scale drawings and ceramic 
installations, sometimes that make him internationally 
recognized. Mr. Angus Ferguson from Meacham this year is the 
recipient of the Leadership — Individual Award for his work in 
the performing arts. 
 
The leadership — organization recipient is the Friends of the 
Broadway Theatre in Saskatoon. This group has worked hard to 
keep Broadway the gem of the Prairies. The arts and learning 
recipient was Mrs. Heather Cline of Regina who has created a 
distance learning program for grade 1 to 9 students. And finally, 
Mr. Speaker, the volunteer recipient is Mr. Richard Gustin of 
Regina, who has tirelessly supported the arts community 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to join me in congratulating all the recipients this 
year. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind the member not to use 
proper names of members of the House. You might wish to 
inform your staff of that as well. I recognize the member from 
Carrot River Valley. 
 

Oil Royalties 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We thought we 
had seen it all from the NDP [New Democratic Party], but they 
have come up with the same old plan to disappoint the residents 
of this province. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the NDP plans to 
review and increase oil royalties on a regular basis, something 
that would not only harm the economy of this province but a 
decision that his own members disagree with. On March 26th, 
the member from Athabasca was quoted as saying, “Don’t 
change royalties and don’t try and mess with any of the alliance 
we had with the industry that develops a lot of resources in our 
province.” But it seems the Leader of the NDP wants to destroy 
these very alliances that helped grow our economy, something 
we have all benefited from. The Leader of the Opposition has 
learned nothing from the 2011 election campaign when citizens 
of this province rejected those same job-killing policies. Clearly 
the members opposite have not thought out any of their plans 
and again show us their lack of public policy. This is not 
forward thinking, but in fact more of the same old NDP. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to request leave to revert 
to introduction of guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked leave for introduction 
of guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to the 
Assembly. I’d like to introduce a couple of guests that are in our 
east gallery. These are individuals who have made careers in the 
film industry. First of all, Mr. Layton Burton who is an 
award-winning director of photography who is in demand 
across Canada. Sadly, his business in film in Saskatchewan 
collapsed as a result of this province being the only one in 
Canada without a film employment tax credit, but he has stayed 
and is living in Saskatchewan for family reasons. 
 
I’d also like to introduce Mr. Andrew Gordon who’s a former 
manager of the film company William F. White here in Regina. 
He had to leave Saskatchewan and is rebuilding his career in 
Vancouver. He would love to come back though and work here 
in his industry of choice. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome both of these individuals 
to the Legislative Assembly and would ask the Assembly to do 
the same. 
 
 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5593 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — The Health minister said yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, that the $3,500-per-day Japanese senseis and the 
$600-per-day Japanese interpreters now are focused only on 
something called kanban. And the latest information that we’ve 
obtained from the government shows that they are planning to 
spend another $650,000 on kanban that is led by the Japanese 
senseis. But, Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of Saskatchewan 
people have absolutely no idea what kanban is. My question, 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: can he please explain what kanban 
is? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, through the continuous improvement work that we’re 
doing in Saskatchewan, we use a number of different 
techniques that come from continuous improvement 
methodologies, whether that be kanban; whether that be 3Ps, 
rapid process improvement workshops; 5S-ing [sort, simplify, 
sweep, standardize, self-discipline] for example. Mr. Speaker, 
we certainly have seen some significant results. And in fact, 
through a recent 5S which works around, as well, inventory, 
this is what Dolly Kosar had to say. She is a registered nurse in 
Regina. She said, and I quote, “It’s amazing. People used to 
yell, ‘Where’s this? Where’s that?’ because no one could find 
anything. Now, we know where things are . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lois Schatz from the operating room in Regina 
said, “If [we] . . . go and find something in one second instead 
of 30, it’s got to be freeing your time up for your patient care.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just two examples of front-line providers 
that have seen the benefits of lean and show that it not only 
saves the system dollars, but also frees up time for them to care 
with their patients. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, organizing the supply closet is 
hardly worth $40 million that we’ve seen from this government. 
We asked for a simple explanation of kanban, and it certainly 
wasn’t there. 
 
Let’s get this straight, Mr. Speaker. Senior health administrators 
say this: “The orientation to the kanban process within RQHR 
by the sensei had little added value.” So again, senior health 
administrators saying that Japanese senseis don’t bring any real 
value to this kanban process. Yet instead of listening to that 
scathing criticism, Mr. Speaker, we see this government do the 
opposite. This government is now having the Japanese senseis 
focus exclusively on the kanban stuff — the exact thing, Mr. 
Speaker, that the senior health administrators say that they don’t 
actually even bring any value to. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: does he 
misunderstand the criticism that senior administrators have said, 
or is he just choosing to ignore it? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, certainly I would 
encourage the Leader of the Opposition to read the rest of what 
the memo had to say in Regina Qu’Appelle. Marlene Smadu on 
kanban had this to say: “Doing kanban is necessary for an 
organization of our size.” They feel that this is an important 
thing.  
 
Certainly the experience in the Regina General Hospital 
post-anesthetic care unit, this is the experience that they found. 
They removed more than 3,500 supplies out of about 9,000 
items and actually returned them to the manufacturer for a 
credit: “The credit is still being estimated but it’s expected to be 
in the thousands of dollars.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the situation that we have. We have 
thousands of dollars worth of inventory that we don’t use that 
eventually expires, and it is a waste to the system. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it is a patient quality issue if a patient in this system 
gets a piece of equipment used on them that is expired. This is 
why we have to focus on this work in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, you can organize a supply closet, 
but you don’t need a $3,500-a-day Japanese sensei plus 
interpreter to do the job. And that’s precisely what the senior 
health administrators were saying, Mr. Speaker. The senseis do 
not add value to the kanban process. That’s what the senior 
administrators say. But this government, they shovel 3,500 
bucks a day out the door for the senseis, 600 bucks a day for the 
interpreter that’s attached to the sensei, not to mention at least 
$2,000 for each sensei to travel from Japan to Saskatchewan. 
And health administrators are adamant that the senseis do not 
add value to the kanban process. 
 
My question again to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: is the Premier 
ignoring the criticism from the senior administrators, from 
front-line workers, or is he choosing to ignore it?  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I am told that yesterday, 
and it’s from after question period, the Leader of the Opposition 
said, and I quote, “Any person that can read and use their brain 
can figure out when something expires.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, here’s a great example. In Saskatchewan, in 
2009 Saskatchewan and Manitoba both spent $53 million 
purchasing blood and plasma products from Canadian Blood 
Services. Manitoba, since 2009, has gone from 53 million to 
$61 million in expenditures with CBS [Canadian Blood 
Services]. Saskatchewan in that same time frame has gone from 
$53 million — the same starting amount, $53 million — to $38 
million, Mr. Speaker. Is the Leader of the Opposition saying 
that there’s no brains in the NDP government in Manitoba? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is proving my point. 
The blood exercise, Mr. Speaker, has no attachment to the JBA 
[John Black and Associates] contract, Mr. Speaker. You don’t 



5594 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

need the senseis. Listen to the senior administrators. Listen to 
the front lines. The senseis do not add value with their 
interpreters to the kanban process, as the senior administrators 
clearly say. 
 
April 7th email to John Black from a senior official: “We need 
to be more judicious with the use of the Japanese consultants.” 
But for some reason, Mr. Speaker, being more judicious isn’t 
because of the negative feedback from the front lines or from 
the senior administrators. Not at all with this government. Not 
at all with this Premier and this front bench. Here’s what the 
official said to John Black: “We need to demonstrate action 
based on the negative public perception in the media.” Just 
about the optics; that’s what motivates this government. That’s 
what motivates these decisions around keeping JBA, John 
Black, on the contract. 
 
My question to this Premier: when will he listen to senior 
administrators? When will he listen to front-line workers? 
When will he listen to his own Health minister who says when 
JBA leaves, we can tailor this to Saskatchewan’s needs? When 
will he come to his senses and end the wasteful and toxic 
contract with John Black? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this is what motivates the 
government, the members on this side of the House. When we 
see examples where we can reduce the number of surgical 
in-patients, the inventory by 42 per cent, that’s what motivates 
us. When we can see a 100 per cent reduction in the time that a 
home care RN [registered nurse] needs to take to order supplies, 
that’s what motivates us. When we can see a quality defect in 
surgical supplies by 100 per cent in one health region, that is 
what motivates us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are embarking on a process in this province to 
embed a tool that has been used effectively by a number of 
organizations, in fact including a health region under the NDP 
government early or late in their term. But this has been 
something that’s been used by organizations that we’ve talked 
about like Virginia Mason, Seattle Children’s Hospital, 
ThedaCare in Wisconsin, the Mayo Clinic, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Johns Hopkins Hospital — some of the 
leading health organizations in North America. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Smart Meter Program 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Yesterday the Premier was asked if it 
concerns him that the SaskPower minister didn’t know about 
smart meter problems in other jurisdictions. The Premier 
responded, “Well I didn’t either. I mean we were aware about 
the smart meter installation. I wasn’t googling about them 
either, neither was any other minister.” He went on: “If this 
information is not readily available, you assume the appropriate 
processes are undertaken. It’s not something you’re going to go 
out and google perhaps and find out.” 
 
My question is for the Premier: did the SaskPower minister 

actually tell him that such information wasn’t available? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite would 
know that we rely on officials for the information. They gave us 
their best advice. They make recommendations to the 
government. And it’s been said in this very building that 
officials make decisions and they’re signed off, and the 
politician shouldn’t be involved in these decisions. 
 
And you know, mistakes are made. And so it would be really 
useful when we are having these kinds of discussion that we 
don’t play the blame game. Blaming doesn’t help. Sometimes 
officials make mistakes and ministers aren’t necessarily 
involved in it. Mr. Speaker, who said that was none other than 
the former member for Saskatoon Nutana, Pat Atkinson, just a 
few short years ago. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, my question was a pretty 
straightforward one. And it was actually for the Premier 
because it was the Premier who said yesterday that he 
understood why the SaskPower minister didn’t know about the 
smart meter problems in other jurisdictions. And the reason the 
Premier gave for the minister’s ignorance was that the 
information was not readily available to the minister. 
 
My question’s not to the minister who shouldn’t be a minister. 
My question is to the Premier. So again my question to the 
Premier: did the minister actually tell him that information 
wasn’t readily available? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when the government learned that there was problems with 
respect to the smart meter program here in Saskatchewan, we 
immediately took some steps. We directed SaskPower to stop 
the installation and start the removal of them. In addition to 
that, we went to work with Sensus to recover the money that 
has been spent on the program, which we did. In addition to 
that, we immediately called for a review, and the review is in 
and has indicated where there was problems. We have now 
directed all of the Crown corporations to take a look at the 
recommendations that the reviews came up with, and they have 
done that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe that the government has acted in an appropriate way, 
Mr. Speaker. And when it comes to simple questions, the 
member opposite was asked a pretty simple question yesterday. 
And that question was, do you have an alternative, someone 
you’d like to see that SaskPower would use other than Sensus? 
And you know what the member opposite’s response was 
actually, Mr. Speaker? Those are technical questions that 
politicians shouldn’t be in a position to direct. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — For that minister and for the Premier to 
claim that information about the smart meter problems in other 
jurisdictions wasn’t readily available is absolute nonsense, Mr. 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5595 

Speaker. 
 
I understand that the minister received a briefing note dated 
October 10th, 2012, a full two years ago, that laid out major 
safety concerns about Sensus meters including “. . . fires in 
homes of Philadelphia-area customers served by PECO, the 
local electrical utility.” To the Premier: did he know the 
SaskPower minister was briefed on major safety concerns, 
including house fires, way back in October of 2002? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, there are . . . When you look 
at this program, you have to ask yourself, has this been handled 
appropriately by the government? Has it been handled 
appropriately by the government? And if you look at the 
independent commentators around this, and the most recent one 
was the Leader-Post editorial board of October 28th: 
 

The smart meter episode has been an ugly one and we 
commend the government for tackling it head on and 
stepping in to halt it and order the meters removed once it 
was realized [that there were] lives were at risk and quickly 
making public a report that pulls no punches. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the appropriate steps were taken by this 
government all the way through this, and we’ll continue to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question, Mr. Speaker, was to the 
Premier. The minister answering never gave any reference of 
the briefing note in 2012, two years ago, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier gave responsibility for SaskPower to the member from 
Kindersley in May, on May 25th, 2012. And just four months 
later, in October 2012, the member for Kindersley in his 
capacity as Minister Responsible for SaskPower was given a 
briefing note by officials at SaskPower. The briefing note that 
raises major concern about safety was prepared for the minister 
by SaskPower’s chief operating officer who’s now the CEO 
[chief executive officer].  
 
And insiders have told us that this issue was the subject of a 
face-to-face meeting between then CEO Robert Watson and that 
minister in October 2012, a full two years ago. To the Premier: 
with a briefing note and face-to-face briefings, how can the 
government possibly claim that that information about safety 
concerns was not available to their government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this day I had a 
conversation, a long conversation with and meeting with the 
new CEO of SaskPower, Mr. Mike Marsh. We went through all 
of the recommendations that have been laid out in the report. 
We talked about them in great length. SaskPower has accepted 
all of the recommendations and will be moving as aggressively 
as possible to implement those recommendations. 
 
And I think what it says is that the appropriate steps have been 
taken. There has been, accountability has taken place with 
respect to this, and the government will continue to move in this 

fashion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again that question wasn’t 
to the minister. It was to the Premier, and it was about the 
briefing note two years ago and his meetings on this file. 
Yesterday the media asked the SaskPower minister why he 
didn’t know anything about the problems with Sensus meters in 
the United States. The minister said, “If we aren’t provided with 
information, it’s difficult to make determinations. In this case, 
we weren’t provided with any information that there were 
problems with the meters.” That’s what the minister said 
yesterday. 
 
But in October 2012, we are told the minister was presented 
with information from SaskPower officials about major safety 
concerns related to Sensus meters in the United States. To the 
Premier: what will he do now that he knows that serious 
information was readily available and conveyed to that 
minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to embark 
upon the changes that are necessary with respect to the smart 
meter program. We will continue to do exactly what the report 
outlined in detail here in Saskatchewan. We will continue to do 
the appropriate steps. 
 
We’ll continue not to take the advice of the member opposite, 
which is to spend money willy-nilly as they did for years when 
they were in government. We will continue to do . . . We won’t 
be dragged through court like the members opposite were in the 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company] fiasco here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’ll continue to try and recover taxpayers’ dollars, as is 
the appropriate thing. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to remind members to put their 
questions and comments through the Chair and not direct them 
personally to any member in the House. I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — To the minister: does he remember the 
briefing in October of 2012? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, if you look at what 
independent commentators are saying with respect to this, it 
says that there are a number of commentators that have weighed 
in on this important subject. The StarPhoenix editorial board 
made the comments just a few short days ago: 
 

The Wall government deserves credit not only for 
intervening swiftly in the wake of eight fires in meters 
supplied by U.S. manufacturer Sensus and ordering 
SaskPower to immediately begin replacing the 105,000 
installed units, but also for ordering an investigation into 
both the causes of the fires and the procurement process. 

 



5596 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister: 
does he remember the briefing he received in 2012? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we always rely on the advice 
and judgment of the officials when it’s presented to us. They 
give us advice on a regular basis. We certainly understand that. 
When you take a look at what the officials have provided us, we 
always take a look at those kinds of recommendations and, if 
needed, we move in an appropriate fashion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we have a briefing note 
that that minister received. We understand that that minister 
was briefed two years ago, more than two years ago by the then 
CEO of SaskPower, yet that minister has been pretending that 
he wasn’t aware of any of the problems with Sensus. 
 
Back to the minister: does he remember the briefing note? Does 
he remember his face-to-face meeting? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower 
officials advised the government on a number of occasions that 
there were problems with the smart meter program. In addition 
to that, they outlined individual concerns as they happened here 
in Saskatchewan. They advised us that there was concerns, but 
they also advised us that these were within the industry level 
and tolerances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after there were seven incidents here in 
Saskatchewan, the government took what I believe is the 
appropriate action and asked for and directed SaskPower to 
remove all of those meters, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what is 
exactly is taking place right now in Saskatchewan. The removal 
is taking place. We’re doing the appropriate steps, and 
commentator after commentator agrees with that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this minister is absolutely 
skirting around his ministerial responsibility, and his argument 
that he didn’t know about the issues doesn’t hold water, Mr. 
Speaker. The facts suggest something else. I’ll tell you 
something that the minister said, I believe, just in the last day or 
two. That SaskPower minister said, “If there was information 
presented and we didn’t act upon it, clearly there would be a 
problem with that and I would resign.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we understand that the fact of the matter is 
that information was presented to that minister. He didn’t know 
about major safety concerns related to . . . He did know about 
major concerns related to Sensus, and he didn’t bother to act on 
that information. And he spent the last several days and this 
time in question period, continuing his claim that he didn’t 
know anything. 
 
My question is to the Premier or the Deputy Premier: how can 

they stand by this minister? Why won’t they do the right thing 
and turf him today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member 
from Rosemont has asked a number of questions in the last few 
days that lead to a lot of questions from this side of the House 
and, I think, from the public. 
 
The public wants to see leadership by this government. The 
public wants to see leadership by this minister, Mr. Speaker. 
And let me tell you, there has been leadership. There has been 
leadership. For the member opposite to stand, and yesterday in 
a scrum when asked, as the minister has already mentioned, do 
you have an alternative? You know what the member from 
Rosemont said? He said, “Well I mean those are technical, 
technical questions that, you know, politicians wouldn’t be in 
the position to be directing.” That’s what the member said, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So for that member to suggest that there has not been 
leadership, the fact that we have regained all the money, that we 
have moved forward with replacement of smart meters is the 
right thing to have been done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Support for Creative Industries 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Prior to becoming the Minister for Parks, 
Culture and Sport, the member for Regina Coronation Park 
frequently told members of the film industry that he disagreed 
with the Premier’s decision to yank the carpet right out from 
under the film industry in our province. 
 
To that minister: does he still disagree with the Premier’s 
ill-advised decision to scrap the film employment tax credit, 
and what is he going to do to restore our once-thriving film 
industry? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I almost 
thank the member opposite for the question. Nothing’s changed, 
Mr. Speaker. I absolutely agree with the decision of this 
government in regards to the FETC [film employment tax 
credit]. This government isn’t reinstating the film employment 
tax credit. In place of that, we’ve added in Creative 
Saskatchewan. And Creative Saskatchewan, Creative 
Saskatchewan’s in place in order to support all of the creative 
industries. 
 
So we’ve agreed to disagree with SMPIA [Saskatchewan Media 
Production Industry Association], Mr. Speaker, and we’re going 
to move forward. I suggest that the NDP move forward as well, 
with SMPIA and the rest of the creative industries. And I’m 
assuming from the member’s question opposite that disagrees 
with the fact that all the creative industries are being supported 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5597 

now for the first time ever. So thank you. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I suspected the minister would refer to 
Creative Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. He needs to take a look at 
what’s happening there. It’s clear that’s not doing the trick, and 
he needs to take a close look at that. It’s shameful that this new 
minister has changed his position on this issue just to please the 
Premier. Here’s what our Premier had to say on July 9th, and 
this is a quote. He quoted: 
 

I would be happy to agree if we could have other premiers 
in this country saying we ought not to have grants to any 
particular sectors. I’d agree with that, including the film 
sector, including any creative industry. 

 
So the Premier opposes any incentives for creative industries 
and wants to see them eliminated right across the country but, 
on the other hand, he is bringing in a new tax incentive. This 
one is for manufacturing and processing. Maybe it will be 
available to the film industry. To the minister: will this new tax 
incentive apply to those who manufacture films and export 
cultural products here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re going 
to continue to support the creative industries through Creative 
Saskatchewan, and there are grant programs in place with 
Creative Saskatchewan. We’re happy to support the creative 
industries. We’ll continue to support them. And as for the 
members opposite, who never supported any of the other 
creative industries, this government will continue to support 
them now and into the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 144, The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 144, The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment 
Act, 2014 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 145, The 
Fee Waiver Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act be now introduced and 
read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 146, The 
Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 146, The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2014 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/ 
Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 147, The 
Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 



5598 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics 
Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant 
la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l'état civil 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move Bill No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 be 
now introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 149, The 
Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved Bill No. 
149, The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 150, The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 
2014 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 
modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 152, 
The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 152, The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced and 
read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5599 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, asking leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The member is asking leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a very good friend of mine from Yorkton in the west 
gallery, Mr. Scott Fitzsimmons. Scott is a key person at 98.5 
Christian radio, the Rock, in Yorkton, and a program director, 
host of drive at 5, and a bunch of other things that he does there. 
 
He also just started an online venture, Game Time Radio, 
gametimeradio.ca. He’s a huge sports fan. This fits right in with 
his interests. He’s doing the online sportscasting. Again he’s a 
great sports fan. I’m not going to even mention what team he 
cheers for when it comes to football. 
 
But he’s a great guy, great young family — a set of twins and a 
new one recently. He’s helping to grow the province, grow 
Saskatchewan, grow Yorkton. I’d ask all members to join with 
me in welcoming Scott Fitzsimmons to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 
Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is a pleasure to stand and talk to this House. First of all I’d 
like to add my condolences to the families of Corporal Cirillo 
and Warrant Officer Vincent on that tragedy of last week. 
 
I also want to recognize the men and the women who play that 
important role of protecting our communities and our country 
and our province, Mr. Speaker. These men and women stand for 
protection and for security. They stand for democracy and for 
peace and for order and for freedom, freedom at any price. God 
bless the men and women who are there to defend the rights and 
the liberties of our country and to stand on guard. May we never 
forget and always be grateful for those who serve and those 
who dedicate their lives for providing us with the freedom that 
we enjoy. 

Mr. Speaker, as we enter the Speech from the Throne debate, it 
gives me an opportunity to say thanks to a lot of people in 
Moose Jaw North, a lot of people starting with my wife, who is 
very supportive, and my children, my four children, Brent and 
Krista, Kimberly and Paul, and also my five grandchildren. And 
I’m just kind of watching my watch as time goes by because 
there’ll be a sixth grandchild that is being a little, couple of days 
late now. So any hour or any minute, we could get a message 
that we have another grandchild in our midst. 
 
Beyond that, this past summer’s been an exciting one in Moose 
Jaw and Moose Jaw North. Probably one of the most significant 
of the events was the significant nomination process that was 
involved, and I want to thank a number of people of Moose Jaw 
North. And I was very humbled of the number of constituents 
who got involved with that democratic process and, like I said, 
there are many to thank — more than 465 members that were 
involved, and I certainly appreciate their support in the 
democratic process. 
 
The reason that this was partly very momentous was the fact 
that at that nomination meeting there were over — over — 900 
people that attended. And it was probably the biggest one-night 
event in Moose Jaw so far this year, when you consider, Mr. 
Speaker, that in contrast the NDP in their provincial convention 
in Moose Jaw just four days prior had attracted only about 230 
delegates. So I thought that was very significant in the process. 
And it really shows the strength of our government and our 
party in the democratic process, and it shows the incompetency 
of the NDP. And people all across Saskatchewan are starting 
more and more to realize the strength of this government and 
this party. 
 
And the people are realizing the NDP incompetency, and they 
have a record to prove it, Mr. Speaker. NDP incompetency in 
leadership like the Lingenfelter logic that does a lot of babble 
but makes no sense. The NDP incompetency in policy and that 
may not be fair to say because really they have no policy. The 
NDP incompetency in bad fiscal management. The NDP 
incompetency in their agricultural support, and we’ve all seen 
that over the years that they were in power. We’ll talk about the 
NDP incompetency in health care. Mr. Speaker, they closed 54 
hospitals and laid off a lot of the medical professionals. They 
have the NDP incompetency in seniors’ assistance. And of 
course we know the NDP incompetency in infrastructure, in 
highways, in schools. 
 
[14:30] 
 
It’s obvious that people’s interest in Saskatchewan is for a 
strong future and for the strength Saskatchewan has achieved 
under positive leadership and fiscal discipline. That’s the record 
of this Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we can talk about record population, 
and we will, because of the population increases that we’ve 
seen over the past several years. We can talk about record 
employment, and we do, because we’ve created more jobs than 
we’ve seen over several decades. We can talk about the low 
unemployment record, and we will do that too, because 
Saskatchewan again leads the nation in unemployment. And we 
can talk about record tax reductions and lower debt. These are 
all important to the people of Saskatchewan. 



5600 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, there is a line in the Speech from the Throne that 
points out the true strength of our province is found in the 
compassion and generosity of its people. It is that strength that 
this side of the House believes in. It is the strength of seven 
years of leadership, of vision, of growth, and thus the theme of 
the Speech from the Throne, “Keeping Saskatchewan Strong.” 
 
Where does this Saskatchewan strong originate from? Well you 
might say it’s government. But government is in general, as 
government, we’ve had government right since our inception in 
1905. We may say it’s in the agriculture. Well we’ve had 
agriculture for 110 years as well and beyond. Could it be in the 
oil and gas that’s below the surface? Or in the potash? We’ve 
now started two new mines, the first new mine in over 40 years 
with K+S in Moose Jaw and BHP Billiton near LeRoy, 
Saskatchewan. Or in the opening of a new Cameco Cigar Lake 
mine for uranium? 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are all resources, and these resources have 
been part of the province forever. It is just that we are now in a 
position that they’re being developed, and the incompetency of 
the NDP are no longer in power. They never developed any of 
these for the good and the benefits of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So keeping Saskatchewan strong centres around the confidence 
of our people. It is the people. It is our citizens. More than any 
single factor, it’s the people of the province that provide us with 
strength, and thus the Saskatchewan motto, “from many 
peoples, strength.” It’s all part of keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Her Honour stated in the Speech from the Throne 
the true strength of the province is found in the compassion and 
generosity of its people. What we might add as well as 
compassion and generosity: the ingenuity, the persistence, and 
the work ethic and the leadership and the vision and the attitude 
and the commitment and the caring. This is what makes 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for decades the incompetency of the NDP . . . Our 
people fled this golden province. Saskatchewan’s population 
fluctuated around that million mark ever since 1928-29, along 
in there. Our population remained stagnant while our children 
left the province for other jurisdictions, and there was no 
growth and there was no strength. 
 
The vision of the future became prominent to those who chose 
to stay. The leadership that changed attitudes and set forth a 
vision of growth and economic gain, this is the strength 
Saskatchewan is experiencing today. This is the strength 
whereby we continue keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Keeping Saskatchewan strong is about developing our resources 
for the benefit of our people. It’s about increasing productivity. 
It’s about increasing trade and trade opportunities. It’s about 
transportation in a landlocked province. It’s about education. 
It’s about caring for people. It’s about vision and understanding. 
It is about people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007 Saskatchewan has seen tremendous 
growth. Our province continues to grow with more people, with 
more people working, while having the lowest unemployment 
rate in Canada. We see increases in weekly incomes. We now 

have lower taxes. We’ve increased funding to cities and 
municipalities through an improved revenue-sharing program. 
We’ve improved highways. 
 
The incompetency of the NDP closed 176 schools during their 
time in office. The new strength of Saskatchewan, the new 
strength has us building schools — 40 new schools being built 
or in the planning stages. That’s keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re keeping our children here in the province to 
work and establish careers as well. We’re retaining educated 
young adults with some of the most attractive student programs 
in the country: the graduation retention program for 
post-secondary graduates who stay in Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan grant for education savings, the Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship for those entering post-secondary 
education. 
 
The incompetent NDP not only closed 176 schools, Mr. 
Speaker, they closed 52 hospitals. But now Saskatchewan’s 
strength comes from improving health care, with over 400 more 
doctors. And the number of nurses in all designations has 
increased by more than 2,600. We have new health care homes, 
we have health care facilities like the children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon, the new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, 
and of course the new hospital in Moose Jaw which, Mr. 
Speaker, will include an MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] 
unit. This will be the first MRI unit to operate outside of our 
two major centres and is scheduled to be open next summer. 
That’s the strength of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have lowered surgical wait times and increased the number 
of drugs in our formulary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can feel the strength of the province and the 
leadership in our people. The true strength of our province is 
found in our people. 
 
The Speech from the Throne highlights a number of 
strengthening prospects and I’d like to touch on a couple of 
others. Mr. Speaker, the reintroduction of the Saskatchewan 
infrastructure growth initiative for municipalities’ finance 
infrastructure. This program provides interest rate subsidies for 
up to five years on municipal borrowing for infrastructure 
development. You know, I can see this is a great opportunity for 
Moose Jaw and every municipality in Saskatchewan in need of 
significant infrastructure investments. And this program will 
work well with the revenue-sharing program that this 
government brought in back in 2008. Moose Jaw’s share of that 
revenue-sharing program increased from $2.8 million to $6.8 
million from 2007-08 to this fiscal year. That keeps 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
We’re also seeing substantial investment in new housing, 
especially in Moose Jaw, with 145 social housing units being 
constructed or being in the planning stage. That keeps 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
The development of the poverty reduction strategy will further 
assist a number of low-income families and people in need in 
our province. That’s keeping Saskatchewan strong. The 
community rink affordability grant is also available to assist 
communities in the operation of skating rinks and curling rinks. 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5601 

That’s keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Another beneficial program that will increase the scope and 
service that can be provided by pharmacists. This will enhance 
the practice of pharmacists by giving them the authority to 
administrate vaccinations and other drugs as well as ordering, 
accessing, and using lab tests, and that is keeping Saskatchewan 
strong. 
 
The new-growth tax incentive for manufacturers is a program 
that I am confident that will be well received by the 
Saskatchewan manufacturers. Mr. Speaker, since 2007 
Saskatchewan manufacturing shipments have climbed by more 
than 50 per cent and that’s substantial to our province. Back in 
June of this year the Premier asked me if I would act as the 
Legislative Secretary for the Minister of the Economy for 
manufacturing, and I was pleased to do so. And over the last 
five months, I visited dozens of manufacturers across 
Saskatchewan and there’s many, many more that I want to get 
out and see. 
 
Major manufacturers like Brandt Industries and Bourgault 
Industries do a lot for this province. When I think of Bourgault 
Industries, they’ve attracted other industries into this small 
community and have really created a community atmosphere 
that has grown the community with a lot of the input that they 
do there. But it’s not only the major manufacturers that create 
employment and build communities that add the strength to 
Saskatchewan, and when you think of manufacturing, you 
generally think of farm machinery. And I don’t want to 
minimize the strength of agricultural manufacturing but when 
you think of places like Honey Bee Manufacturing in Frontier 
or Dave Dietrich’s Flexxifinger in Assiniboia or Gary 
LaRocque’s Power Pin in Fort Qu’Appelle, and many brilliant 
minds in developing better agricultural products for our 
agricultural producers to feed a growing global appetite, they all 
are part of keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
The ingenuity of Saskatchewan people goes far beyond the 
manufacturing of farm equipment, Mr. Speaker. I’ve met with a 
number of owners and managers and I had the privilege of 
seeing many of the manufacturing components in some of our 
major centres that are made right here in Saskatchewan. One of 
them was a mounting that goes on a ship for the drilling of oil 
in the ocean. That’s made right here in Saskatchewan. There’s 
another cone that was designed and built for the potash industry 
that will be at K+S just north of Moose Jaw and elements that 
will go into research for oil in northern Alberta as well as 
Saskatchewan. There’s other manufacturing goods of electronic 
components, of diodes and connectors and resistors and sensors 
and a lot of these things that we are manufacturing right here in 
this province and that happen to help be the future of this 
province. 
 
There are manufacturing initiatives like Failure Prevention 
Services in Watson, Vecima Networks, JNE Welding, and 
Mitsubishi Hitachi Power products and Superior Cabinets of 
Saskatoon, as well as Windows Plus and manufacturing in 
Moose Jaw, and processors like Mitch’s Meats near Assiniboia 
and Thunder Creek Pork and Agrocorp International in Moose 
Jaw — all these great, wonderful processors and manufacturers 
that are helping Saskatchewan be strong, all keeping 
Saskatchewan strong. 

Mr. Speaker, there are dozens and dozens of gracious 
manufacturers and processors in Saskatchewan that provide 
great economic strength in keeping Saskatchewan strong. Part 
of that success is derived from such things as the Global 
Transportation Hub, which helps with our transportation needs. 
I also want to recognize the assistance of the Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership and what they have done and 
continue to do, the tremendous work in promoting and 
exporting Saskatchewan products all around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a gracious province with great 
leadership, with lots of resources and ingenuity that will take 
this province well into the future, and it’s keeping 
Saskatchewan strong. The Speech from the Throne reflects our 
strength and our commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne 
and I will not be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
It is a privilege to rise in the House. Any time you get to 
respond to either the budget or the Speech from the Throne and 
talk a little bit more about kind of where you come from and 
who has got you here, for example, it is a pleasure because 
often when we get to speak it’s on a specific issue. But certainly 
the Speech from the Throne and the budget gives all of us a 
little more latitude to talk about other things that kind of put us 
in this spot. 
 
And I, as is tradition, want to thank a number of people that 
allow me to do my job, whether it’s the MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for Indian Head-Milestone, which is by 
far the most important job that I have, and the second job that I 
would have would be serving in the cabinet under our Premier, 
and that is certainly a privilege too. There have been some 
changes on that front as far as the responsibilities that I have. 
And it has been an interesting summer over the past four 
months to five months learning and getting up to speed on the 
various files that I have responsibility for, whether it’s 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, whether it’s CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] or Crown 
Investments Corp., whether it’s lean, whether it’s Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming, whether it’s the Public Service 
Commission, a number of different responsibilities, and I’ve 
enjoyed my time over the past number of months learning those 
different portfolios, at least getting a start to learn some of the 
issues in those portfolios. I certainly don’t profess to know all 
the issues that are going on in those areas but I’m starting to 
understand a little bit better. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But before I get into what I want to say on the Speech from the 
Throne, I do want to thank a number of people that are, again, 
allowing me to do my work. And most importantly that allow 
me to stand in this position here today would be the constituents 
and the people of Indian Head-Milestone. A strong community, 
I guess a little bit like the Speech from the Throne. A strong 
community, but for . . . A strong constituency based on 
agriculture, whether it’s in the Avonlea, Rouleau, Milestone 
area, all the way up to Fort Qu’Appelle which is a little bit more 



5602 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

tourism; Indian Head, kind of the home of the research farm 
and formerly the PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration] and really kind of a leading-edge agriculture 
area. 
 
I just am really blessed when I get to go to the various parades 
around the constituency, whether I get to go to the odd fowl 
supper, which is fowl supper season right now — that’s a tough 
one to say — but I certainly enjoy my time when I get out into 
the constituency. 
 
I had a great day last Friday. I went out to Sedley and got to 
speak, meet with some of the kids that go to school there. I read 
a book to the grade 1 and 2, which I don’t read very often out 
publicly, and you can tell by my speeches that I don’t read very 
often publicly. But I got to speak to the grade 1 and 2’s and read 
a book that I had read many, many times when our boys were 
growing up. And then I also spent some time with the grade 4 
and 5 and then 5, 6, 7, and 8’s. And it was interesting the 
questions and the understanding that they have of our political 
system. I want to credit the teachers in that school and all the 
support staff for doing a great job. Well-behaved kids. Great 
questions. 
 
But those are the times and the examples that really, when I get 
to stand in this place representing all those views and all those 
people, it truly is a humbling experience to think that, you 
know, there are roughly 18 to 20,000 people that live in the 
constituency that I represent. And I’ve been given the honour 
and been blessed to be able to express their views on what they 
think is going on in the province. And you know, we don’t all 
agree on every issue but certainly it is a strong constituency 
with strong, strong people that are hard working and just want a 
fair shake and believe, I think, that we’re getting that fair shake 
in the province right now. 
 
There isn’t a member in here that doesn’t do their work for their 
constituents without a strong constituency assistant. And I think 
we’d all stand in here, at least I will, I’ll say I’ve got the best. 
And probably the member from North Battleford or Cut 
Knife-Turtleford would say they have the best. But I certainly 
am very fortunate to have Nicole Entner-McCullough run my 
office. They have two young girls growing up in the Balgonie 
area and her husband owns a . . . is partners in a fertilizer and 
chemical company. Really kind of the bedrock of a 
constituency, and she does great work in my office in Balgonie 
and I want to thank her for that. 
 
Also I want to thank the staff that I have in my ministerial 
office in this building. That has changed as of changing in 
responsibility. But I’ve been very, very fortunate to work with a 
very strong chief of staff and ministerial assistant and other 
assistants, administration assistants, that give me the 
information that I need to go to the events that I go to. If I have 
to do any media, they certainly have me briefed up very well. 
So I am very fortunate in that front as well. 
 
The other area I just really briefly touch on is of course we 
don’t get to stand in this place without probably strong family 
backing us up, whether it’s spouses and kids or extended 
family. And I’m fortunate that way. I will just quickly say that 
it has been an interesting year and a half to two years, because 
normally when I would be in my constituency or talking to 

people in the general public, they’d wonder how your life is 
going as an MLA. But they don’t ask me that question anymore. 
In fact they really don’t care what’s going on in my life. They 
really care about more what’s going on our boys’ lives as far as 
what they’re doing right now. And I will say just briefly, 
they’re living a dream. I could only dream that life. They’re 
living a dream and right now they are in California. They are on 
their way to Vancouver tomorrow. They are coming home 
finally — only for a couple days — and they are going to be 
speaking at the Milestone sportsman dinner, which should be 
kind of interesting. Scary, because that’s in my constituency. So 
I may not win a poll there now. 
 
But certainly they’ve kind of started on this speaking tour and 
this is about their fifth or sixth appearance that they speak 
together. And so I’m kind of looking forward to it. I’ve only 
seen about 20 or 30 seconds of their presentation so I’m looking 
forward to seeing what they have to say. But I think — I think 
— and what I hope it is, is thanking, you know, probably for the 
support, but the province for the support. You know, they were 
very, very fortunate in that they got to be on a number of 
provincial teams, whether it was when they were wakeboarding 
and the support from Sask Sport and SaskCulture and Sport, 
Culture and Rec, or whether it is the snowboarding team that 
they were on, that they were kind of founders of, but the 
province has been very, very supportive all the way along on 
our elite athletes, on all of our athletes, but elite athletes. And I 
think and I hope — not that I get to see their speaking notes 
because I guess I don’t show them mine — but that I’ll get to 
see their speaking notes and hopefully they have something to 
say about the support that this province has had. And I think 
that’s why they want to come back and talk about, you know, 
they’ve got to where they are because of where they have come 
from, and that is in large part because of support, again, across 
the province, but also some small financial support provincially. 
 
I also want to just touch on, and it’s I guess really poignant as 
so many other MLAs on both sides of the House have spoke 
regarding the incidents that happened a week ago today. It’s 
hard to believe it was a week ago today, what happened in 
Ottawa. And you know, the cowardly act of course has been 
mentioned many times, and the death of Corporal Cirillo and 
the tragedy around that. But I really want to acknowledge our 
protective services — RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police], city police, first responders — so many of those people 
that work so hard to make sure that we are safe, not only on our 
day-to-day lives, whether it’s on the roads or city streets, 
wherever, but especially in facilities like this, that it is a 
struggle, no doubt. 
 
In Ottawa for sure, we are probably going to have more of a 
conversation about it here in Saskatchewan, about making sure 
that these buildings are accessible and we as public figures are 
accessible, but making sure that we’re safe as well. Because you 
know that there’s people, number one, they sometimes don’t 
believe in the same beliefs, but there’s also people that, you 
know, are struggling with many . . . whether it’s addictions or 
mental illness and, you know, just aren’t thinking straight. 
 
And so how do you balance that between protection of elected 
officials and the freedom to access those elected officials? And 
so again it was . . . I think for anybody that work in these 
buildings or know people that work in these buildings, their 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5603 

eyes were glued to the sets, of course, all last Wednesday. And 
then the fallout since that time to where we are today, which is 
a one-week anniversary, and I can’t believe how quickly that 
time flies. So that’s a little bit about the thank yous, and I 
certainly am fortunate. 
 
What I do want to talk a little bit now is getting to the Speech 
from the Throne. I would hate to . . . Shoot, my watch is not 
working here. So I’m sure it’s only been a couple minutes, but 
when I get to 20 minutes, somebody please tell me. 
 
I do want to talk about the Speech from the Throne that was 
delivered. I hate to say I don’t know if I responded to everyone 
since 1999 — can you believe that, member from Estevan, that 
we’ve been here that long? — but I have responded to most of 
them. And you know, it’s always an interesting time to hear the 
debate back and forth. And some would question whether it’s 
really debate. The opposition don’t like it and the government 
just all likes it, and that’s just the way it is, back and forth. 
 
But it is interesting to look at the different perspectives of what 
the opposition has to say regarding the Speech from the Throne, 
what we have to say, of course, regarding the Speech from the 
Throne. But I try and contrast that, and I try and compare it to 
what I hear on the streets on a day-to-day basis. Now the people 
on the streets of Balgonie or Fort Qu’Appelle or Vibank or any 
of the communities that I represent may not refer to items 
specific in the Speech from the Throne. They may not talk 
about, you know, whether it’s the education spending or the 
highways spending or the workforce spending. But what they 
tend to talk about is the direction of the province and how the 
province is doing. What I hear from the constituents that I 
represent is very, very closely matched to what is spoken about 
in the Speech from the Throne. And if it isn’t item specific, Mr. 
Speaker, what it tends to be is it is very specific on the theme. 
And the theme is Keeping Saskatchewan Strong. And that’s 
what people feel in the province right now. 
 
I can honestly say from 1999 to 2014, today, there has been a 
marked change in the attitude of people within this province. I 
don’t think in 1999 or 2000, 2001-02, up to 2007, I saw many 
speeches from the throne that would talk about a strong 
province. It would maybe talk about, no one gets left behind. 
That’s a little bit different than strong. I just don’t remember 
any of the conversation on the streets, the conversation in this 
building kind of matching up to where it does match up today. 
 
Keeping Saskatchewan strong, being positive, a positive 
outlook into the future, a strong economy, a strong government, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what people are seeing throughout the 
province. And that’s why it’s always interesting when I hear 
opposition members that really don’t have much positive to say 
about the Speech from the Throne. Now perhaps only the 
negative people live in those constituencies; perhaps there are. 
And believe me, I have some that don’t care for the way we 
may operate as a government, but each and every one of them, 
there are very few, more than one, there are very few that would 
say the province is going backwards — very, very few. 
 
They all believe that we’re going in the right direction. They 
may not like the exact direction our government is moving, but 
they also believe that the province is in a much better place in 
2014 than it was in 2004. In fact, I believe to a person that they 

would believe the province is strong. 
 
It’s a long, long ways from some of the words that we used to 
hear in opposition days when . . . I remember and I have great 
respect for the former premier, Lorne Calvert. Again, him 
sitting on this side of the House, and I was sitting on that side 
the whole time that he was premier, not agreeing with a lot of 
the . . . not disagreeing with everything that he did, but not 
agreeing with a lot of what he did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the one thing that I really struggled, when he would go to 
other provinces or abroad and he’d talk about the wee province, 
wee province. And I tell you, that really cut to my soul. I mean, 
are we Ontario as far as population? Or are we Quebec as far as 
geographic size? Absolutely not. But our province, I would 
believe right now in the Dominion, save for maybe Alberta, is 
the strongest province in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I will 
guarantee you that you will never hear from our Premier going 
around trying to sell your province as the wee province, Mr. 
Speaker. That just is not, not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the other statements that we heard when 
the NDP were in government is . . . I remember asking the very 
question about, we should set targets for the number of nurses. 
And we set a target for the number of nurses because we 
thought the only way a government can be held to account is to 
set a benchmark and then try and get there, and asking the 
members opposite, why wouldn’t you set a target? And it was 
interesting because the member from Saskatoon Nutana was 
saying that there just are not enough targets in the Speech from 
the Throne. But when they were on this side of the House, when 
we asked, would you set a target? They would say, well we 
don’t want to set targets because there’s a good chance we’re 
just not going to make it. You know, that’s hardly a reason to 
not set a target. So you go from that sort of mentality and 
psychological leadership to where we are today, keeping 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
There was another member from Prince Albert, I remember 
when he was in here I had the opportunity — and I don’t know 
if I’ll say fortune — but I had the opportunity to serve. And he 
would always talk about when there was population decline, 
when the population, the kids were leaving the province, and it 
was our kids leaving the province, Eldon would always say that, 
you know, yes, it’s maybe not exactly what we want to have 
happen, but the best part is there’s more left for the rest of us. If 
they leave, then we’re okay, because we get more. I mean that’s 
the exact opposite thinking of where the province is today. We 
are doing everything in our power, whether it’s the graduate 
retention program, whatever the program may be, to make sure 
that we retain all of these that want to stay here, attract youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve never seen such a low unemployment rate, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve never seen so many people work in this 
province. We’ve never seen higher wages, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
a strong province, Mr. Speaker. That isn’t saying there’ll be 
more left for the rest of us. 
 
The Premier’s used this kind of rationale before and it really is 
interesting. I’d hate to be a luggage salesman in Saskatchewan 
right now, because it used to be every grade 12 gift to their kids 
in grade 12 was luggage. Well you know what? Luggage sales 
have dropped an amazing amount here in Saskatchewan 



5604 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

because people are staying in this province. 
 
The last statement that I remember from the opposition was 
when we talked about population increase. And we, I remember 
well before the ’07 election, I believe it was back in 2003, we 
set a target again of what we would like to see the population be 
after 10 years. We wanted to grow at the national average of 1 
per cent. The opposition, the government at that time, when we 
talked about growing at the national average . . . Just think 
about this and how the province has turned around in 10 years. 
Growing at the national average at that time for the government 
was statistically impossible. It would be impossible for this 
province to grow at the national average. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Well we’ve far surpassed that over the last seven years, Mr. 
Speaker. We are dealing with issues of growth absolutely, but 
when you stand as a government and say, statistically 
impossible to be average in Canada, is not a strong government, 
Mr. Speaker, and doesn’t promote a strong province. That isn’t 
where we’re at today. We have a strong province, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s reflective in so many of the numbers. It’s reflective when 
you go outside the province, and it’s interesting when you go 
outside the province and how much Rider gear you see outside 
the province, which you always did, but how proud people are 
to be from Saskatchewan, if they’re outside of the province, and 
how proud they are of their home province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if anybody has been more proud than 
a transplanted Saskatchewan person of where their province is 
today. Because you know, they came from here at a time when 
it probably wasn’t doing very well and they’re reflecting back 
and they’re looking at the province — if they haven’t moved 
back already — but they’re reflecting back and seeing what a 
province could have been. And they’re all probably saying, if 
that could have only happened a number of years ago, they 
wouldn’t have had to look back and see, you know, from 
outside the province. Too bad they couldn’t be there. But there 
are more people moving back all the time. There are 
opportunities. It is phenomenal. 
 
There are a couple areas that I do want to touch on really 
briefly. I don’t know how much time I have, but a couple areas 
that we talked about in the Speech from the Throne, and I think 
this is reflective. I have been kind of listening to the opposition 
through their replies to the Speech from the Throne, but more 
importantly, I’ve been listening to the opposition over the last 
couple years to see what their options are in the province. They 
don’t like a lot of what we’re doing, and I can, you know . . . I 
mean I sat on that side for far too long — eight years. I can 
understand opposing the government. But I always remember, 
especially the last five or six years, we would oppose the 
government, absolutely oppose the direction they were going, 
and offer solutions, offer suggestions, Mr. Speaker. And for the 
life of me, I cannot remember the last time they offered a solid 
solution. 
 
Here is their solution. Health care is no good. Improve it. That’s 
what they would . . . It should be improved. Okay, how will you 
improve it? They say there should be nurse/patient ratios. Okay, 
what are the numbers? What is the nurse/patient ratio? They 
come up with virtually no ideas. They criticize and they can be 

pretty good at that, but they come up with no tangible platform 
or policy. 
 
And I know I’ve heard a couple of snipes back from the other 
side that that’s not fair or, yes, we have. Except, you know, try 
and find it on the website. Try and find it anywhere and you 
can’t see a word from the opposition as far as, okay, you don’t 
like what we’re doing; what are your options? People need to be 
able to measure that. And there is never a better time to put 
those options out than when you’re in a by-election. We’re in a 
by-election in Lloydminster and not one word as far as policy 
for the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve been very transparent. We’ve had a 
strong platform in 2007. We kept those promises. We’ve got a 
strong platform in 2011. We’ve kept those promises. And even 
in between elections, Mr. Speaker, we talk about issues and we 
try and get the general public’s opinion. 
 
Most recently, and I’m fortunate to be Minister of 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming, but most recently the 
Premier had mused about privatizing liquor stores. Should we 
have government employees selling alcohol into the general 
public? Is that the best use of our dollars when it comes to 
capital? I mean it’s one thing to just look at, so we’ve got so 
many employees, but they’re working in government stores. 
How much does it take to keep those government stores up? If 
we need to increase the number of government stores, should 
the dollars that we have as government go into capital for 
building buildings that will sell alcohol or should we . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Government 
Relations on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — To request leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Government 
Relations has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to you and through you to this Assembly, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce in your gallery, His Worship Mayor 
Greg Dionne from the city of Prince Albert. I had an 
opportunity just a few minutes ago to chat with the mayor, and 
I’m looking forward to seeing him at an event tonight. 
 
He’s here to attend meetings with the Saskatchewan city 
mayors’ caucus. And I’ll also be meeting with them more 
formally tomorrow. So I’m looking forward to the event tonight 
and also the meeting tomorrow. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
would ask all members to please give Greg Dionne a warm 
welcome to his Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of CIC. 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5605 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 
Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, so as I was saying, the 
Premier mused about privatization of liquor stores. We already 
know the opposition, of course, any change, if they can go back 
to, you know, when they were in power in 2000, 2003 and have 
it set in that time, that would be perfect because any changes 
that we’ve made, they’ve opposed — haven’t come up with any 
of themselves. But when the Premier mused about privatizing 
of liquor stores, the opposition I believe critic from Saskatoon 
Nutana said about privatizing our liquor stores, no, but not 
privatization; that isn’t on the list. In other words, absolute flat 
out no. Not whether it would make more sense, not whether the 
people of the province thought it was a good idea, just 
philosophically they’re dead set against it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we want to do, and this will roll out over that 
next couple of months, we want to have hopefully input in by 
sometime around the end of January, but hear what the public 
has to say about, should we have government employees selling 
alcohol or could we do it a better way, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And some of the assumptions that I heard the opposition . . . I 
think it’s the critic; I’m not sure, but Saskatoon Nutana, some of 
the assumptions she said in her speech yesterday were just 
absolutely wrong. And it shows I think maybe a lack of 
knowledge of the system. And so I think the big part of what we 
are trying to do over the next three or four months is, number 
one, get input back in regarding the privatization of liquor 
stores. But I think most importantly is to educate the general 
public of how we retail alcohol within the province. 
 
Most people think, well we have a public system. But we have 
really quite a mixed system of public/private. We have vendors 
in about 160, 170 locations. We have 400 outlets that sell 
alcohol, beer for example, Mr. Speaker. There’s only a small 
number of stores that are public, 75 now, and so the vast 
majority is already sold public/privately. 
 
But what should that mix look like? The member opposite said, 
well we’re making money in all our stores. That’s just not quite 
the case because you’ve got to take into consideration all the 
expenses of the store, not just lighting, not just personnel, but 
the whole capital cost, Mr. Speaker, as well as head office 
support. 
 
So what we are trying to do in this paper as we release it, is the 
first part, educate where we’ve come from regarding alcohol 
sales to where we are now. You know, in 2009 we had the 
introduction of private liquor and wine stores within our 
system, That’s the first major change in 50 years, Mr. Speaker. 
You can go all the way back to 1958 where the government at 
that time decided that women should be able to drink in public 
establishments and, you know, we’ve crossed that bridge now 

and I’m not going to comment any more on that. But, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a lot of education that needs to be done I think 
regarding the general public, as far as what type of system we 
have now along with options of what it could look like into the 
future. 
 
Maybe it’s status quo. Maybe it should stay the same. Maybe it 
should be all public. Maybe it should be all private. But there is 
a real myriad of options from one to the other. But first we kind 
of have to get an understanding of how the system works right 
now. I’m really looking forward to it over the next number of 
months to get the public’s input, not just driven on ideology, but 
on what is best for the province, what is best for the consumer. 
There are stakeholders involved. There is a whole host. And 
I’ve said before on one interview I said is that, you know, I’ve 
had the opportunity to get public input on other issues, and 
sometimes it’s really tough to get that issue in front of people 
and to get people talking about that issue. All you’ve got to do 
is talk about alcohol and I get a lot of responses, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve had no problem getting public response back in. I look 
forward to that response over the next number of months and 
then moving on from there as far as maybe a position for into 
the future. 
 
The issue I didn’t get to talk on much about is lean — I look 
forward to that on some other opportunity — and the benefits of 
lean. I would just put out one challenge to anybody on our side 
but more importantly to anybody on the opposition side. I can 
understand criticizing lean. I can understand not understanding 
lean, thinking that it’s just, like it’s just common sense; 
anybody could do that. What you need to do is tour, whether 
it’s a ministry that we’ve implemented lean, whether it’s a 
health care facility that’s implemented lean, or a health region. I 
don’t think you can ever come across credibly . . . And I think 
that’s the opposition especially leader’s problem is he’s coming 
across without any experience, without any opportunity. And 
he’s had opportunity. He’s been offered many times to get out 
and tour lean facilities, but he refuses to. He refuses to remain 
ignorant on the issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne, 
and I will not support the amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I speak once again for the people of Batoche, and I thank them 
for the privilege and the honour of being here. Also I’d like to 
thank my board of directors for their support and guidance and 
my CAs [constituency assistants], and we call them team Telfer 
that looks after the office in Cudworth. Much appreciated, and I 
thank them. 
 
I would also like to thank my wife, Valerie, for her love and 
understanding and her kind support. And just in a few days is 
November 1st and that is our anniversary, and it will be 39 
years. So I know I don’t look hardly that old, but it is there. 
 
Today I speak in reply to the Speech from the Throne. I am 
thrilled to be able to speak of the new Saskatchewan, the land of 
opportunity. And the land held so much promise when our 
forefathers first arrived here. They saw the potential of the land. 



5606 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

They saw the land with a great future. They saw a land that you 
could build dreams on. Then along came the dirty thirties, 
smashed all of those dreams. And as that was ending, here 
comes Tommy and his dream of socialism that has held us back 
for 60 years. 
 
Now we are back on track. Saskatchewan is now building, 
growing, and reaching goals that the NDP said were 
unattainable. The new Saskatchewan that is now often referred 
to has reached goals of epic proportion. Since the Saskatchewan 
Party has come to power in 2007, Saskatchewan has bloomed 
like the first flowers of spring on a dewy, sunny morning. 
Saskatchewan sparkles and glistens in the new light of the new 
Saskatchewan, and people are taking notice. Might I say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the world is taking notice. Goals that were set 
by our first premier, Sir Walter Scott, are now being achieved. 
We are once again the fastest growing province in Canada. 
 
I would now like to talk about some of the successes our 
government has made to help make this province stronger. For 
me, one of the biggest signs — and I’ve spoken of this before, 
but I must speak of it again — is K+S mines of Germany is 
back. K+S was one of the companies that the NDP drove out of 
this province when they took over the potash mines. Mr. 
Speaker, K+S has looked at the new Saskatchewan with a 
Saskatchewan Party government and they have decided to try 
again. Now they are back building a new potash mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know what the odds were of a company 
coming back after being kicked out by the NDP government? 
Mr. Speaker, they must have given a real hard look at the new 
Saskatchewan and the new government of this province. They 
had to see a strong, stable government before they said, okay, 
we’ll try again. They looked at us, we might say, through a 
powerful magnifying lens and a very sharp pencil, and they 
once again are risking millions of dollars to reinvest in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, this information was also available to the NDP. 
When they analyzed the information, they said Saskatchewan is 
sliding backwards and is bound to fail. I think the NDP needs 
some new analysts. Or is it, Mr. Speaker, that they want 
Saskatchewan to fail, not for economic reasons but purely 
political? The negative nine on the other side of the House have 
only one goal, and that is to regain power, not the betterment of 
this province but to regain power. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know that I’m a bit of a history buff, so I’d 
like to show a parallel. The location was southern USA [United 
States of America] and the time was the 1860s. It was the end 
of the Civil War and people were exploiting what they could 
from the defeated South. There were people, carpetbaggers and 
politicians, and they were given a name. That name was 
snollygoster. It means, and I quote, “self-seeker; somebody, 
especially a politician, whose actions are motivated by 
self-interest rather than high principle.” Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan doesn’t need any snollygosters. We don’t need 
any self-seekers. 
 
This province is rich with resources and blessed with a people 
who will put this province first and are willing to build their 

future and that of this province. Our government is giving them 
the tools to do the job. 
 
I must now return to some of the many successes our 
government has had in our province. Mr. Speaker, one of the 
biggest challenges we have faced and are still facing is of 
course health care. The bill for health care is a whopping 42 
cents of every tax dollar. That challenge is to get the best 
mileage for that tax dollar. To do this we brought in the lean 
program at the cost of 40 million. So far, so far the savings are 
59 million and counting. Mr. Speaker, I’d say that’s a pretty 
good start. Yes, that’s just a start. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re hearing some complaints about the lean 
program, other than our colleagues from across the aisle. But 
where are they coming from? I would say they are NDP Party 
members or strong union members. They are not your John Q. 
Public. When we talk to the public, they are impressed and 
happy with the lean program. We are also applying the lean 
principles to other departments of our government and are 
having tremendous successes. Yes, it’s not all gold, but it sure 
beats the downward spiral that health care was taking under the 
NDP. 
 
We had the longest waiting lists in all of Canada. The NDP 
were closing hospitals, and we were losing nurses and doctors. 
Now we are shortening waiting lists. The Saskatchewan Party 
government is building hospitals and reversed the outflow of 
doctors and nurses, and we are educating more doctors and 
nurses right here in Saskatchewan. We have broadened the 
prescription drug plan, and we are also building more seniors’ 
homes. 
 
Yes, there is much more to do, but these are steps in the right 
directions. It is a step forward and not a step backward like the 
now-opposition party was doing when they were in power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another huge measurement of success of 
Saskatchewan is the rating that Moody’s, one of the large 
financial institutions in North America, has given us. Moody’s 
has recently upgraded Saskatchewan to a AAA rating. That’s 
their highest possible rating, and they’re the second firm to do 
so. Mr. Speaker, the world says we are financially solid, and to 
prove it, they’ve given us a AAA rating. That’s not just words, 
that’s action. The NDP response to that has been to ignore it 
and not talk about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the past weekend I was present at what I would 
call a historic event. I was part of the grand opening of the new 
St. Louis bridge. For the Batoche constituency this is a huge 
event. In fact for Saskatchewan this is a huge, great event. The 
old bridge has served the people of Saskatchewan well, but the 
time has come for a new bridge. In fact, the time has come 20 
years ago. 
 
The government of the day, the NDP, had said we need the new 
bridge. Well they just never got around to it, and it didn’t 
happen under their watch. But the Saskatchewan Party 
government has built that bridge. History will record that on 
October 24, 2014, the Minister of Highways and the MLA for 
Batoche constituency opened the new St. Louis bridge. 
 
Another giant project that our government has undertaken is 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5607 

clean coal technology. There have been people who say it can’t 
be done, but Saskatchewan took up the challenge. The result is 
that in early October, we opened the Boundary dam 3 power 
plant with clean coal technology. More than 90 per cent of the 
CO2 emitted at Boundary dam will be captured and stored for 
use for enriched oil recovery. Mr. Speaker, that is equivalent to 
taking 250,000 vehicles off of Saskatchewan’s highways. 
People have travelled here from all over the world to see what 
Saskatchewan has done. To the people who said it couldn’t be 
done, I offer this quote: “People who say it can’t be done should 
get out of the way of the people who are doing it.” 
 
We also have now almost completed the new facility at the 
U of S [University of Saskatchewan], which is the Sylvia 
Fedoruk Canadian Centre for Nuclear Innovation. That’s quite a 
mouthful. This new laboratory will be making 
radiopharmaceuticals or, for us lay people, drugs containing 
radioactive materials. These drugs will be used to detect, 
diagnose, and treat diseases such as cancer, Alzheimer’s, 
Parkinson’s, and multiple sclerosis. Mr. Speaker, this is a giant 
step in the diagnosis and treatment of these terrible diseases. 
And to think it will be done here in Saskatchewan, not 
someplace else but right here in Saskatchewan with 
Saskatchewan uranium. This is an innovation that will touch the 
lives either directly or indirectly of every person in 
Saskatchewan. This is something we could not do or could not 
even have afforded to do in the old NDP Saskatchewan. This 
however is what is possible in the new Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Batoche constituency is made up of small 
communities. We have no cities. As a result, the people of 
Batoche constituency will be very grateful for the province’s 
revenue-sharing program, which has doubled from when the 
Saskatchewan Party first became government. The small 
communities are the backbone of this province, and our 
government is supporting them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot take leave until I speak of my passion in 
life, and that of course would be agriculture. Agriculture is still 
the heart of this province. With 47 per cent of Canada’s 
cropland, agriculture is not only important to Saskatchewan and 
Canada but to the world. In 2013 for the third year in a row we 
set a record for agriculture exports of 11.7 billion, and we have 
set a goal of 15 billion by 2020. 
 
Being a former livestock producer, I was glad to hear that 
Canada won its challenge against the USA country of origin 
labelling, better known as COOL, at the World Trade 
Organization. Saskatchewan supports free trade, and we are 
working on international trade barriers. 
 
We realize that we must also work on trade between provinces, 
and we’ve made a great start with the New West Partnership — 
so trade with Alberta, British Columbia, and Saskatchewan. 
Once again there’s more work to be done. Our government is 
also increasing rural Internet and cell service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know things have changed in 
Saskatchewan. We no longer hear the line from the NDP days, 
will the last one to leave please turn out the lights? We are now 
putting up more lights, building more schools, hospitals, and 
homes. Most importantly, we are now the place to be, not the 
place to be from. 

Mr. Speaker, as a postscript I would like to add that the member 
from Athabasca always says that we are blowing our own horn. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s better than blowing hot air. I’m very 
proud of what our government has accomplished since 
November of 2007, and this Throne Speech is another step in 
that right direction. 
 
I would now like to make a few comments about the past week. 
Over the past two days, we’ve heard a lot of very emotional and 
heartfelt words about our fallen soldiers. We’ve shown a great 
respect for the men and women of our armed services, RCMP 
and police services, and legislative security. Let’s not let it end 
there. I would suggest that each and every one of us go home 
this weekend and spread the word that November 11th is 
Remembrance Day and, to show respect, everyone should 
attend a Remembrance Day service. Let us contact our families, 
friends, neighbours, and organizations that we know, churches 
and clubs, and ask them to spread the word also. Let us as 
MLAs promote the largest Remembrance Day ceremony since 
the end of the Second World War. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today in the Assembly to add my comments to 
the reply to the Speech from the Throne. The events of October 
22nd will be forever in our minds. Our thoughts are with 
Corporal Nathan Cirillo’s family and his military family. Those 
who live for service of others will be remembered. Though we 
face troubled times, we can draw strength from the knowledge 
that our forefathers met and overcame great difficulties. May 
we face and conduct ourselves with dignity and fortitude that 
hence future generations can take equal pride in our 
achievements. As our Saskatchewan motto says, “from many 
peoples, strength,” and yesterday’s funeral of Corporal Cirillo 
has impacted so many of us, and a nation mourns. But we will 
prevail. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I will get on with the business of 
Saskatchewan, despite our challenges. Mr. Speaker, it was a 
very busy summer in Saskatchewan Rivers with many 
celebrations and happy occasions to attend with constituents, 
Saskatchewan residents, and tourists all enjoying what 
Saskatchewan Rivers has to offer. In this region where many 
lakes and beautiful parks abound, I was able to help celebrate an 
anniversary. It was the one-year anniversary of the Great Blue 
Heron Provincial Park at Emma Lake. 
 
As well we announced 35 non-electrical campsites in Anderson 
Point campground and it will receive electrical service in 29 
existing campgrounds, and Murray Point campground will have 
electrical services upgraded. Tourism is a very important part of 
this area, both economically and for a place of recreation and 
relaxation for all Saskatchewan people. I believe we had a good 
summer as the resorts, the roads, and parks were busy and well 
utilized, and as the Throne Speech indicated, our government 
has invested extensively in the provincial park system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am honoured and privileged to represent the 
people of this amazing and distinct region of this great province 
where diverse cultures have created a home side by side as 
neighbours. Where else could I attend the swirling dancers in 



5608 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

their colourful regalia at the First Nations Thanksgiving 
powwow and then go on to a wonderful Ukrainian feast? 
 
As parliamentarians, all my colleagues and I do this intricate 
dance of balancing work and family. Public events, parades, 
even shopping and weddings can become political arenas. 
However, saying that, I am grateful for the feedback from our 
constituents and welcome their honesty, faith and trust placed in 
me. I have met some great people that way, with interesting 
insights to help our great province move forward. Hopefully 
they’ll continue to approach me with their concerns and issues. 
I am also fortunate to live close to the regional and provincial 
parks as well as the national park, where I can enjoy what 
Saskatchewan has to offer our families while engaging in 
dialogue of various opinions so that I can have current feedback 
to do better. 
 
This past summer I toured across the riding of Saskatchewan 
Rivers and even further north. Wildfire management was one of 
the issues of discussion in the region. Therefore I took the 
opportunity to tour the provincial fire base along with my 
colleagues from Carrot River Valley, Prince Albert Northcote, 
and Rosthern-Shellbrook. I was impressed by the technology, 
the knowledge of the dedicated staff, and the accuracy of the 
wildfire detection equipment. During the 2013 fire season, 42 
existing wildfire detection towers across the northern forest 
were fitted with cameras. The system started operating for the 
2014 fire season. These cameras send images to the provincial 
centre where three specialists monitor images from all cameras 
and focus on the high-risk areas as required. These cameras 
operate seven days a week, and these images can be shared with 
others. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s system is the largest 
wildfire-detection camera system in North America. And as we 
stood there watching the monitor systems, we saw many images 
come across the screen from the North. We saw cars travelling, 
local bird life, and images of the trees swaying in the wind, the 
intricate close details to observe whether it was dust or smoke. 
We also learned that the provincial wildfire centre provides 
weather information critical to wildfire program operations and 
safety, information used to calculate hazards and predict fire 
behaviour, evaluate fire risk, and to manage resources 
effectively. 
 
While I was there I also had the chance to visit with a team of 
firefighters being dispatched to fight a fire, and these are the 
brave men and women from across our province. Consequently, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this summer I had the pleasure of meeting 
Hope Pederson, author of The Saskatchewan Smoke Jumpers. 
Many of these men were from the North, an area I represent, so 
their family names were very familiar to me. This is a 
remarkable story detailing the courageous young men who 
served their province by fighting forest fires in the 1950s. They 
certainly did great work to protect our Saskatchewan resources 
and have remarkable stories to tell. I then had the privilege of 
meeting some of these men at the luncheon held earlier this 
summer, and their stories were highly interesting as well. 
 
Our government believes in the protection of the environment 
and is dedicated to adding more resources to protect all of our 

communities. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this spring I was pleased to 
gather with Smeaton village council and Mayor Sonia Fidyk; 
residents; and our local MP [Member of Parliament], Randy 
Hoback, to celebrate the grand opening of the new water 
treatment plant and reservoir. The village of Smeaton is 
benefiting from infrastructure funding through the Building 
Canada Fund, a joint provincial-federal program. This project 
increases the number of households that will have access to 
improved drinking water and provides all residents with safer 
quality drinking water. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our municipal governments are on the 
front lines dealing with the opportunities and the challenges in 
our growing province. One way the government is helping is by 
providing our municipal partners with predictable funding tools 
for priority projects in their home communities. Municipalities, 
towns, and villages across the province are receiving a 
revenue-sharing increase by more than 100 per cent increase 
province-wide since 2007. One of the rural municipalities I 
represent, Buckland No. 491, has an increase of 219 per cent. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government is also evaluating an 
innovated proposal from SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities] what would use federal, provincial, and 
municipal funding to leverage private sector investment on our 
rural roads. 
 
Earlier this summer, I joined the member from Swift Current in 
Prince Albert, along with several of my colleagues, as the 
announcement was made that the province intends to fund its 
portion of a second bridge by way of a P3 project. It was also 
encouraging to see our Member of Parliament publicly inviting 
local municipalities and the province to come forward with a 
Prince Albert bridge proposal for the federal government to 
consider. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this summer I was also happy to be invited 
to view the most recent addition to the Shock Trauma Air 
Rescue Society fleet, the state-of-the-art AW139, first of its 
kind in the province. This impressive helicopter will help save 
lives through quicker flying times and the larger medical 
interior. The pilot and the additional medical staff were quite 
helpful in explaining the details of their roles in helping save 
Saskatchewan people. Our government will also continue to 
focus on retaining and attracting health care professionals. 
Since 2007 a large number of nurses has increased. I believe it’s 
2,600 has come to Saskatchewan since 2007. 
 
And as I watch the children come back into our communities 
and welcome another school year, I was proud of our 
government’s high-quality education system. It’s important to 
recognize the potential of our youth, as they will be the leaders 
of tomorrow. This government is committed to continuing work 
with all sector partners to ensure that we are meeting the needs 
of all students, no matter where they live in this vast province. 
 
I spoke to a group of school children in Big River earlier this 
year. They were well prepared with questions and ideas. I 
applaud the principal and the teachers for extending a warm 
welcome and the hospitalities of all the schools where we were 
received, whether it be at Debden or across my constituency 
over to Choiceland. Our province’s schools are a vital part of a 
strong Saskatchewan, and we will continue to invest in the 
Saskatchewan school system to meet the growth and challenges. 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5609 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also had the pleasure this summer of 
attending the Lakeland Citizen of the Year dinner where we 
celebrated a wonderful senior of 91 years. He continues to 
enjoy the sport of curling and actively volunteers. Murray Smail 
is the gentleman’s name, and we recognize and congratulate his 
accomplishments. He’s a great model to all of us. Also the 
community volunteers continue to prepare a potluck supper for 
this annual award held at the Christopher Lake Legion Hall. As 
many communities can attest to, these volunteers are the 
backbone of many events, and it’s not surprising that the 
province of Saskatchewan has the most volunteers in Canada. 
 
In reflection on the Throne Speech, our government has 
committed to serving as a strong voice for rural Saskatchewan. 
And it’s areas like this, the villages and the towns across the 
riding of Saskatchewan Rivers, that will benefit from the 
Throne Speech. 
 
Agriculture also in Saskatchewan contributes greatly to our 
economy, and our government is committed to serving as a 
strong advocate of our agricultural community. The agriculture 
sector contributes 4.5 billion to Saskatchewan’s gross domestic 
product and sustains 50,000 jobs in our province. 
 
It’s good news that SaskTel is doubling the available Internet 
speed in 220 rural communities and improving cellphone 
service in 111 rural communities, thus enabling the rural 
communities where they have businesses to be more efficient 
and more effective. This is what the public has been asking us, 
and we are delivering. I believe our government is addressing 
the needs of a growing province because of some of the issues 
I’ve discussed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on September 1st, 1905, Saskatchewan 
became a province of Canada. The pioneers of that day are the 
grandparents of many of us today. It is in large part due to the 
courage and fortitude of these early settlers that so much 
progress has been made in Saskatchewan. These settlers went 
on to fight in the world wars, and for that, we are extremely 
grateful. 
 
Today we are again discussing in our Throne Speech replies the 
progress our government has achieved in so short a time. Our 
first Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly was in 1888. The 
story of our province is now being told time and time again 
around the world. Our Saskatchewan communities have 
character, confidence, vigour, and new visions. 
 
One of my granddaughters was born on the 11th day on the 
11th month of the 11th year — Remembrance Day. And as we 
honour those who gave our lives, we also celebrate my 
granddaughter’s birthday. It is bittersweet for some of us who 
have lost those in the wars. 
 
As Remembrance Day nears, I’d like to quote Winston 
Churchill: “Never give up. Never, never give up. We shall go 
on to the end.” And so, Mr. Speaker, our values and our way of 
life will prevail. We shall prevail and go on. And in conclusion, 
I will be supporting the Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
certainly a pleasure to enter into the reply to the Throne Speech. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve participated in quite a number of these 
replies, not every one, but quite a number. 
 
And usually as customary, and I certainly follow custom, it’s an 
opportunity for members to, what I would term, give us 
comments on their constituency, the state of affairs of their 
constituency. And there’s good reason for that because there are 
things that go on in our constituencies, and if we’re not here to 
speak about them, quite often our colleagues in this House don’t 
know about them, but more importantly, the rest of the 
province. We do have a viewing audience. And I know 
sometimes the numbers go up. And I’m guessing that right now 
the numbers have gone up. Or maybe not. My parents aren’t 
here to view, watch me anymore. 
 
But before I get into what I would like to speak about, I would 
like to also, as many members of the House have done, is thank 
their families. I would like to thank Marlene and our two 
granddaughters. As I have referred to them many times, our 
little darlings, but they’re not so little anymore. The oldest, 
Tenaisha’s 17, will be graduating this spring, coming spring, 
has a number of plans for her future after high school. 
University is certainly one of them. She also is looking very 
seriously at perhaps joining a youth group and doing some 
volunteering here in Canada and in other countries in the world. 
 
The youngest one, Alyx, is in grade 7 and is one who quite 
often gets upset with me when I refer to her as my little darling, 
and she takes me to task over that. She’s quite a quick wit. 
 
And while we’re here in Regina tending to the affairs of the 
province, our families are at home. And they seem to adjust 
while we’re away, and that’s certainly the case for my family. 
In fact after a week or so of being away from home and being 
here in Regina when the House is sitting, when I do get home 
there are some difficulties that arise when I’m home on the 
Friday and over the weekends. They seem to have worked out a 
system that works quite well, and if I happen to interject into 
the system and perhaps say well, you know, why are you doing 
this or why is grandma allowing you to do that, I do now get 
pushback. 
 
I can remember not so long ago at the dinner table, I did take 
the youngest one to task. And she looks at me with a very 
serious, straight face and she says, you know what, Grandpa? 
There are days when I think I like you better when you’re in 
Regina. And upon reflection, I think she was right. Grandpa 
needs to find his role. But things, like I said, are going well. 
 
I would also like to and I certainly thank the family for all the 
support they give me and help me, enable me to do the job that 
we’re elected for. 
 
The other people that certainly assist all of us, and certainly 
that’s true in my case, is our staff in our constituency office. 
And I have very, I’m proud to say, I have very capable and 
loyal staff in my constituency office. Carol Mellnick has been 
with me for many . . . well from day one, and continues to serve 
well the people of the province ably and well.  
 
And recently we have added another person, Donna Klein, who 



5610 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

is quite new to the position, started earlier this summer, very 
capable. She was here to witness the delivery of the Throne 
Speech. It was her first time. She was very . . . She really 
appreciated being here, really felt to be included in our world, I 
guess, by being here. We did go over to Government House and 
took in the hospitality of Her Honour, and she felt that, she very 
much appreciated, Donna very much appreciated that. 
 
[15:45] 
 
But I appreciated her being here because I think it is important 
for our staff, whenever possible, to be here to see what happens 
in this Chamber and to see what happens on a special day like 
the Throne Speech. And I thank them for their loyalty and the 
good work that they do on behalf of the people of this province, 
and certainly help me look much better than I would be if they 
weren’t there. 
 
As other members have spoken about and paid their respects to 
our two fallen soldiers of last week, the tragedy that happened 
that perhaps brought a new reality to our country and to this 
province, I certainly offer my condolences to Corporal Cirillo 
and Warrant Officer Vincent’s families. And I certainly, along 
with, I’m sure, all the people of our province, value the work 
and the dedication of our armed forces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that the Board of Internal Economy in our legislature 
has met and are dealing with the issues that have arisen, 
security and so on. I know our Sergeant-at-Arms has put 
forward suggestions. I believe these suggestions have come 
forward in the past, and perhaps we need to look very closely at 
all these suggestions. 
 
But I would, I suppose, offer a word of, perhaps caution isn’t 
the right word, but perhaps a word of pause. I think we need to 
be very deliberate about what it is we will be doing. We 
certainly agree that we need to have a safe workplace for 
everyone that works in this building. And to sit and do nothing, 
I don’t believe would be appropriate. But however I think what 
we need to do is find the balance that will serve the people in 
this building, those of us that are members, but also serve the 
people of the province well. 
 
I was very pleased this afternoon when at 1:30 or just before 
1:30 when I walked in and saw the galleries quite full. It is the 
people’s building. This Chamber is their Chamber. We’re here, 
we’re elected by the people of the province to sit and speak for 
them. But it is theirs. And to reduce their ability to come and 
view the workings of this legislature, I think would be 
problematic. 
 
But having said all of that, I realize that perhaps we do need to 
change some things. And again just to re-emphasize, I think we 
need to find the balance. And I think we need to, as members, 
we need to have the proposals so that we could review of them. 
And I believe we need to have a discussion and then have a 
common decision as to what it is we will be doing to ensure that 
everyone who enters this building is safe and the measures are 
in place to deal with the new reality of the world we live in, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to I suppose present the 
Last Mountain-Touchwood report of the year. And I must say 

that 2014 has been quite a trying year in my constituency. The 
record rainfalls that we received over the year has certainly 
presented a lot of problems, created a lot of issues. The record 
rainfall in a short period of time that happened in the eastern 
side of the province at the end of June, beginning of July, we 
were severely impacted. We were much more severely 
impacted than back in 2011. And that is something that I have 
heard from the people of the constituency, whether it be RM 
[rural municipality] reeves and councillors or town councillors. 
 
The impact on the highways, we certainly did have some impact 
back in 2011 on the highways in the constituency, but that was 
more a result of the rerouting of truck traffic when the No. 1 
Highway was flooded back in 2011. It was again flooded in 
2014, and there was some rerouting of traffic but perhaps not to 
the extent that happened in 2011. 
 
But what we did have is we had one highway, Highway 22, 
with a major washout in Pearl Creek. I remember in that time 
frame when we had those heavy rains and flooding was rapidly 
happening, I did have the opportunity to do a fair bit of travel in 
the immediate area. 
 
I remember the, I believe it was the Sunday. I had to meet some 
people in Grenfell early in the afternoon, and my usual route 
going to Grenfell was through Indian Head and on over, taking 
Highway No. 1 over to Grenfell. And so I did that. Well on the 
way, going east to Grenfell, the southbound lanes of No. 1 
Highway in the Wolseley area were starting just . . . The water 
was just starting to come over the highway. There was some . . . 
Just as I got there or just before I got there, there was actually 
an RCMP officer there and he was slowing people down, and 
later on he was replaced by Highways people. 
 
I spent about an hour in Grenfell and came back the same route. 
And by the time I got back in the Wolseley area again, the water 
was coming over, by this time, over the westbound lanes, the 
north lanes. The water was coming from the south of the 
highway and flowing to the north, and there was two areas, one 
east of Wolseley and one west, I believe. And so it wasn’t a 
surprise that later in the day that the news media reported that 
Highway 1 was closed because there was a lot of water. It was 
quite fast moving. By the time I was heading back to Indian 
Head, I was quite happy I was driving my truck because I was 
really, I was concerned about if, particularly, inexperienced 
drivers in smaller vehicles if they were attempting to cross 
those flooded portions of the highway, there could’ve been 
some very unfortunate consequences of that. 
 
Highways people were out there. They were slowing people 
down and they were warning them to be cautious and careful, 
and they certainly were looking after this emergency situation. 
So that was Sunday. 
 
So Monday I received, June 30th, I received calls from mayors 
and reeves in the east part of the constituency, particularly over 
in the Neudorf area about, you know, they were quite concerned 
about the potential for highway trucks that were carrying 
primary weights coming over Highway 22 in particular, and 
they were concerned about perhaps that highway be damaged 
like it was in 2011. I believe that it didn’t happen because, well 
I did travel that area and I was told about the potential flooding 
at Pearl Creek which is quite a narrow, deep creek. It’s part of 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5611 

the Qu’Appelle River drainage system, and there is quite a high 
fill through that creek with a railway trestle, oh I don’t know, 
quarter or half a mile to the north which was blocking a lot of 
water also.  
 
So on the 30th of June, the water on the north side of the 
highway — of course the water would flow south into the 
Qu’Appelle valley — it was quite high. It was almost to the 
edge of the highway. That was the Monday, and there was 
already some flooding on Highway 10. Yes, because I did go up 
to Melville that day and come back on Highway 10 west to 
Balcarres and beyond back home. 
 
And at that time there was, in the Duff area there was . . . This 
situation was changing very rapidly. There was, flooding was 
starting to happen in the Duff area across Highway 10. And as 
you can well imagine, Mr. Speaker, the rain was falling. There 
had been a lot of rain. The water was gathering up and it was 
creating these flooding situations. And that was a situation 
where again I was quite happy that I was driving my truck and 
not a small vehicle because that was flooding, that portion of 
the highway, flooding. I was told later, just had, you know, it 
just started when I had crossed, and there was a lot of water, 
fast-moving water going across the highway, Mr. Speaker.  
 
So that was June the 30th, the Monday. So Tuesday again I 
travelled the area and the situation was changing dramatically. 
Monday in the afternoon I was able to cross Highway 22 at 
Pearl Creek and go on up 47 to Melville. On the Tuesday I 
needed to go back to Grenfell. Well Highway No. 1 was already 
closed, so I thought, fine. I’ll just head east on Highway 22 to 
47, which is the highway south of Melville, and take it down to 
Grenfell and I’ll be fine. I’ll bypass the flooded area on 
Highway 1. 
 
Well as I said, the situation was changing rapidly, and by 
Tuesday afternoon the highway was closed at Pearl Creek. 
There was a massive amount of water — Highway 22, that is — 
a massive amount of water going across the highway. And I’m 
sure if people who have probably saw the pictures of the 
washout which resulted later in the week, a huge washout. The 
culvert’s gone. The cut, the fill there was probably . . . I’m still 
using the old English system. It was probably at least 40 feet 
deep and 40 or 50 feet wide. 
 
The steel guardrail and the posts were dangling in the air. The 
only thing that was keeping them up was the steel along the 
side. And the water, it was a lot of water had gone through there 
and the fear was there was still a lot of water backed up behind 
that railway trestle. And if that had’ve given way, we would 
have had some huge flooding issues. So that gives you a bit of 
an idea of some of the issues and the results, and the impact of 
the flooding that we had, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I must say that Department of Highways, they did an 
excellent job, and it was a massive undertaking to repair the 
Highway 22 in Pearl Creek. Some of the members may have 
seen the pictures in the Leader-Post of this massive culvert that 
I was told 16 feet in diameter and 200 feet long was placed 
there, and that was a major undertaking. And it’s been filled and 
the people over in that area . . . I haven’t had an opportunity to 
go over and check the highway myself, but the people are very 
happy that they now don’t have to detour around on gravel 

roads. And the RM, I know I spoke to the RM secretary and he 
was very pleased with the work that the Department of 
Highways did and the contractors that were on site, and now 
that they don’t have that extra traffic on their roads. Because 
with all the rain, Mr. Speaker, it’s not only taking its toll on 
provincial highways but also on the municipal grid road system. 
 
But there is good news also in the constituency. I’m happy to 
report that, not this year, but in 2013, there was construction 
work and the rehabilitation of Highway 310 between Balcarres 
and Ituna has been completed. I could tell you that the people 
particularly in Ituna are very happy with the work that was 
done. They are the major users of that highway. And I can tell 
you that the telephone in my constituency office isn’t ringing as 
it did prior to this. It’s been a long time coming, but it’s done. 
 
Something else that I can report, Mr. Speaker, is that a portion 
of No. 22 Highway over on the west end, the portion between 
Southey and Earl Grey, is a work-in-progress, but the first five 
kilometres are done. They look great. That part of the highway 
has been upgraded to primary weight status. I think the last time 
that I saw it, which was just last Thursday, the only thing we 
needed to do was have the lines painted and perhaps that’s 
already done. However, the remaining nine kilometres over to 
Earl Grey is another matter. That was also slated to be upgraded 
and be completed this year but it isn’t, and that is because there 
is a section in that portion of the highway that was under water 
once again this summer. And that particular area, it’s not a very 
long area but there’s very deep water on either side and it has 
nowhere to drain. And it was lifted probably four or five feet I 
believe or one and a half metres as a result of flooding in 2011, 
and it was flooded again this summer. And so the engineers 
need to go back to the drawing boards and do some redesign on 
that portion of the highway. But hopefully there’s . . . the 
aggregate’s in place so we’ll get that done in 2015. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I had said, the flooding not only affected 
highways dramatically but it affected many municipal roads. I 
toured with the reeve and councillor of the RM of Ituna Bon 
Accord in mid-July and they took me to places where roads had 
been washed out. This in 2014 and they were also washed out, 
the very same road was washed out in 2011. And what they told 
me, Mr. Speaker, is that they’re very appreciative of the 
provincial disaster assistance program. They said it’s been 
hugely helpful, but they said there are some limitations in that 
the program only pays to replace what was there before. 
 
And that’s part of the program design. It’s a national program. 
The federal government is involved in it and it’s applied across 
the country. We were at a super-grid that was washed out in the 
creek area. So they had already ordered . . . and that same 
portion of road washed out in 2011. So what they have done, 
Mr. Speaker, is the RM said, look, to replace it with the same 
size culvert that was in there before, which they had done in 
2011, that doesn’t make any sense. So they certainly 
appreciated the assistance that they’re getting, but they’re going 
to put some of their own dollars into this repair and ordered a 
larger culvert so that hopefully in the future they don’t have to 
deal with this problem again. 
 
On that same tour they took me to a farmyard. I had spoken a 



5612 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

day or two earlier with the farm family that they took me to and 
we got to the farmyard. There was a lot of water. There was 
water across the road. There was water in the yard, but 
thankfully the house was built on a bit of a knoll and it was high 
and dry. But the farmer took . . . The only way we were able to 
get into his yard is we could get up to the house but we couldn’t 
get into the rest of the farmyard except on his quad, and so we 
went through about two or three feet of water to get there. And 
what I saw there, there was bins in the water. One bin had burst 
open. There was canola floating on the water and the shop was 
under water. 
 
He said he had a lot of spraying to do, but he couldn’t even get 
to his sprayer. Eventually he did get it out of the water but he 
said, you know, his shop was flooded so his tools, that was a 
problem. And so if there’s that much water in the farmyard, of 
course there was a lot of flooding in the fields, Mr. Speaker, and 
that certainly was challenging. 
 
So that’s some of things that we’ve been dealing with in my 
constituency as the result of the heavy rains at the end of June. 
Well of course I think most people would know that the rains 
continued. It seemed perhaps even if we didn’t get record 
amounts of rain, the rain that we did get came in a very short 
period of time and resulted in some additional flooding. 
 
But what I should tell you, Mr. Speaker, that there is an area in 
my constituency that received 10 inches of rain in less than a 
week in September and that has created some huge, huge 
problems, Mr. Speaker. And it is in an area of the constituency 
where there really isn’t any external drainage. There are a lot of 
basins or sloughs, as we refer to them, which have now become 
lakes. And it’s an ongoing issue. There are farmyards that are 
flooded. 
 
And what’s happening is some of these basins are so full now 
that they’re running into another basin, but they’re really not 
draining out of the area. So what’s happening is that some of 
these flooded areas and particularly I know of a few farmyards 
where the threat is growing. You would think it hasn’t been 
raining that much. I mean there’s a few little showers that 
we’ve got. It’s nothing too dramatic. It’s not going to cause 
flooding. But the problem is growing in some of these areas. 
 
We continue to get calls as to what can be done. We’re working 
with the RMs to help assist them in whatever manner we can. 
The RMs of course are trying to do their best and do some 
pumping and so on, but there’s only so many pumps out there, 
and they’re still busy pumping water in other areas. So it is 
certainly a challenge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I did spend, about three weeks ago, I spent an afternoon with a 
constituent, a farm family who explained their situation. They 
had a well in the lower area. They said up until September there 
was water gathering but they could get to their well, which 
supplies the farmhouse and certainly, in the wintertime, their 
livestock. Well after the 10 inches of rain, they estimate there is 
about 4 feet of water overtop of the well, and there’s nowhere to 
pump this water. So it’s a matter of great concern, Mr. Speaker. 
We are working with them to find some solutions and hopefully 
we can. 
 
If I could get back to the issue of what some of the municipal 

elected people, particularly the rural councillors are saying, they 
have told me what we need to do is we need to find a method of 
perhaps blending our disaster mitigation along with PDAP 
[provincial disaster assistance program] so that we can do 
things better and that we don’t have a repeat of some of these 
things. 
 
One other problem that has arisen recently, and obviously is a 
result of the record rainfall that we’ve had this year, is the only 
primary weight highway that I have going through the 
constituency, Highway 6 at the Qu’Appelle Valley just north of 
Regina, I hadn’t driven it for a while. And here, middle of 
October, I see on the north slope of the Qu’Appelle Valley the 
red pylons and so on along the edge of the highway. What’s 
happening is that it’s slumping. The weight of the clay, it’s just 
giving way. 
 
Something else that’s happened is in Highway 56 in the Fort 
Qu’Appelle area just outside of Fort San, and that highway has 
been there forever, I think. There’s clay is slumping on to the 
edge of the highway. And I talked to the Highways officials 
because constituents are saying, well can’t we do something 
about that? Just get some loaders in there and trucks and haul it 
out of there? Well it’s not quite that simple, Mr. Speaker. If that 
is removed, the rest of the hill would come down and 
completely close that highway, so that’s an issue that has 
certainly been difficult. 
 
And as you can well imagine with all the rain and no drainage 
— or at least in part of the constituency — all the sloughs, the 
basins have filled up. It’s been a real challenge for the 
producers, for the farmers to get their crop off. But there’s 
always an upside to these situations, and the people that sell 
grain carts have done very well this summer and fall because 
there’s been a real proliferation of grain carts throughout the 
area. And the producers have made that investment. There’s a 
number of producers certainly had them before, but now it 
seems like everybody has them and they needed them because 
you couldn’t take the trucks into the field as you traditionally do 
most of the time. The trucks were parked right at the edge of the 
field or on the approach or on the road and then the grain carts 
would haul the grain to the trucks. And so it’s an added 
expenditure but there’s an asset there. 
 
And of course the people that sell heavy tow ropes to pull the 
combines out of the mud, and the tractors and the grain carts 
and the swathers, you know, they were having difficulty 
keeping the tow ropes in stock, because I know from personal 
experience that those ropes don’t last forever. And there is a lot 
of tension, a lot of torque on those ropes when these large 
combines with large four-wheel-drive tractors and sometimes 
two tractors hook to them to get them out of that mud and so on. 
 
But in true Saskatchewan fashion, our latest crop report and 
talking to producers, the majority of the harvest is done. There’s 
still a few, a bit of harvesting to be done out there, but overall 
the majority is done even under these trying, trying conditions, 
Mr. Speaker. So that’s kind of the report of 2014 and so on. 
Overall crop yields were certainly not as good as last year but 
they are average to even in some areas above average, and 
quality is actually in some cases quite surprising with all the 
interruptions to harvest and all the late rainfall that we’ve had, 
Mr. Speaker. 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5613 

I should say I was . . . One of the issues in all of this that I heard 
over and over again from people in rural Saskatchewan is, and 
in my area, is the issue of draining, the draining and the 
ditching that has gone on in the past. And not all of it certainly 
was approved. There’s a lot of illegal draining that’s happening 
out there which causes problems for people who in the past 
never had that much water come on to their property and to 
their farmyards and so on. And that’s an issue that certainly 
needs to be dealt with. And I was very pleased to hear the 
Minister of Environment speak yesterday about this whole area 
being under review. It is something that certainly we need to 
review. 
 
We need to modernize the whole issue of watershed 
management. That’s a big issue because it’s not only the current 
situation that we have but, come spring, if we have an average 
rainfall and an average runoff, we are going to have flooding 
issues, more flooding issues to deal with. We’re going to have 
more flooded roads. We may have more flooded highways. And 
it’s a problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, overall though, you know, our province is strong. 
There’s programs and measures that are in place to help our 
people when they’re facing challenges like we’ve been facing 
this year. It’s great to have a strong province so that the people 
can feel assured that, even though they are facing these 
challenges, that the government of the day is there to provide 
assistance where necessary. And I’m certainly grateful that, of 
the situation that we find our province in today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a number of other things 
that I could raise at this time, but I think I have taken up my 
time and I know there are other members that would like to 
enter into the debate. So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would say 
that I will be supporting the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
rise for the sixth time in my five years as an MLA to respond to 
the Throne Speech. It’s always a privilege and a pleasure to get 
up here and have an opportunity to talk about some of the 
things that are important to the people of Saskatoon Riversdale 
and important to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As is tradition usually at the Throne Speech, we have an 
opportunity to acknowledge and thank those very important 
people in our lives, Mr. Speaker. And I do this every time, but 
with two young children — well, my 16-year-old wouldn’t say 
she’s young anymore — but with a 16-year-old and a 
six-year-old, it is a team of people who allow me to be able to 
do this job. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And two of those people on the team are my kids themselves, 
Hennessey and Ophelia, who are incredibly patient and 
supportive and willing to let their mom go to Regina for several 
weeks out of the fall and several weeks in the spring, which is 
no easy thing, Mr. Speaker. And I know my kids miss me and I 
miss them, but we make it work. And we make it work in large 
part due to my very amazing family, my parents who live two 

blocks away from me. And I’ve done that on purpose, Mr. 
Speaker. I live very close to my parents because they are 
incredibly supportive and helpful, and it’s nice to be able to see 
my mom and dad or grandma and grandpa on a regular basis. 
 
So Ophelia is actually going to school now at the l'École 
Française de Saskatoon, which is just down the street from my 
parents’ house, so my six-year old has the opportunity. She 
feels like a very big girl these days and gets to walk the one 
block to grandma and grandpa’s house as my mom waits on the 
lawn for her every day after school, Mr. Speaker. And my dad 
continues, I think I’ve mentioned this before, but the 
after-school snack is an interesting one and always consists of 
ice cream that my dad has made, which is never really good for 
supper, but it’s grandpa doing it for her so I think that that’s all 
right. 
 
My daughter Hennessey is pretty amazing. And I’ve just 
realized in recent months that I am the parent of a young adult. 
When I’ve been away, Mr. Speaker, Hennessey has picked me 
up at the airport with Ophelia in tow, which is really quite an 
amazing thing for me. When I’ve been very busy, Hennessey 
has taken my bank card and gone and bought groceries. So I 
can’t believe I am the parent of a young adult, Mr. Speaker, and 
she’s growing into a fine young adult at that. 
 
My sister Michelle and her husband, John, continue to be huge 
supports, making sure that my kids have what they need. 
Ophelia’s dad, Blair, is there for Ophelia when I’m not. And so 
it’s a well-oiled machine. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon Ophelia had an appointment at 3 o’clock and it was, I 
kind of feel like a general coordinating the troops at times from 
a distance where I’ve got this person picking Ophelia up here 
and this person taking her there and someone else getting her 
going in another direction. 
 
So I’m very, very grateful for all those in my life who make it 
possible for me to be able to serve the people of Saskatoon 
Riversdale because if it wasn’t for my strong support network, 
which is primarily made up of my family, but some very 
wonderful friends too who are there for me as well, I don’t 
think I could do this job, Mr. Speaker, so a big thank you to 
them. 
 
I think it’s important I have wonderful assistants who I think 
serve the people of Saskatoon very well, Saskatoon Riversdale, 
when I’m not there, Mr. Speaker. Vanessa Hyggen and Judy 
Gossen are compassionate, smart, thoughtful, industrious in 
trying to figure out, when people come to our constituency 
office with challenges, how to help them sort out and work their 
challenges through and connect them to the appropriate people. 
So I am very grateful for Vanessa and Judy who have two very 
different skill sets and experience. Judy had been a long-time 
constituency assistant for the former member from Saskatoon 
Nutana, Pat Atkinson, and Vanessa was brand new to my office 
just three years ago, and they complement each other incredibly 
well, Mr. Speaker. So I’m grateful for those, for my staff, and I 
think the people of Saskatoon Riversdale appreciate the work 
that they do as well. 
 
And I would be remiss if I did not say a big thank you to the 
people of Saskatoon Riversdale who, on a regular basis, still 
have lots of things to say to me — good, bad, what’s working, 



5614 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

what’s not working, what I should be doing differently, what 
they see as some of the challenges facing them and some of 
their fellow citizens. So again it remains a privilege to represent 
the people of Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
I think I need to mention, Mr. Speaker, the events of last week, 
the loss of Corporal Cirillo and Patrice Vincent. I’m very glad 
that we went ahead with the Throne Speech last week, Mr. 
Speaker. It was a troubling day for everybody and a troubling 
week and we’ll continue . . . There’s many discussions that 
need to come out of that. But I was very glad that the Throne 
Speech went ahead. 
 
And as the daughter of a police officer, I have to express a huge 
gratitude for protective services who were here: the RCMP, the 
Regina Police Service, our Sergeant-at-Arms, and our security 
staff here. And I think on one of those occasions I actually 
would like to agree with my colleague from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood who talked a little bit about this 
legislature being the people’s legislature. And that is a very 
important thing that we can’t forget, Mr. Speaker, and it is a 
surprisingly open place. 
 
I know some people . . . I remember when I first came here, Mr. 
Speaker, and I don’t know what I expected, but I thought that 
there would be more rigorous policies in terms of security. And 
it really is a pleasure that it is such an open place and it is the 
people’s legislature, Mr. Speaker. So although we do have to 
discuss some . . . I think the discussion is what we need to put 
in place to ensure that people remain safe, but it remains as 
open as possible and as accessible by the general public because 
that is what this building is here for, Mr. Speaker, and we can 
never forget that. 
 
But with that, Corporal Cirillo and Patrice Vincent, I think we 
can’t forget them and think about . . . My thoughts and prayers 
go out to their family and friends, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the business of the day though, Mr. Speaker, is to discuss 
this government’s Speech from the Throne, and as I said, this is 
my sixth opportunity to respond to a Throne Speech. And I 
think the one thing that stood out for me, I always think that 
throne speeches are supposed to be about visions going 
forward. And there seems to be a lot of . . . There are a few new 
items in here which I will talk about, Mr. Speaker, but a big 
concern of mine, this is still very much a reflection looking 
back, some back-patting and some things that have happened in 
the past which are undoubtedly good things. But a Throne 
Speech is about, supposed to talk about what the government 
plans to do going forward, Mr. Speaker, and this Throne Speech 
is surprisingly short on those details, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I walk through the Throne Speech, the third page there’s a 
. . . And I think it’s important today as there were a couple of 
people here in the gallery who are former film workers. Not 
former. There’s one person who is still working here in 
Saskatchewan and another who is now having to make a living 
in Vancouver. He left his family behind and friends behind. 
And so I think it’s important to talk a little bit about the film tax 
credit, Mr. Speaker, because in the Throne Speech we have on 
. . . The film tax credit was an incentive for producing film 
products, Mr. Speaker, producing and exporting film. It was a 
job creator. It was a benefit to the economy, Mr. Speaker. And 

one of the new initiatives in the Throne Speech is the 
establishment of a new growth tax incentive tied to the creation 
of new jobs by manufacturers and processors as they expand 
their sales outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know that as we talk about those things, many people in the 
film industry who . . . Families have been ripped apart. Careers 
have been decimated, Mr. Speaker, and they don’t understand. 
They look to two and a half years ago when the film tax credit 
was cut. And they don’t begrudge any other industry. It’s the 
government’s job in some respect to incent business and to 
figure out how to ensure that jobs are growing and the economy 
is growing here in Saskatchewan. So the film folks that I’ve 
talked to don’t begrudge any other industry having incentives, 
but they wonder why the incentive that worked for their 
industry and worked so incredibly successfully, Mr. Speaker, 
was taken away. So there’s some huge frustration with that. 
 
I was talking about my daughter Hennessey, and Hennessey 
actually is at Evan Hardy school in Saskatoon in the media 
production program there this year. And it’s interesting because 
Hennessey actually has an interest in health care, but she was 
very keen on an integrated learning experience and that’s what 
the media school at Evan Hardy is all about. It’s been a 
wonderful experience and that’s it. 
 
But she’s not so interested in filmmaking. The cinematography, 
the special effects, the lighting, the sound, everything that they 
study, it’s really quite amazing — the production, the directing. 
The thing that appeals to her most, Mr. Speaker, is in fact the 
producing. So she likes to run the show, Mr. Speaker. She’s a 
bit of a bossy pants, but she likes to guide and lead and is very 
good at that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So Hennessey doesn’t have an interest in a career in film. She 
wanted an integrated learning experience. But do you know 
what? With the exception of one other student who’s much like 
Hennessey, everybody else in that program wants to pursue a 
career in film. They’re passionate about it. Hennessey is 
amazed at the skill that some of these, some of her colleagues 
have already developed long before coming to this program. 
And the sad thing is that these teenagers who will soon be 
graduating — next year they’ll be graduating — that they know 
that they can’t have a career in their own province, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is incredibly unfortunate and was not necessary, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And it’s frustrating for those who’ve had to leave the province 
or who have stayed behind and had to change professions and 
still struggle with making a living here, that the film tax credit 
was cut. And the language around incentives, I think we need to 
clarify here a little bit with this government, Mr. Speaker. So 
that is the first thing that I mention because it’s very near the 
beginning of the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit also about health care, Mr. Speaker, as 
I am the Health critic. And it’s been interesting to me. I’ve been 
the Health critic now for the past year and although we get a 
large variety of casework in our office in Saskatoon Riversdale 
— Social Services, SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], 
child and family services — we get a host of casework, it’s 
been interesting as the Health critic the number of issues that 
pour in, Mr. Speaker, ranging from mental health to long-term 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5615 

care to concerns about conditions in our hospitals and long-term 
care facilities, cleanliness to decrepit buildings to not enough 
staffing, Mr. Speaker. So I’ve had the opportunity to be sort of a 
. . . People come to me to tell me some of these stories, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think that when the government talks about health, this Throne 
Speech was again very lacking in terms of talking about new 
initiatives or what the government might consider going 
forward. Rather they talked about a drop-in-the-bucket 
approach that they took this time last year in the Throne Speech 
with the Urgent Action Fund, Mr. Speaker, which this 
government only came to after they were dragged kicking and 
screaming to recognize that there was an issue in long-term 
care, after the opposition had been raising it, after people like 
Carrie Klassen and many others had come forward saying that 
there were serious issues in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this government was dragged kicking and screaming. They 
didn’t release the report. So they did a review of long-term care 
facilities. They did do that, but then they held on to the report, 
Mr. Speaker. It was July and they were finished the report, 
didn’t release the report. We did a freedom of information 
request. It took 30 days. They still didn’t release it. They asked 
for an extension. It was a report, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t take a 
whole lot to . . . There was one question in the freedom of 
information request. It was about getting this report. 
 
They got the extension. The day after, the day after the 
extension expired was when this government got up and gave 
their drop-in-the-bucket approach — 10 million additional 
dollars, which was only about half of what was required for 
urgent action, Mr. Speaker. And there was nothing new in this 
budget, this past budget on acknowledging the long-term care 
crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to bury your head in the sand and pretend that everything is 
okay is not okay, Mr. Speaker. We continue to hear about a lack 
of staffing in our long-term care facilities, in our hospitals. We 
continue . . . I should mention actually a quote from Maura 
Davies. The recently fired CEO from the Saskatoon Health 
Region had this to say about long-term care: “We know that the 
complexity of the residents in long-term care is much higher 
than it used to be, and our staffing levels haven’t kept up.” And 
she also said, “There are lots of unmet needs in this province, so 
we do not have adequate resources and programs to meet the 
needs of our seniors.” So those are recent comments by Maura 
Davies talking about long-term care. 
 
And that came out, Mr. Speaker, those quotes happened when 
we had an individual, Mr. Roy Armstrong . . . He was 94 years 
old. He’s 95 now, a veteran, three types of cancer, Mr. Speaker. 
He had been to the hospital, transferred to the hospital 10 times 
in the previous six months from his personal care home — 10 
times. He had had, I believe, it was two heart attacks. And Roy 
Armstrong was assessed as not being eligible for long-term 
care, Mr. Speaker. How does that happen? Like he was . . . Well 
they said he’s ambulatory. Mr. Armstrong could stand up and 
dress himself, and then he was done for the morning. So this, a 
94-year-old man with three types of cancer and multiple heart 
attacks and transfers to the hospital, was not eligible for 
long-term care. So my question is, to this government, then who 
is? 

[16:30] 
 
It’s interesting. In estimates last spring, Mr. Speaker, I had the 
opportunity to ask the minister a little bit about long-term care 
and who gets into long-term care and the average length of 
time. And the minister actually pointed out that, he said that he 
thinks the average right now is about a year and a half. So that’s 
the length of time that people stay in long-term care. 
 
So he validates the fact that people are admitted into long-term 
care much older or much . . . not necessarily older, much more 
ill and in much higher need of care. But before they get there, 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t have the services that they need to have 
a high quality of life. Many personal care homes, which do 
wonderful jobs, are not equipped to deal with high, high needs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s exactly what happened in Roy Armstrong’s case. He 
had incredibly high needs, and his personal care home struggled 
to deal with them. And so a man who desperately needs 
long-term care is denied it. 
 
This fall, just a couple of months ago or just actually I think less 
than a month ago, Emily Krushelnicki was transferred. She’s 
from Ituna. That was her home community. She is in her 90s as 
well and had been very ill. She had been I think in three or four 
different health care facilities because she’d had some emerging 
health care issues. She is from Ituna and was in fact in a bed in 
the Ituna long-term care facility there, Mr. Speaker. And Emily, 
her doctor had recommended . . . The government wanted to 
transfer her to Foam Lake. 
 
So this is a woman who’s in her community, she’s in a 
long-term care bed, but someone else from some other 
community needed that bed so they transferred Emily, against 
doctor’s orders, to Foam Lake. So a woman who wanted to 
spend the last days of her life in Ituna got transferred to Foam 
Lake despite the fact she was already in a bed in her home 
community. 
 
So I think that one of the questions came up, well do we need to 
have long-term care facilities in every community? And that 
obviously is not the answer. But when you have a long-term 
care facility in the community that you’ve lived for all your life, 
more than nine decades, Mr. Speaker, you’re in a bed in that 
community, your doctor says you shouldn’t be moved but 
because of space crunches elsewhere, you get pushed out, that 
is not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity this summer as the Health critic to tour 
a variety of health care facilities. I’m including some long-term 
care facilities. And there’s been some new long-term care 
facilities built, but they’re not without their challenges, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I was in Rosetown actually about a month ago, touring the 
facility there. And it’s a lovely facility. There are some issues. 
Some of the staff have pointed out that there are things that 
could have been done differently, including involving the staff 
in terms of installing some of the fixtures. So you have people 
who need two . . . bed lifts, and what has ended up happening is 
there is no room. For example, with the toilets, there is no room 
to do a two-person lift. The bars are placed wrong. There are 



5616 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

little details, Mr. Speaker, that if you actually talked to staff, 
they could look very, very differently and serve the residents 
much better and serve the staff much better, frankly, too. 
 
But with respect to Rosetown, I was surprised. I believe it’s 55 
beds. It might be 56 beds. I believe it’s five homes and 11 beds, 
but give or take a couple, Mr. Speaker. I was surprised to learn 
that at night between 11:30 and 6:30 a.m., there are two 
continuing care aids on for 55 staff . There is a registered nurse, 
but the registered nurse is responsible for all the medications 
and all the administrative paperwork, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 
something that’s changed. 
 
When we talk about how long-term care has changed — and the 
minister might be able to say numbers — there might be more 
staff, but the reality is the complexity of needs has increased 
and the roles of staff have changed. So the RN now continues to 
administer medication but has a whole host of administrative 
functions to play as well, Mr. Speaker, and supervisory 
functions. 
 
So you have two continuing care aids to turn people, toilet 
people, help get people who wander back to their beds, Mr. 
Speaker. What do you do in the case of an emergency? It’s 
completely unacceptable, two sort of hands-on staff at that 
point. Yes, it’s nighttime, but there are still many needs that 
don’t stop just because it’s nighttime. 
 
And the daytime staffing, Mr. Speaker, there was one 
individual, I understand, per house and then a couple of floating 
staff to cover off when people are on breaks — but one person 
for 11 people. And we talk about the Eden concept of care. And 
these houses are a great model, but you need to staff them 
properly to ensure that people have the care that the Eden model 
is supposed to provide, Mr. Speaker. So there continues to be 
huge issues around staffing. 
 
We proposed a bill. In fact it was my private member’s bill, The 
Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, and this government 
unanimously voted it down. Again as I said, you can’t address 
issues and fix a problem if you are not willing to admit that 
there is a problem, Mr. Speaker, and any tour of a long-term 
care facility or health care facility will reveal that there are huge 
problems, Mr. Speaker. And there is nothing, nothing in this 
Throne Speech that addresses those concerns, just a reflection 
back on a drop-in-the-bucket measure that happened a year ago, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we talk about health care infrastructure, nothing in the 
Throne Speech on that either, Mr. Speaker. And again kicking 
and screaming, the government finally released, it’s called the 
VFA report. It was an independent consultant that looked at 
infrastructure needs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And their total, they came to . . . This was in summer of 2013, 
but the government didn’t release it until the summer of 2014 
despite freedom of information requests, despite conversations 
in estimates with the minister. And not just our freedom of 
information requests, media was trying to get a hold of this. 
Everybody wanted to see this particular report, Mr. Speaker, 
and the government begrudgingly released it this summer, 
which illustrated there was a $2.2 billion health care 
infrastructure deficit which more than doubled in the last seven 

years, Mr. Speaker. And according to the consultants who 
prepared this report, it was a conservative estimate because it 
didn’t include any of the soft costs like architecture fees and 
didn’t include the possibility of increased construction costs 
over time, Mr. Speaker. So $2.2 billion in the infrastructure 
deficit. 
 
You know, what I think is a smart approach is investing in 
repairing and maintaining facilities as you go along. This 
government has had record revenues, record revenues in this 
province. And the question is, why have you not, why has this 
government not put that money into maintaining and repairing 
those facilities? 
 
Again Maura Davies, the now terminated CEO of the Saskatoon 
Health Region had this to say recently about this government’s 
investment in infrastructure: 
 

Since 2007, we’ve received approximately $10 million per 
year to maintain and repair our buildings. That is less than 
a fifth of what we need for routine maintenance. Virtually 
all the dollars are, of necessity, spent on emergency 
building failures. 

 
She also goes on to say, “. . . a multi-year plan to address the 
current, unacceptable situation.” And this is something she had 
called for, as we of the opposition have been calling for. We 
would like to see a multi-year plan to see how they’re going to 
address this infrastructure, the failings our of health care 
facilities, Mr. Speaker. We would like to see a plan how they 
are going to spend their money, the people’s money on ensuring 
that our health care facilities . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are people across the aisle who are heckling 
like crazy and because they do not have a plan. But they have 
more money . . . Mr. Speaker, I was going to say more money 
for brains than brains, but I probably shouldn’t say that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this government has had record 
revenue at its disposal, and our health care facilities . . . 
Surgeries at Royal University Hospital have been cancelled 
because the HVAC [heating, ventilating, and air conditioning] 
system failed. Hot water on the maternity ward has failed. So as 
Maura Davies said, they have spent their limited infrastructure 
money that this government has provided on emergency 
maintenance, Mr. Speaker. That is not acceptable. The smart 
thing to do is to ensure that you’re maintaining your facilities so 
they cost you far less. 
 
It’s great to cut the ribbon on a shiny facility, Mr. Speaker, and 
yes, we need many. There are many new facilities that we need, 
but it is absolutely imperative that we maintain and repair the 
facilities that we have to ensure that we’re spending . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I seem to have touched on a nerve here. There’s a 
great deal of noise coming from the other side. So this 
government needs to invest in repair and maintaining the 
facilities that we have, and they haven’t done it. Maura Davies, 
who was the former Chair of the health region until she was 
fired by this government possibly for speaking out . . . is 
because this government has only provided a fifth of what they 
needed to keep their facilities in basic state of repair, Mr. 
Speaker. That is absolutely shameful, absolutely shameful. 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5617 

Mr. Speaker, I think one thing that’s important to talk about 
also is mental health. Mental health is quite near and dear to my 
heart and has been for a very long time. I remember as a 
reporter having an opportunity to spend time . . . I was a feature 
writer, Mr. Speaker, and had an interest in human interest 
stories. And 20 years ago I was writing about schizophrenia and 
bipolar disorder which was manic depression back then — it 
had a different name. But mental health has always been of 
interest to me. I’ve had friends and family members, and it was 
considerably elevated on my list of importance personally, Mr. 
Speaker, when I lost my nephew last summer to bipolar 
disorder after a brave struggle for five years. 
 
And so in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, there is a mention 
of Dr. Fern Stockdale Winder’s report. She has spent the last 
year and a half interviewing, going around consulting, talking to 
all kinds of people about mental health. And the government 
does in fact mention that that should be released soon. I know 
people are eager to hear that 10-year action plan. 
 
I continue to hear from people . . . Mental health touches one in 
five people here, Mr. Speaker, so many of us, I’m sure many of 
us in this Chamber have had family members or friends who 
have lived with mental health challenges. So it is a pressing 
issue for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m eagerly awaiting Dr. Stockdale Winder’s report, but I 
would have liked to have seen it prior to the Throne Speech, 
Mr. Speaker. I know the government is in budget deliberations 
and I hope, that because they didn’t outline anything in the 
Throne Speech and there was a general mention to it, that we 
will see initiatives in this budget in the spring, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
eagerly awaiting that, as many people are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know one of the things last . . . well the budget, I actually 
anticipated that maybe the government would do something. I 
know that Dr. Stockdale Winder was in the process of 
consultations, but there were many papers. Prairie North had a 
very good, Prairie North Health Region had a very good paper 
out actually about mental health, and it’s several years old now, 
Mr. Speaker. And I understand there was actually a cabinet 
decision item before cabinet a few years ago, but we don’t 
know where that went, Mr. Speaker, and it talked about the 
need for supportive housing. 
 
So people leave a place, an acute psychiatric facility like the 
Dubé Centre in Saskatoon, and don’t have the appropriate 
places to go after that. So in my nephew’s case, my brother and 
sister-in-law had Jordan, my nephew, continue to live there. 
And it’s not easy, Mr. Speaker, but my brother and sister-in-law 
are amazing folks and worked really hard trying to support their 
son. But many people don’t have that kind of option. So you 
might leave an acute psychiatric facility and you don’t have 
supported housing. You end up on the street. You end up in an 
apartment that you can’t afford without any services. 
 
So Prairie North Health Region had a very good proposal 
before the government a few years ago done with the ministry, 
Mr. Speaker, and so I really am hoping that that’s some of that 
housing piece. I’m expecting actually, I’m not hoping, I’m 
expecting that is one of the big pieces that has been identified 
by many people that supported housing and step-down housing 
with services: caseworkers for example, to help people make 

the adjustment back into . . . out of a hospital setting happen, 
Mr. Speaker. So I know that they’ve mentioned the mental 
health 10-year strategy, and I was hoping there’d be a little bit 
more in the Throne Speech. But I will remain optimistic that 
there will be measures in the budget, and I guess we’ll see what 
happens then. 
 
I think when it comes to mental health, it’s been interesting. I 
know that I’ve raised this issue in the past of people who have 
complex needs, often community living service division clients 
living in acute psychiatric facilities a year, two years; in North 
Battleford multiple years. The Dubé Centre for example in 
Saskatoon — and I always use the Dubé Centre because 
Saskatoon is my home and I know that facility well — but it is 
a hospital, Mr. Speaker, where you get . . . It is not a residential 
setting. You’ve got people who are in psychosis around you. 
You’ve got stimulation. You’ve got all kinds of things that are 
not good. It’s not a residential environment; it is an acute 
psychiatric facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Last spring in estimates I had the opportunity to ask the minister 
about the number of folks with some of these complex needs, 
which are often intellectual disabilities coupled with mental 
health challenges or behavioural challenges. So last spring there 
were 12 individuals living in acute psychiatric facilities who 
were community living service division clients. And that’s not 
everybody. Not everybody is a CLSD [community living 
service delivery] client who has behavioural or complex needs, 
Mr. Speaker. And the minister didn’t have an answer then as to 
how to fix that. But I think one of the things that I would have 
liked to have seen in the Throne Speech — and I hope that we 
see in the budget — is recognizing that these complex needs we 
need to address, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had brought the case of Mr. Ron Caron here, last spring I 
believe it was. Ron was one of the individuals, he had early 
onset Alzheimer’s, Mr. Speaker, in his 60s. And he was placed 
at the Dubé Centre and his daughter was advocating for him. He 
had his daughter to advocate for him. Mr. Caron suffered from 
very severe dementia, or very advanced dementia, which caused 
behavioural difficulties. And the folks at the Dubé Centre are 
not equipped to deal with dementia. They are a mental health 
facility. But this poor man, because nobody else would take 
him, there was no other place for him. He was living in this 
hospital setting, Mr. Speaker. So I was happy after some 
advocacy that Mr. Caron was moved to Parkridge, and I 
understand that he had a continuing care aide assigned to him to 
provide that support. 
 
And you know, Mr. Caron passed away this past month, Mr. 
Speaker. So Mr. Caron passed away this last month, and I heard 
from his daughter just recently who was very grateful that, 
despite her father’s challenges, we were able to get him out of 
an acute psychiatric facility and into a long-term care facility 
which was a residential facility. So he was able to spend the last 
few months of his life in a much more appropriate setting with 
much better supports, Mr. Speaker. But unfortunately not 
everybody who lives in these acute psychiatric facilities has 
someone like Mr. Caron’s daughter to advocate for them, so 
they end up languishing in those kinds of facilities. 
 



5618 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2014 

I had the opportunity this summer to head to Prince Albert and 
tour the adult psychiatric facility there. You know, the youth 
psychiatric facility there is wonderful and relatively newly built 
and has space and light. And it’s an appropriate facility, and it’s 
very good. And I know the people who work in the adult 
facility covet what those in the youth facility have. It’s 
overcrowded, noisy. They had, if I get these numbers right, nine 
CLSD clients and three other complex cases at that point. I was 
told there were 12 complex cases, people who were very, very 
hard to place. 
 
So the government right now is in the process of closing Valley 
View. And I was glad to hear actually that they extended that, 
the timeline, because there are huge concerns. In order for 
people to live in community and be included in community, you 
need to build the right supports in place and the right homes. 
And I can tell you that that’s not happening because we have 
people living in acute psychiatric facilities very much like the 
people who are living in Valley View. So I would have liked to 
have seen more attention paid to that in this Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I can’t talk about health and not talk about the firing of Maura 
Davies. The largest health region in the province, probably one 
of the largest health regions, one of the largest health regions in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and for this government not to do 
its due diligence and have a thorough process to hire a new 
CEO is reprehensible, Mr. Speaker. A $1.14 billion budget, 
almost 14,000 staff, 1,000 physicians, and this government is 
going to have someone in place December 1st. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I am the Chair of the Public Accounts 
Committee, and as such I have the opportunity to be part of the 
hiring committee, along with the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland, when it comes to hiring the Provincial Auditor. And 
I’ve never done a process like this before, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve 
been told by people who’ve gone through it, including the staff 
who are preparing us, that it is a four-to-six-month process, and 
four months only because we already have a very 
well-established process in place. 
 
So to hire the Provincial Auditor is going to take four to six 
months, and to hire the CEO of a $1.14 billion budget health 
region is going to take just over a month, Mr. Speaker. This 
government owes the people of Saskatchewan, the people of 
Saskatoon and area and the people of Saskatchewan, due 
diligence in this regard, Mr. Speaker. And they are failing 
miserably on that front. 
 
To say that you need to be lean-certified to . . . this job is about 
strategic vision. It is about governance. It is about leadership. It 
is not about lean, Mr. Speaker. To say that they are 
pre-qualifying the position to . . . Any manager and leader 
worth his or her salt can get up to speed on lean, Mr. Speaker, 
so to keep that hiring process internal is doing a huge disservice 
to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I do hope that 
this government comes to its senses and does a proper process, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think another important thing to talk about, and actually I’m 
very pleased to see in the Throne Speech, the poverty reduction 
strategy, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that this government has had a 
conversion on their road to Damascus on this regard. 

I was going through Hansard from the last three years. I was 
the Social Services critic, as was my colleague from Saskatoon 
Centre. So in the last four years, or pardon me, last three years, 
between the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Saskatoon Centre, and myself, I believe we asked the 
government four times. And I didn’t look very hard actually. I 
found four occasions where we asked and encouraged the 
government to get with the rest of Canada and adopt a poverty 
reduction strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And some of the responses, Mr. Speaker, some of the responses 
that, as of . . . One of them, Mr. Speaker, I asked the question. I 
asked the question and the minister, I’m just finding the date 
here, Mr. Speaker. November 22nd, 2012, the now former 
minister of Social Services, when I asked her about needing a 
poverty reduction strategy, she said: “The members opposite are 
always wanting to have a plan and a strategy, and what they 
really don’t want to hear is action,” Mr. Speaker. So I’m not 
quite sure how what they’re doing now is different or better 
than what they’ve been doing. That was one, that was one 
comment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another comment that the minister said in response to the 
Leader of the Opposition is, this is from May 6th, 2014: 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Leader in the Opposition 
is why does he insist on a strategy when he really wants 
action. What we really need to do is to ensure that we have 
fewer people living in poverty. 

 
I couldn’t agree more, Mr. Speaker, but you need to have a 
strategy to get there. And I’m glad, as I said, that this 
government has had their conversion and come to, come . . . 
You know, and there’s been many good people for many years. 
 
I have to commend Dr. Meili, Dr. Neudorf, Alison Robertson 
who’s amazing at the food bank. She’s done some really great 
work. There’s some really good people who now have been 
working on poverty reduction issues. But there have been 
people . . . Poverty Free Saskatchewan actually. I had the 
opportunity shortly after becoming an MLA in 2011 in taking 
part of, in Poverty Free Saskatchewan’s, which was a network, 
a wide network of many, many organizations dedicated to 
poverty reduction. 
 
And they came up actually with some six key areas that need to 
be part of any successful plan to eliminate poverty in 
Saskatchewan: housing access and affordability, income 
security for vulnerable groups, education training and early 
childhood learning and development, enabling and rewarding 
work and participation in our communities, improving access to 
and quality of services for low-income people, and promoting 
health and preventing illnesses. So that came out of Poverty 
Free Saskatchewan in 2011 who is also advocating, has been 
advocating. There are many, many good people, Mr. Speaker, 
among them Dr. Meili, Dr. Neudorf, Alison Robertson. 
 
Last week the member from Saskatoon Centre and I had the 
opportunity during anti-poverty awareness week to attend a 
really great event called Hands Across the Bridge, which really 
is about joining the west side and the east side in Saskatoon, 
about the goal to eliminate and reduce poverty, Mr. Speaker. 
And so I’m very glad that this government is committed to an 



October 29, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5619 

anti-poverty strategy. 
 
I can you tell you in my constituency there are people who 
struggle with all those things — housing, the cost of living. We 
have a province, Mr. Speaker . . . The economy is doing well, 
but I can tell you that not everybody is benefiting from that. 
This is about people doing well, and I can tell you there are 
many people in Saskatoon Riversdale who are not doing well, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re struggling with the cost of child care. 
They’re struggling with the cost of housing. They are working 
incredibly hard and can’t make ends meet. The cost of utilities 
are breaking them, Mr. Speaker. And there was not a single 
word about addressing, Mr. Speaker, the rising cost of living 
and the stresses and strains that those many, many families are 
living. Not just families who would be identified at being below 
the low-income cut-off, but middle-income families too, Mr. 
Speaker, are struggling and are finding that they have much less 
money at the end of the month. 
 
I have to just point out that we will be watching very carefully 
and we would like to work with this government. This should 
not be a partisan issue. An anti-poverty strategy should not be a 
partisan issue. This should be about both sides of the House 
working together to ensure we get this right. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Centre has put forward in the past 
private members’ bills that the government has adopted, and 
our leader, on the asbestos registry. There’s really good 
opportunity to make sure that we get this right, Mr. Speaker. 
And I know Upstream, which is a think tank, Mr. Speaker, that 
Dr. Meili helped found, these are some key . . . This is a 
document from Upstream which was part of the Poverty Costs 
campaign that I think seemed to push the government over the 
top when it came to finally realizing that we needed a poverty 
reduction strategy here. 
 
But we’ll be watching to ensure, we’ll be watching to ensure 
that this poverty reduction strategy has targets and timelines, 
that it’s comprehensive, that it involves the community. And 
that is absolutely imperative. I know people talk about, nothing 
about us without us, Mr. Speaker — nothing about us without 
us. So that piece of involving the community is absolutely key, 
has to be unique and address the issues in each jurisdiction, be 
non-partisan, Mr. Speaker, and require a commitment. And 
sometimes that’s a legislative commitment. So as much as I 
commend the government for moving on this, Mr. Speaker, we 
will in fact be looking for action and to see how that rolls out, 
and we would like to be part of that process too, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that that’s very important. 
 
When we talk about . . . I’m also, aside from being the health 
care critic, Mr. Speaker, I’m also the child care critic and the 
Status of Women critic. And although child care is not a 
women’s issue . . . I hate that term, women’s issue. I really 
believe that issues of women are issues of family and issues of 
community, Mr. Speaker. But in my role as the Status of 
Women critic and the child care critic, I would be remiss if I 
didn’t talk a little bit about child care and what is missing in the 
Throne Speech. 
 
There’s nothing, Mr. Speaker, nothing about how we are going 
to address the absolute lack of child care spaces for working 
families, Mr. Speaker, families who are going to school. We 

have had . . . I don’t have the numbers in front of me right now 
but I remember talking about them in the budget, Mr. Speaker, 
in the budget debate. In the previous . . . Up until 2013, the 
previous five years, there had been a birth rate of 60,000 kids, 
Mr. Speaker, which is awesome. That is incredible. It’s 
wonderful to see our economy growing and our population 
growing, but we need to ensure that those supports are in place. 
We need to ensure those supports are in place, that people can 
be engaged in the workforce, be engaged in their families. 
 
And I had the opportunity last night, I had the opportunity last 
night, Mr. Speaker, to attend a child care . . . speak with some 
child care providers — day home and group home providers. 
And they pointed out to me some of the huge issues that their 
families are experiencing, families who don’t have money to 
pay the bare minimum bills. They pay their rent and they pay 
their child care and they can’t afford food, Mr. Speaker. One 
family in particular had the opportunity. A single mother got a 
raise, and it bumped her over the threshold for the subsidy. And 
that raise was going to put her in greater financial distress than 
before she got the raise, because she was no longer eligible for 
the child care subsidy. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, there’s many things lacking in this 
Throne Speech, but I will be supporting the amendment and 
cannot support the original motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being near the hour of adjournment, 
this House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5589 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5589 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5589 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5589 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5589 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5592 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5599 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5604 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5589 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5590 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5590 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Graduation Ceremony at Centre for Northern Governance and Development 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5590 
 National Diabetes Awareness Month 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5591 
 2014 Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5591 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5592 
 Terry Fox Ride 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5591 
 Construction Starts on Kelvington Health Care Facility 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5591 
 Oil Royalties 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5592 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5593 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5593 
 Smart Meter Program 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5594 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5594 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5596 
 Support for Creative Industries 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5596 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5596 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5597 
 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5597 
 Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5597 
 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5597 
 Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l'état civil 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5598 
 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5598 
 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5598 
 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 
 modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5598 
 
 
 



 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5599 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5601 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5605 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5607 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5609 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5613 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


