
























































Hansard: April 14, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 50A  MONDAY, APRIL 14, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5157 
 April 14, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 
contemplating requesting leave for an extended introduction, 
but I think we can manage with the regular time. Mr. Speaker, 
there’ll be a number of members who wish to introduce guests 
that have joined us today. 
 
Today is one of the highlights for any spring sitting of the 
Legislative Assembly because today we are able to honour 
volunteers in the province of Saskatchewan, and specifically 
nine amazing Saskatchewan people who have done much for 
their communities for various causes and for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Members from where these folks reside are 
going to get a chance to put their names, read their names onto 
the record. We had a chance at Government House to recognize 
them and honour them with a medal under the leadership of 
course of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ralph Waldo Emerson said that life was actually 
not about trying to be happy. He said the purpose of life is “. . . 
to be useful, to be honourable, to be compassionate, to have it 
make some difference that you have lived and lived well.” Well 
here’s the good news, Mr. Speaker. These nine have realized, 
figured out long ago that if you were to do those things, you 
indeed will be happy and, more importantly, you will improve 
the lives of others. You will make so many other people happy. 
 
And so on behalf of a very grateful province, on behalf of all 
members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, we say to these nine, thank you 
for serving this province. We hope that their family also 
recognizes that we appreciate their support and their 
contribution to the leadership represented here. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would with that ask all members of this Legislative 
Assembly to welcome these nine recipients of the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, it’s my pleasure to join with the Premier in 
welcoming the recipients of the volunteer medals today and 
their family members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are individuals who time and time again 
over many decades have contributed so much to making our 
province the great place that it is. And none of them have done 
what they’ve done wanting to be recognized. In fact chatting 
with them post-reception, most of them felt quite uncomfortable 
about the attention that their work was drawing. But to that we 
say, too bad. We are proud of you. We are so thankful for 
everything that you’ve done and just want to say thank you also 
for the work that you have yet to do, because no one there, Mr. 

Speaker, is calling it quits. They’re still working very hard for 
the province of Saskatchewan. So on behalf of the official 
opposition, thank you and welcome to the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce Dr. David Buettner from Saskatchewan Rivers who 
today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
introduce Barb Butler from the constituency of Regina Wascana 
Plains who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my privilege to introduce Mr. Morley Gusway from the 
constituency of Regina Coronation Park who today received the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 
Mrs. Maisie Hanna from the constituency of Regina Douglas 
Park who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 
Ms. Betty McDougall from the constituency of Swift Current 
who has this day received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege to introduce Mr. Ted Merriman from the constituency 
of Saskatoon Northwest who today received the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 
introduce Mrs. Margaret Sandison from the constituency of 
Regina South who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 
Mrs. Beverly Wilson, niece of the late Mr. Walter Thiessen 
from the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland who today 
posthumously received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 



5158 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
introduce Mrs. Pansy Taylor from the constituency of 
Moosomin who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my 
pleasure to introduce, sitting in the west gallery, a group of 16 
students, all grade 8, from the Mother Teresa Middle School. 
With them today is Jane Brundige, and the teacher is Dave 
Nelson. And, Mr. Speaker, this group of 16 is the first 
graduating class of grade 8s from Mother Teresa School. I just 
wanted to recognize that. 
 
And they’re also, these students are especially involved in their 
community. They won first and third place in the Me to We 
video that brought awareness to mental illness. These students 
are an example of the unique approach that Mother Teresa 
Middle School provides to Regina’s vulnerable inner city and 
youth. I’d like all members to help join me in welcoming them 
to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d ask for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, I’m very pleased to recognize the University of 
Regina’s Hill School of Business, JDC [Jeux de commerce] 
West champions. They are the best business champions in 
Western Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, JDC West is among the 
very best of Western Canada’s large business school 
competitions. We’ll be hearing more about that from one of the 
members in a statement. But importantly, the University of 
Regina and city of Regina hosted the JDC West competitions 
earlier this year and did a remarkable job. 
 
And so I’m pleased to introduce the following JDC West 
champions and some of those that supported the team: Emily 
McNair; Ashley Dennison; Mason Gardiner; Alex Piniach; 
Brady Kapovic; Derek Fleck; Taryn Gullickson; Clarke 
Westby; David Senkow; Bob Kayseas; Saqib Khan; George 
Peng; Doug McNair; Scott Cheston; Jeremy Swystun; Ernest 
Johnson; Randy Linton; Lisa Watson; Victoria Johnson; Greg 
Elkington; someone who we’re familiar with, Ellen Glaze; and 
of course the dean, Dr. Andrew Gaudes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members on each side to join me 
in welcoming these remarkable students to their Legislative 

Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister opposite and indeed with all members in 
congratulating these Hill School of Business, University of 
Regina, best in the West JDC champions. Congratulations. 
We’re very proud of the work that you’ve done. I note with 
interest, Mr. Speaker, that the debate team had Tommy 
Douglass on the squad. So I don’t know if that was what tipped 
the balance, but I’m sure it was in all sectors where the students 
and the prof and the advisers were working very hard. And 
again we’re very glad to see this victory for the Hill School of 
Business. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan placed second. They had won 
last year, which again is something to be proud of, Mr. Speaker, 
but certainly the University of Regina Hill School of Business, 
best in the West. We’ll see where it goes from here, but JDC 
champions, I’d like to again join with the minister in welcoming 
these tremendous individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all the members of the Assembly, I want to 
introduce my uncle, Dr. Bob Kayseas. He’s a professor at the U 
of R [University of Regina]. And he’s one of the trailblazers in 
indigenous economic development, and he’s consulted on many 
business development projects in the province. And he’s also 
one of my mentors and role models, so I’m very proud to 
introduce my uncle. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 
it’s important on a day like this, when we’re honouring these 
nine who have received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal, 
and we’ve mentioned their families at the ceremony earlier 
today, but I think it’s important that we recognize them. So I 
would just ask for all of the family members of the recipients 
just to maybe stand, those that are here. 
 
Some have travelled a long way. I think the Buettners have 
three daughters here, three of their four. All of them actually are 
now not living in the province, three in Ottawa and one in 
Edmonton I think, so this should also be a bit of a recruitment 
mission for the province of Saskatchewan. But mostly we just 
want to say thank you to the family members and friends who 
are here, who’ve supported these recipients. And maybe we’d 
ask them just to give us a quick wave so we can welcome them 
to their Legislative Assembly as well. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition against Saskatchewan health care 
laundry privatization. And we know that in May 2013, the 



April 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5159 

Government of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize 
health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a 
for-profit, Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro linens. And we 
know that the privatization of health care laundry will put 
patient care at risk as health regions lose direct control over 
health care laundry services. And we also know that the 
privatization of health care laundry will mean that fair wage 
jobs will be replaced with poverty wages and public 
accountability will be lost. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in the 
devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 
an Alberta-based corporation; and, furthermore, the 
privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 
risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 
over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 
ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 
on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to the lack of 
safety on Dewdney Avenue and the dangerous heavy-haul truck 
traffic that needs to be rerouted from Dewdney Avenue. The 
residents in the community note that this was a problem created 
by that government and any further delay to address that 
problem and bring safety is entirely unacceptable. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 
present a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to restore the rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters of the social housing program and to 
reinstate the remote housing program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and the people that have signed this petition and 
many other petitions, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse and Patuanak. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition for real action on climate change. And the undersigned 
residents of this petition wish to bring to your attention the 
following: that Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse 
gas emissions per capita in all of Canada, and that these 
emissions have continued to grow to 74 million megatonnes 
annually as reported by Environment Canada in October 2013 
and show no signs of decreasing, and slashing programs such as 
the Go Green Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses energy 
efficiency program has set the province on a backwards course. 
 
[13:45] 
 
So in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a real plan and allocate 
appropriate funding in the provincial budget to tackle 
climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, 
helping families transition to energy-efficient homes, and 
encouraging everyone in the province to take real action to 
protect the environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is submitted by people from Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Remembering Jim Flaherty 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was with 
great sadness that Canadians learned about the sudden and 
shocking passing of Jim Flaherty on April the 10th. We express 
our deepest condolences to his wife, Christine, and their sons 
Galen, Quinn, and John. 
 
In his nearly 20 years of public life, Jim held many portfolios in 
Ontario, including Attorney General, Finance minister, and 
deputy premier. Federally he served as Finance minister for 
over eight years. Jim served the public selflessly and with the 
utmost distinction. 
 
His ideals of public service and integrity radiated throughout his 
life. To me, Jim was a friend. To Canada, he was a steady hand 
guiding and shaping Canada’s financial future. Internationally 



5160 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2014 

he was recognized as the best of his class, leaving Canada in an 
enviable position through the global financial crisis. As Teddy 
Roosevelt once said: 
 

The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, 
whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood; who 
strives valiantly; who errs, who comes short again and 
again, because there is no effort without error and 
shortcoming; but who does actually strive to do the deeds; 
who knows great enthusiasms, the great devotions; who 
spends himself in a worthy cause; who at the best knows in 
the end the triumph of high achievement, and who at the 
worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly, so that 
his place shall never be with those cold and timid souls 
who neither know victory nor defeat. 

 
Jim was truly a man of the arena. May he rest in peace. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on Thursday we were 
shocked and saddened to learn of the sudden death of Jim 
Flaherty, who served as Canada’s Minister of Finance until just 
last month. 
 
A speech that Jim Flaherty gave to students at the University of 
Western Ontario a couple of years ago was widely shared 
through social media over the weekend. And it’s worth quoting 
here because it speaks to his view of the incredible importance 
of public service: 
 

Public service is good for you. You will have opportunities 
to change the world around you in varying ways and to 
different degrees, large and small. You will get 
opportunities and to use your talents to implement your 
thoughts and beliefs. In concert with others, 
accomplishments will follow. Great adventure this, for 
disappointments and failure will follow also. Boredom, 
however, is not on the agenda. 

 
He went on: 
 

It is the most satisfying and personally enriching career 
you will ever find. This, my friends, is priceless. 

 
Mr. Speaker, regardless of political stripe or policy difference, I 
ask all members to join with me in saluting Jim Flaherty and to 
extend our deepest condolences to his family and his friends 
who deserved time with him following his public service. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Congratulating Hill School of Business 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
recognize the University of Regina Hill School of Business JDC 
West team. These students competed in the JDC West 
competition held here this past January here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, JDC West is Western Canada’s largest business 
school competition, where over 600 business school students 
compete in 10 academic disciplines, a parliamentary debate, an 

athletic tournament, and a social competition. 
 
Led by Lyndon Kifferling and Mason Gardiner, this team 
practised for several months leading up to January’s event. Mr. 
Speaker, their efforts showed. I’m pleased to say that the Hill 
School of Business team placed first as the School of the Year, 
as Academic School of the Year. Mr. Speaker, the Hill School 
of Business also placed first in the Participation, and the Human 
Resources, and Management Information Systems category. 
This is the second time the Hill School of Business won the 
School of the Year award, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan business schools have been able to keep this 
award in our province for the last three years with Edwards 
School of Business at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 
taking home the honours last year. We should be very proud of 
our province’s business students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate these students on this 
great achievement, and thank them for representing the 
University of Regina and our province at the national level. I 
would also like to commend the Hill School of Business for 
hosting such an amazing event. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Protest Supports Equal Rights 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday I had the pleasure of 
attending a wonderful, love-filled rally in Weyburn hosted by 
the community group, Intolerance Free Weyburn. It was a 
powerful, peaceful protest in support of equal rights. The event 
brought together community members of all ages in support of 
equal love for all, regardless of one’s sexuality or religious 
beliefs. I, along with the other supporters, participated in their 
pro-love peace walk. Intolerance Free Weyburn is speaking out 
to ensure everyone is entitled to safe environments. The 
organizers made a tremendous effort to show their community, 
like others in our province, is a welcoming, safe place for all. 
 
One of Intolerance Free Weyburn’s organizers, Chris Brookes, 
had this to say about the decision to take action when he heard 
of a controversial speaker at an event taking place in his city, 
and I quote: 
 

When we first started this movement, we couldn’t have 
foretold the amount of positive energy that we would 
receive. We were just a few people with a sense of justice 
and the intentions to craft the community into one that we 
could be proud of. We are simply expressing our right in 
an attempt to prove that we are a community full of 
supportive, compassionate people, a people whose voice 
may not be as loud as an ignorant one at times, but we have 
volumes in numbers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I am humbled by the bravery shown by the 
organizers and supporters of this weekend’s rally. I hope that 
we will remember this leadership as we move towards 
communities that are safe and welcoming for everyone, 
regardless of who they choose to love. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 



April 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5161 

Sod-Turning for New Transition House 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, our government has always held 
that growth is not pursued for its own sake, rather it’s approved 
growth which we seek in order to provide a better quality of life 
for all Saskatchewan families. I am pleased to rise today to 
mention one worthy example from my own constituency, a 
project which I’m very, very proud of. On Friday I was pleased 
to join the Minister of Justice at a sod-turning ceremony for the 
province’s first new transition house since 1989. The Angel’s 
Lighthouse, operated by the North East Outreach and Support 
Services in Melfort, will provide a much needed safe place for 
women and children escaping interpersonal violence and abuse. 
 
With the federal government, we are providing a combined $1.5 
million for construction through Sask Housing and Canada 
Mortgage and Housing. The Minister of Justice will also be 
providing annual funding for the ongoing development and 
operation of the Angel’s Lighthouse. I would like to thank the 
federal government for their involvement and commend North 
East Outreach and its supporters for their tireless work in 
bringing this project forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a project like this is the reason we pursue growth. 
Now vulnerable women and children have a safe place to 
escape from violence. I ask all members to join me in thanking 
the North East Outreach for their valuable work in celebrating 
this important investment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Saskatchewan Country Music Association Awards 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend the 
25th annual Saskatchewan Country Music Association awards 
were held in Nipawin. These awards are a great opportunity to 
support and promote our homegrown talent in this thriving 
industry and give Saskatchewan country music artists 
recognition for what they have accomplished throughout the 
year. 
 
On Saturday night, I had the opportunity of attending an event 
which featured many young bands from our province. The 
highlight may have been the closing performance by the Hart 
Boys of Tisdale and In With The Old, a Saskatoon-based 
bluegrass band. 
 
On Sunday night there was the awards gala hosted by Northeast 
Country Music. Guests were again treated to several live 
performances from our province’s finest country music groups. 
A total of 17 awards were presented at the event. Major award 
winners included Codie Prevost who won the Fan’s Choice 
Entertainer of the Year, Male Vocalist of the Year, and the 
SCMA [Saskatchewan Country Music Awards] Achievement 
Award; and Saskatoon-based Wyatt, who took home Group of 
the Year, Album of the Year, and Video of the Year. Other 
award winners include Jess Moskaluke, the Midnight Roses, the 
Trudel Family, Eli Barsi, and Yvonne St. Germaine. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating all of the 
Saskatchewan Country Music Award winners and nominees for 
their hard work. As well I would like to thank all the organizers 

of this fantastic event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Aboriginal Bursary Program 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to share 
news about a program that is helping Aboriginal students 
achieve their goal of post-secondary education. 
 
The Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan has 
renewed funding for its Aboriginal bursary program for the next 
five years. This program grants up to 85 bursaries of $5,000 a 
year, and these bursaries are renewed if the student maintains a 
good grade point average throughout their studies. 
 
The program started at the University of Regina in 2004. In 
2009, it expanded to help students at the University of 
Saskatchewan, SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies], and SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology]. Lakeland College was added to the 
program in 2010. The bursaries at SIAST and SIIT and 
Lakeland are focused in the areas of business, trades and 
technology. At the universities, the primary focus is on business 
and engineering. 
 
Since the expansion in 2009, 337 bursaries have been awarded 
to Aboriginal students in Saskatchewan. Financial demands are 
one of the top three reasons that students leave their studies. 
These bursaries will go a long way towards helping reduce that 
pressure. 
 
CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] has 
received many testimonials from students, and I will share two 
of them here today. Single father, studying electronic systems 
engineering at U of R, said, “This bursary allows me to 
continue to study on a full-time basis.” 
 
A business student at SIAST wrote, “Please thank everyone 
who made this possible. I am forever grateful. Even after the 
scholarship is gone, I will have an education, and that never 
goes away.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is proud to support Aboriginal 
students in achieving their goals. Please, I hope all members 
will join with me in congratulating these students and wish 
them well. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Health Care Workers and the Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve known for a 
long time that this government has created a culture of fear 
within our health care system. But last Friday, Mr. Speaker, we 
learned just how bad it has become. Nurses and other front-line 
health care workers who raise concerns about this government’s 
lean pet project are actually being put in time-out rooms. So 
health care professionals, Mr. Speaker, that raise concerns 
during these lean, rapid process improvement workshops are 
being put in time-out rooms. Apparently, Mr. Speaker, it’s an 



5162 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2014 

attempt to make them fall in line and to stop raising their very 
legitimate concerns. 
 
My question to the Premier: what are these time-out rooms for 
health care professionals and why on earth is this government 
sending health care professionals to them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for his question. I noted the same article over the 
weekend with some concern, Mr. Speaker, because the message 
we provided from this legislature just last week is that health 
care workers are welcomed. They need to be welcomed to come 
forward with respect to their concerns or their support for things 
that are going on in the health care system that they’d like to see 
either continue or stop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health and his officials have 
undertaken at least a cursory — because of the timelines; we’re 
talking about the weekend — investigation of this. We’re 
unaware, he’s unaware, the ministry is, of these so-called time 
outs, but we take this seriously. We’re pursuing it with the 
regions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bottom line is we know that the lean initiative has already 
saved more than it costs. It’s giving us a chance to improve 
patient-centred care in the system. However we need to be open 
to ways to improve it as we continue with the initiative, and the 
way to do that is to make sure front-line workers feel very 
welcome and safe and secure in bringing forward any concerns 
they may have. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that’s what this government says, 
but their actions to front-line health care workers tell a very 
different story. The fact, Mr. Speaker, that we’re even having to 
discuss time-out rooms for health care professionals is 
absolutely bizarre. And it shows, Mr. Speaker, just how 
ridiculous this government’s approach has become to its lean 
pet project. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: who came up 
with this idea of time-out rooms? Was it the $40 million US 
[United States] consultant? Was it the $70 million kaizen 
promotion offices? Was it the $3,500-per-day senseis? My 
question to the Premier: who came up with this ridiculous idea 
to use time-out rooms when nurses and front-line workers raise 
very legitimate concerns? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not even sure that these 
time outs exist. Now we would take it very seriously if they do 
because the message to the health care workers from this 
government — and I repeat it again today; it’s pretty clear — 
we need their input. We need their constructive suggestions. 
 
We’ve seen some very positive comments about lean from 
nurses, from health care workers, from doctors, from the SMA 

[Saskatchewan Medical Association] for whom the member 
was a researcher prior to elected office. And we have heard 
some concerns that we feel that we take seriously as we seek to 
improve the process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is these so-called time outs have 
not been directed by the minister, by the ministry at his 
direction certainly. He is looking into the matter. We’re 
unaware of these examples. If SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses] wants to bring forward the specifics, that would be 
helpful, Mr. Speaker, because it’s simply not on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the problem is the tone being set 
from the top where there is an agenda when it comes to this lean 
pet project where people who question are seen as being on the 
outside, Mr. Speaker, and are seen as working against the 
interests of this government. And that’s why we see actions that 
don’t match up the talk that they’re saying. The president of the 
Union of Nurses, as reported in the media, it says: 
 

They’re being told that they have to support lean. And if 
they’re involved in the process and they see that there’s an 
area that’s going to impact patient safety in a negative way 
and they raise that concern, they’re actually being told, we 
don’t like your attitude and you have to leave the process, 
or they’re put in a time-out room. 

 
Mr. Speaker, here is the tone . . . That’s from the president of 
the Union of Nurses. Here is the tone, Mr. Speaker, being set by 
this government. It’s no wonder that we now have instances 
where this government is directing front-line health care . . . 
administrators in the health care system to monitor the social 
media and the Facebook accounts of their members, Mr. 
Speaker. No wonder people are afraid to speak out. 
 
My question to the Premier: how on earth is it acceptable to 
have managers in the health care system directed by this 
government creeping on the Facebook pages of front-line health 
care workers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my friend across the way is 
getting worked up about a directive that simply does not exist 
with respect to social media. Again the allegations that came 
forward in the media at the end of last week are being 
investigated by the minister. They’re being taken seriously. 
None of this has been directed. 
 
I understand that the Health minister’s deputy minister this day 
sent a letter to Donna Trainor, executive director, Mr. Speaker, 
for the nurses, indicating the following: 
 

Related to this issue, the Public Interest Disclosure 
Commissioner will be meeting with regional health 
authorities to discuss the possible application of public 
information disclosure Act to employees of the region. As 
deputy minister, I can assure you that any health worker 
who raises concerns about patient safety or the lean 
management system will not be penalized. 

 



April 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5163 

Of course not, Mr. Speaker. I remember just a few weeks ago 
when there was a letter to the editor from a retired nurse, now 
volunteering in the system, concerned about lean, I called her, 
Mr. Speaker. I gave her a call. She’s from Regina here. I wanted 
to hear directly from her. That is the approach of the 
government with respect to lean going forward. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition can torque things for his 
political advantage. The bottom line is if he’s got some 
additional information about these examples, we appreciate it. 
If SUN does, we’d appreciate that as well. Because we take the 
matter seriously. We do want to hear from front-line health care 
workers. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, once again the Premier is going 
and dismissing what nurses are bringing, very legitimate 
concerns, Mr. Speaker. It’s bad enough, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government has been in overdrive, been in overdrive to promote 
its lean pet project. We see talking notes going out, Mr. 
Speaker, to health care workers with suggested testimonials to 
boast and to prove the merits of lean, Mr. Speaker. This is 
ridiculous enough, but what is completely unacceptable, Mr. 
Speaker, is to have nurses afraid to speak out and advocate for 
their patients when they see safety concerns and when they have 
concerns about quality of care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is completely unacceptable to have nurses having their 
Facebook accounts monitored by managers, Mr. Speaker — 
completely unacceptable. Mr. Speaker, my question to the 
Premier: how does he justify this? How does he justify creating 
a culture of fear within the health care system where nurses are 
afraid to speak out, when they’re afraid to do their duty for their 
patients? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what is approaching 
ridiculous are the preambles to the member’s question, Mr. 
Speaker, because I’ve been very clear in this Assembly that 
there’s been no directive on this side of the House, from this 
Health minister, from the ministry, with respect to social media, 
Mr. Speaker. I understand in fact that both Saskatoon and 
Regina health regions have confirmed there are no such things 
as time-out rooms. Neither are they aware of these ever being 
used. 
 
Now SUN has said as much. So we’d like to hear from them 
about specifics because, were we not concerned about the 
front-line workers, we wouldn’t be contacting them directly. 
And were nurses and health care workers worried about coming 
forward, they wouldn’t be writing those letters to the editor in 
the first place. There are many who support what they see in 
lean, some who have concerns. We’re interested in both sides as 
we seek to improve a process that’s already recovered more in 
savings than it cost and that’s improving patient-centred care in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government, this front bench, 
this Premier, have been obsessed with promoting their lean 

project within health care, Mr. Speaker. And it’s because of that 
obsession that we have nurses and health care workers coming 
forward and stating that they are afraid to speak up for their 
patients. It’s ridiculous, Mr. Speaker, that we would have social 
media accounts monitored by health care managers because of 
the fact that a front-line worker might raise legitimate concerns 
and problems with lean. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been saying that this government should 
end the cash cow contract to the US consultant. They should 
stop flying in Japanese senseis, Mr. Speaker. They should stop 
forcing health care workers to learn how to make paper 
airplanes in these workshops that go on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They should be investing in the basics. They should be listening 
to front-line health care providers, and that is not what is 
occurring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking notes are being sent out by the health 
regions, at the direction of the government, in order to have the 
promotion of lean. We see health care workers, Mr. Speaker, 
being punished because they speak out against lean. We see a 
waste of resources with the monitoring of Facebook accounts. 
My question to the Premier: when will enough be enough? 
When will he put an end to this lean nonsense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the work that we’re doing within the 
health care system and lean, yes, it’s the first of its kind in 
Canada in terms of the scope that we are applying lean to the 
health care system, Mr. Speaker. We have indicated, as I’ve 
indicated just in the last week for example, some of the things 
that we are doing through lean that is already saving more 
dollars than it has so far cost the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for example, there are 33,000 extra in-patient 
hospital days that are caused by avoidable incidents or 
avoidable events. That costs the system $33 million a year. So 
we are looking at applying lean to try to reduce this number to 
save dollars, but as well, Mr. Speaker, for a better experience 
for the patients that do not need to be in these hospital days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Premier has indicated, we have listened 
directly to SUN in terms of their wanting some assurance that 
their members can come forward. The deputy minister has 
written to SUN this afternoon. 
 
As far as the Leader of the Opposition goes, most of what he’s 
saying is hardly believable. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Ministry of Education Sector Plan 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the education plan released 
on Friday has goals that everyone can agree on. But the 
government hasn’t named one action it will actually take to 
achieve any of those goals, and there’s no timeline. This 
government’s plan does have hoshins, which is apparently a 
Japanese term for improvement breakthroughs, but the plan has 
not one new dollar to actually achieve these so-called hoshins. 



5164 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2014 

I don’t know the Japanese phrase for resources desperately 
needed, but that would be more appropriate as far as inclusion 
in the sector plan. There are huge needs in our classrooms, and 
this government keeps neglecting what really matters for the 
success of our students. To the minister: what concrete steps 
will the government take to achieve these goals, and where’s 
the resources to do so? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in our education system, we’ve had some enormous successes 
over the last number of years. What we want to do is identify 
where those successes are, raise them up, spread them out 
across the province, have great discussions with people across 
the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read a quote: “For the first 
time in my 26 years of governance, it’s a positive relationship 
where we can pick up the phone and have the conversation if 
needs be” — Janet Foord, president of SSBA [Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association]. Further quote from Janet Foord: 
“‘A year ago, we asked for change in this province. And in a 
year, we’ve come a long way,’ said Foord. ‘We’ve got a sector 
plan that has identified two priorities, but . . . we’ve been able 
to maintain our local priorities.”’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to do that kind of work. 
We’re going to continue to do it. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
doing a good job for the students of this province. We have a lot 
of work left to do, but we’re on the right track. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough that that 
government hasn’t identified any concrete actions, dollars, or a 
timeline for its plan. But what’s especially concerning for 
Saskatchewan families is one particular detail that the 
government didn’t exactly trumpet on Friday. It’s a pretty 
significant detail. This government is actually planning to 
freeze education funding after next year’s budget. To the 
minister: with so many needs in our schools, in our classroom, 
how does that make any sense and how is that fair? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite has 
got a better pipeline to the Finance minister, I’m hoping he’ll 
share the information with me because he’s talking about stuff 
I’ve never heard of about freezing this, freezing that. The only 
thing that’s freezing cold outside is some of the air coming out 
of the folks over there, stuff I’ve never heard of before. 
 
We’re going to continue to fund and support education in our 
province. We’ve got a great education sector. This is the first 
time ever that all of the school divisions have come together. 
They developed this plan. We accepted it. It’s a strong plan and 
it’s going to meet the targets for growth. Mr. Speaker, by the 
year 2020 our goal is . . . And, Mr. Speaker, they talked about 
not having a goal. We have a goal. The goal is to increase the 
graduation rate in our province by over 10 per cent and to close 
the gap between First Nations and Métis students and non-First 
Nations and Métis students, to close that gap by a half. And 

we’re going to work down that road, Mr. Speaker, with the help 
of the school divisions and with the teachers — the finest 
people in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it would seem that the 
minister’s not even aware of a pretty key and concerning part of 
that plan as it relates to fixing funding 2017 moving forward, 
simply tied to inflation and wages at a time, Mr. Speaker, that it 
should be pointed out that our classrooms are under-resourced 
and overcrowded, at a time where we have population growth 
and certainly greater class complexity, and at a time where we 
have a demoralized and underappreciated feeling amongst our 
educators. 
 
Listening to school boards, teachers, parents, and students, there 
are too many examples of inadequacies in the funding from this 
government. Yet this government is actually planning to freeze 
education funding because it’s satisfied with the status quo 
locking in those inadequacies, a fiscal straightjacket on our 
education system. 
 
To the minister: when will this government get its head out of 
the sand and start addressing the realities that students care 
about here today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, November 13th of last 
year the member opposite said, “What this side of the Assembly 
is simply advocating is that the government start listening to the 
school boards across the province.” An endorsement from every 
school division in the province is pretty strong and pretty 
powerful. 
 
On Friday the member opposite said, “When I look at the goals 
and the plan, they’re important goals and to have some of that 
unified across the province is certainly important.” On that 
much we’ll certainly agree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the members opposite and the status quo that 
we don’t want is closing 176 schools, having people move to 
Alberta. We’re not going down that road. What the record of 
this government is, we’ve added 566 teachers. We’ve increased 
operating funding by over 26 per cent. We have 159 more 
student support teachers. We’ve increased the number of 
psychologists by 37 per cent, speech-language pathologists by 
26 per cent, social workers up 12 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we 
have a good record on this side of the House, and we’re going 
to continue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Two questions on the funding freeze 
from that government that’s contained in the sector plan as 
background — not a single answer from that minister — 
essentially something that will lock in inadequacies. There’s 
another area though that is causing a lot of confusion and it’s 
that government’s plan for standardized testing. 
 
As it relates to the minister’s newest comments that plans for 
new province-wide testing are being scrapped and were, quote, 



April 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5165 

toxic, I understand that ministry officials were softening that 
message to school board leaders on Friday, saying that’s not 
entirely the case, and the government’s education plan on 
Friday didn’t describe any policy change as it relates to 
standardized testing. 
 
There’s a ton of concern in this area and there’s concern that 
this government’s simply rebranding its standardized testing 
plan to launch and implement it in the months and years ahead. 
So to the minister, let me be clear: will there be any new tests 
that are province-wide for students? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the previously proposed 
model of standardized testing of every student in every grade 
and every year is not on. The sector has asked for meaningful 
methods of evaluating our students. We plan to start work on 
that upon the completion of the student-first consultation, and 
we will do it with the ongoing support of our sector partners, 
the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], the SSBA, 
LEADS [League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents], and individual teachers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a need for assessment in our province. It 
has to be done appropriate. It has to be done properly. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to do it in consultation with the teachers. 
Those are the ones that are the experts. We’re going to identify 
the strengths that we have in our province and we are going to 
build on those. And we are going to achieve our graduation 
rates because we have the best students and we have the best 
province in Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, instead of, you know, cute 
words to be chosen by the minister, a cute play on words, how 
about some straight talk and real answers to the teachers and 
students who deserve them on this issue? Will there be new 
tests that will be in place for students across Saskatchewan in a 
province-wide basis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve addressed issues 
around capital. We’ve addressed issues around operating 
funding. We have all kinds of things left to do, Mr. Speaker. 
We put things on pause six months ago. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
are working through that with people like Patricia Prowse, Russ 
Mirasty, and we are doing that in consultation with students, 
parents, and with teachers. And that program is working out 
very well for us. 
 
We are going to continue doing that. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
read a quote. Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue doing those 
things. They are right things to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
 

Provision of Occupational Therapy 
and Other Student Supports 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Saskatchewan has the fewest occupational 
therapists per capita in the entire country. The national average 
is 40 occupational therapists per 100,000 people. Manitoba and 
Alberta have 45 and 43 respectively. But Saskatchewan has just 
29 OTs [occupational therapist] per 100,000 people, the worst 
rate in Canada. 
 
This shortage is hurting many people in our province, including 
our children. Far too many school-aged kids fall through the 
gap in services between health regions and school boards and 
are getting no services. And this government is making the 
situation worse. School divisions are eliminating OT positions 
and actually blaming hoshin kanri and lean. To the minister: 
how is this acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
variety of supports that are available in the classrooms. We 
work at sharing those between the different school divisions. 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased all of those since we’ve formed 
government. I’d indicated earlier that we’ve increased the 
number of teachers and student support teachers, psychologists 
up 37 per cent; speech-language pathologists, up 26 per cent; 
social workers, up 12 per cent; English as an additional 
language teachers, up 17 per cent; EAs [educational assistants], 
up from 3,546 in ’07 to 3,601. 
 
I can advise the member opposite that occupational therapists 
have increased since we formed government by almost 50 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, there is not a lot of them in the province, but 
we are contracting the service out as well through Regina 
Catholic. And, Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to do that, and 
we will continue to monitor the situation carefully. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — We’re joined by occupational therapists today 
including Coralie Lennea, Lindsay Roysum, and Shawna 
Turlick. That answer from the minister will not be satisfactory 
to them. We know of at least three school divisions that have 
eliminated occupational therapy positions over the last year. 
Regina Catholic, Holy Family, and Prairie South have all cut 
OTs because of resource constraints. This is leaving many 
families, included those affected by autism spectrum disorder or 
fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, without desperately needed 
supports. To the minister: where are these families supposed to 
go for help? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member should get her 
facts correct. Regina Catholic has chosen to contract out this 
service. There has been no elimination of service. School 
divisions have the legislative authority to determine staffing 
complements and classroom supports. We’ve responded to their 
need by increasing operating funding. 
 
Since 2007-2008, Regina Catholic has seen an enrolment 



5166 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2014 

increase of 7.5 per cent while there’s been an operating increase 
of 26.8 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, they can apply those funds 
as they think their needs are, which might be for psychologists, 
speech-language pathologists, social workers, or a variety of 
other supports that are there. The fact that they’ve chosen to 
contract out this service is something that we accept what 
they’ve done, and we believe from talking to them that it’s 
working well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — What Saskatchewan people can’t understand 
is why it is that the Social Services minister had no problem 
spending $19,000 to attend a brief FASD [fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder] conference in Ghana and then had a 
taxpayer-funded vacation with friends and family, all the while 
OT positions that benefit kids with FASD here at home are 
being cut. And what Saskatchewan people cannot understand is 
why it is that the Health and Education ministers have no 
problem spending untold millions, untold millions, Mr. 
Speaker, on the Premier’s pet lean project, yet this government 
keeps shortchanging what really matters in education and health 
care, things like occupational therapists to support kids with 
autism or FASD and other challenges for which occupational 
therapists can be a big help. 
 
To the minister: how can the government possibly justify these 
misplaced priorities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the 
members opposite don’t really understand what FASD is 
because we didn’t talk about it for the 16 years before we were 
in government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to FASD, we have actually 
held workshops and youth focus prevention campaigns in the 
last year. Regina Community Clinic is now providing ongoing 
services to an additional 45 adults. The children with FASD 
family support program has got 26 families involved. And we 
have 1,408 children now having received autism spectrum 
disorder services in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s always more work to do in this area. And 
we continue to work as a government across ministries to 
ensure that children receive the support they need, whether it’s 
for autism or for FASD. And when we have the child and youth 
agenda and groups like the Hub and the COR [centre of 
responsibility] working together to ensure we don’t have to just 
look at one area, we work together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am very proud of the work that is done. I know there’s always 
more work to do when it comes to receiving supports for 
children, Mr. Speaker, and for families. But I assure you this is 
not an issue that’s been ignored by our government, and it never 
will be. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 132 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 132 — The Public 
Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon and enter into the debate on Bill 
No. 132, An Act to amend The Public Guardian and Trustee Act 
and to make a consequential amendment to The Provincial 
Court Act, 1998. 
 
And of course, this is one that we’ve been waiting for, for seven 
years. This was first, I understand, asked for by the Children’s 
Advocate in 2007, then again in the report A Breach of Trust 
2009, early 2009, one of the key recommendations there. And 
then again for the report that the government had done on this 
same issue about children in care, For the Good of Our 
Children 2010, and even last year, in the Children’s Advocate 
report 2012. 
 
So annually, pretty much annually, this initiative has been 
called for, and so we’re looking forward to see how this plays 
out. It is one where we have significant hopes that this can 
make an impact when children are part of a law process dealing 
with apprehension. And this will be one that I think will go a 
long way. It’s one that’s been called for, for some time. 
 
And I just want to take a minute to review the minister’s 
comments on this bill. And of course he said that this will 
establish a new program for counsel for children in the Ministry 
of Justice. And we’re looking forward to that because clearly, 
as we’ve come to understand the good work that the Children’s 
Advocate has, and what they’ve called for, that it’s one that we 
think it’s really time that it’s in place and that it really be 
supported. 
 
And so it looks like it will be something that the Public 
Guardian and Trustee will look after and will bring forward. 
The minister talks about how the program that was announced 
in the budget, they’re going to be spending some $240,000 to be 
training lawyers across the province, to make sure that when a 
lawyer is required to work with a youth and provide them their 
counsel, that there is one that will know the laws that are at 
play. And I think this will be very, very important. 
 
So it’s modelled on similar programs in other provinces and 
territories. And under the program, the minister says the Public 
Guardian and Trustee will establish a list of specially trained 
lawyers throughout the province who can act for . . . a lawyer 
for a child in child protection proceedings. And I think that’s 
key. 
 
So we hope that this can get going as quickly as possible, that 
this training can occur. This will happen, I understand, when the 
Court of Queen’s Bench or Provincial Court orders that a child 



April 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5167 

be represented. 
 
As well, the guardian and the trustee also has the discretion to 
appoint a lawyer for a child without court direction if there is a 
request from another individual. And in fact, we understand that 
individual could be the Advocate for Children and Youth, could 
be the child themselves, and that’s very important. So we’re 
looking forward to this. As I said, this is something that has 
been called for for several years now, and I think this is an 
important, important, important piece. 
 
And as the minister says, that we want to ensure — and we 
agree with this — that the key part is that there will be direct 
representation for a child where it “. . . is satisfied that the 
interests or views of the child would not otherwise be 
adequately represented.” And I think that that’s really, really 
important. 
 
And the minister has made note of this with the pro bono Law 
Society law program, as part of the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan, and he wanted to thank them. And I’d want to 
join in that because that’s important that we recognize the good 
work that the pro bono lawyers have done over the course of 
several years. But it’s one that really clearly should have been 
supported by Justice here. And now that they’ll fulfill that need, 
that we should take a moment and thank the good folks who’ve 
stepped up to the plate to make sure that children had their 
interests protected and articulated and brought forward in court 
proceedings. 
 
It is of interest that the minister talks about how there could be 
as many as 150 to 200 cases that could be a situation where 
lawyers may be appointed each year, and that in fact that if a 
lawyer is appointed at the right time, the appropriate time, that 
in fact it may save a situation where there’s a need for an actual 
hearing, that it could be settled prior to that. So I think that’s 
very, very important. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we do want to underline the seriousness and 
the urgency of this. This is not something that we can just say, 
you know, take another seven years to bring into action. We see 
many pieces of legislation this government has brought forward 
and money that has been set aside in a budget where it actually 
hasn’t been spent. So we will be asking the minister clearly, 
what is the timeline? What is the timeline for getting this in 
place? Are the training sessions already ready to go? Are there 
benchmarks that they want to see happening right away? 
 
Because as the minister himself has said, that with 150, 200 
cases a year, that clearly there is work there. But we do want to 
underline the urgency of this, you know, because the children in 
care situation continues to be — continues to be — a situation, 
a crisis in this province, and this government has not really 
taken the urgency here seriously. We know, since the For the 
Good of Our Children report was released in December of 
2010, here we are three, over three years, three and a half years 
later, this one recommendation is being addressed when it was 
not the first time the government heard of this particular 
recommendation. In fact they heard of it seven years ago. So 
this is one, while it is worthwhile and very good and we’re 
happy to see it, we really do expect the government to step up, 
to really take this situation seriously. 
 

[14:30] 
 
You know, we’ve asked the minister, where we see in her 
budget that we see over $5 million cut in budget for salaries and 
children and families, and the government has yet to fully 
explain what is happening there. Because as we know, the 
Children’s Advocate has caused, has really raised the alarm 
around the fact that there seems to be less and less front-line 
workers in the Ministry of Social Services. And particularly the 
line is then drawn to poor case management and how the case 
management is done in Social Services, and we see the tragic 
outcomes of that. We see the tragic outcomes, whether it’s 
supervision of cases that need much more attention and things 
fall through the cracks.  
 
We know, for example, Mr. Speaker, that over 100 children 
have died since 2010 that are supposed to be under the 
supervision of this minister. And while she will say she takes it 
seriously and there’s more work to do, she really needs to get 
around to it, Mr. Speaker. We really need to see urgent action 
on that. 
 
And so while I do want to get on the record of saying this is a 
good piece of legislation, a solid piece of legislation, there are 
things that we’ll be asking for, a timeline of how we will ensure 
that this will actually be active and up and running as soon as 
possible. Because we know that the government can pass 
legislation; it doesn’t have to mean that it’ll go into force. The 
government can set money aside, but it doesn’t necessarily 
mean that it will be spent. How will they guarantee that this will 
actually, actually happen? Because it’s one of those cases where 
we’ve seen a long seven years for this government to actually 
take action on the case of appointing a counsel for children. 
And this is an important area. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know other members will want to speak to 
this, but I did want to take a few minutes and just get on the 
record that we will be watching and urging the government to 
do all that they can to get this up and running as soon as 
possible so that the children can have their voices heard in court 
when it comes to child protection. We think that’s a really 
positive step forward. We know the Children’s Advocate’s been 
calling for it for many years. And we look forward to seeing the 
actual rubber hit the road on this program. So those are all my 
comments I have for today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 132, An Act to amend The Public 
Guardian and Trustee Act and to make a consequential 
amendment to The Provincial Court Act, 1998. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we acknowledge that this bill is being introduced as a 
budget bill because the Ministry of Justice has some amount of 
money that was announced in the budget which then allows for 
this particular legislation to move forward. And so one of the 
assurances that some action will be taken in this area is the fact 
that there is money actually set out in the budget and there is a 
plan to spend that money. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation meets a need for 
those situations where children are in protection hearings. And 
a little later I’ll talk about the fact that children are involved in 



5168 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2014 

court hearings in a number of different areas and that this 
legislation won’t deal with that. But this is about protection 
hearings. So this is a situation where the Minister of Social 
Services makes a declaration, or through staff, that a child is in 
need of protection. 
 
And when the children are very young, there’s often no 
question that the interests of that young child can be dealt with 
by the court, by the judges, and by the ministry staff. But this 
particular legislation I think deals with those situations where 
the child in need of protection is maybe a teenager or somebody 
who has a strong perspective on what should happen to them, 
and there’s substantial concern that that child have its own 
counsel in a court proceeding. Now there may be situations 
where very young children also need counsel, but that’s I think 
less often the case. 
 
Over many years of practice as a trial lawyer, as a lawyer in 
these kinds of cases, I personally was appointed by the court to 
represent children who are in these child protection cases. It 
didn’t happen that often because there really wasn’t a procedure 
for doing that. One of the advantages of this legislation is it will 
be very clear that the money that’s available will be managed 
by the Public Guardian and Trustee and that the appointment of 
the lawyer to get involved in the case will come from that place. 
 
One of the challenges up until this point has been where the 
appointment comes from, who would pay the bill for that. And 
my sense would be, and we’ll probably find out a bit more 
about this in committee, is that this type of legislation is 
actually to some advantage or probably great advantage for the 
Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Social Services and any 
other ministry that might be involved in figuring out where and 
how the resources are available to pay the lawyers who are 
involved. 
 
Now the Minister of Justice has indicated in his speech, second 
reading speech, that there may be as many as 150 to 200 cases 
in a particular year. And you know, I’m hoping it’s not that 
many cases, but I wouldn’t be surprised if that in fact happens. 
That means there is a substantial amount of money. 
Traditionally, or what’s happened I think up until now, is that 
these bills for these lawyers will come out of the court budget 
or out of the Department of Justice budget, and not necessarily 
out of the social services budget even though there’s maybe 
some reason for it to come from there. But sometimes it would 
come from the Minister of Social Services if the appointment 
actually of a lawyer comes from that perspective. 
 
So part of the background of this bill is to sort out some of the 
internal financial issues between the different ministries of the 
government. And I think that’s probably a good thing to sort out 
how that’s done. But I think ultimately the judges of the court, 
who often are the ones who identify the need for independent 
counsel for a child in a protection hearing, they will still have 
some final discretion as to when and where these kind of 
appointments should be made. And practically when the 
interests of a child, especially a child in need of protection, are 
at issue, then the cost of who pays for that isn’t necessarily a 
concern of the judge. And so I think we need to follow that, 
keep track of that particular issue as this moves forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what kind of a role will the lawyers take in 

these particular cases? And I think it’s interesting to look at the 
role of the lawyer. And clearly the lawyer is acting for the child 
in this situation, but the legislation makes it clear that the child 
is not a party to the court case. And so in a way that lawyer then 
is acting as a friend of the court or as somebody who is going to 
provide some advice. The legislation sets out the fact that this 
lawyer and the Public Guardian and Trustee, both of them, will 
have reasonable access to the child. In other words, they’ll 
actually get to see and listen to the child, especially as the child 
gets older. 
 
They’ll also be able to get disclosure from all the parties, in 
other words, get all of the information that everybody else has 
in the court case to help make their decisions. And so they also 
will be able to participate in court on all the situations that are 
there. And they’ll be able to speak to the court and that also 
they will end up being able to present a position to the court. 
They’ll be able to file written submissions, in other words, 
they’ll be able to take a look at the law, take a look at the facts 
and the information that they’ve obtained, and then prepare a 
brief for the judge, for the court and have that included as part 
of the proceeding. 
 
They’ll also have the ability to call their own witnesses and 
examine those witnesses in the court, but also cross-examine 
any witnesses that are there for the Minister of Social Services 
who would be presenting one side of the case, or for parents or 
other guardians or others who have an interest in the case. And 
one of the clear powers set out in this legislation is that if the 
lawyer appointed pursuant to this amendment to the legislation 
is not given access to the information, not given reasonable 
disclosure, is not given access to the child, is not allowed to 
participate — all those things — then on an ex parte basis, in 
other words without even telling the other side, which includes 
the government or the Minister of Social Services, they can go 
to the court and say, we need this information. Will you make 
an order to get us the information so that we can do our job? 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s an important power that’s set 
out in this legislation and one that we support. 
 
Now there are a whole number of provisions I think in the 
legislation as well that give some guidance to the Public 
Guardian and Trustee as to what factors they should take into 
account when this appointment of a lawyer for the child in the 
protection hearing takes place. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
it’s anticipated that every court case involving a child in need of 
protection will have a lawyer appointed for that child, but the 
Public Guardian and Trustee is given this job to discern whether 
a difference in opinion between what a child thinks should 
happen to them and what their parents or guardians think should 
happen to them, well that may be a factor that allows for an 
appointment of their own lawyer. 
 
There may be some other issues that relate to the safety of the 
child or just providing necessities for the child or a whole 
number of things like that, where a child has the power to give 
their opinion about that, but also where the Public Guardian and 
Trustee may say, we need a lawyer in here to make sure that 
some of these things are done. 
 
Also the views of the children are important. And as I said 
earlier, as children reach their teenage years, this may be a 
higher factor than if these children, a child is an infant or a 



April 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5169 

toddler. 
 
And then another factor which I think has to be taken into 
account is that some children may say that they want a lawyer 
just so that they feel like there’s some fairness in the process. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, over the years that I practised in front of the 
courts of Saskatchewan and was involved in these types of 
cases, it often was one or other of the parents involved or the 
Minister of Social Services that was convinced that a child 
needed their own lawyer. And so one of the challenges that one 
had as a lawyer getting involved in these cases was to discern 
what were in the best interests of the child over and against the 
best interests of the parents, over and against the best interests 
or the interests of the Minister of Social Services. 
 
And sometimes in situations where the minister didn’t have the 
staff or the facilities or the ability to provide for a particular 
child, that kind of an interest may be an overriding factor from 
the Minister of Social Services’ side. And then it was a duty of 
counsel for the child that needed protection and counsel for 
parents or guardians to say that no, there are some other things 
here, and it is the responsibility in this particular case for the 
government, whichever department, to find the resources to 
make sure that a particularly challenging situation for a child 
could be addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are no end of possible permutations of the 
types of cases that you would get involved in. Now I’m not at 
liberty to talk about any of the particular cases that I had, but I 
would say that since the last cases that I had like this are over 
19 years ago, when I was elected, I would say that a number of 
the children who are now in their 30s and 40s, ones that I 
represented, have come to me and said, the work that you did as 
my lawyer in a situation like this allowed for some stability in 
my life and now I’m a successful businessman or a successful 
teacher or a successful whatever other position in life, or I now 
have my own family and I’m moving head. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is what this legislation is all about. It’s 
trying to provide some other advice, some other perspective for 
the child who’s in the protection hearing to make sure that 
there’s some stability in what is happening in their life. And I 
can tell you that these are some of the most challenging cases 
that you would ever get as a lawyer. But they’re also, when 
they’re ultimately resolved maybe one or two or three years 
later, some of the most rewarding as well. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the information that this legislation deals 
with, on behalf of the child, is absolutely crucial for the future 
of that child. And that ends up then being something that’s 
absolutely important to get right. Now when these orders will 
be made under a more regularized or more organized system, I 
think that we have to be careful that some of the broader 
discretion of the court to identify some of these needs is not 
lost. 
 
When I first looked at the legislation, my hope was that the 
legislation will address the issue of regular or clear resources, 
clear funding, to make sure that any time a judge in a court 
protection hearing or counsel for a guardian or for the ministry 

thought that it was appropriate that there be counsel identified 
and paid for for the child in the protection hearing, that the 
resources were there. 
 
Now we know that the amount of money that’s set aside for this 
year I think is $240,000, and that sounds like quite a bit of 
money. But if we end up with 150 or 200 cases, it will be used 
up quite quickly. I’m assuming that it’s set out at that amount of 
240,000 because this legislation will not be proclaimed until a 
couple of more steps have taken place, so it maybe won’t be 
effective until the mid-year point of the 2013-2014 budget. So 
in actual fact the commitment, on a financial basis, is closer to 
$500,000 a year in a regular year to cover these kinds of cases. 
It may also be that the $240,000 is effectively a guesstimate or a 
marker amount because we don’t know how many of these 
cases will require counsel, and we also don’t necessarily know 
how much each case will cost, given that it’s a legislative 
position at the discretion of the Public Guardian and Trustee as 
opposed to the system now where the court often will make the 
direction. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the legislation, and I 
think it’s section 5 of the bill but it’s also the part where they 
add section 64.1, you’ll see that the Provincial Court has the 
power to authorize a direction that a child in protection be 
represented by a lawyer if they can see in the court proceeding 
that the child’s interests or views aren’t otherwise adequately 
represented. And how this takes place is that the child is 
referred to the Public Guardian and Trustee who will then 
appoint a lawyer to represent the child. 
 
Now it looks pretty simple on the wording of the legislation and 
of the explanation of how this is going to work, but I don’t 
think it necessarily will be that simple because often that need 
for the lawyer happens in the middle of a court case or in the 
middle of a trial, and all of a sudden there’s a referral. The 
whole thing happens fairly quickly and then you’ve got a new 
lawyer in a proceeding that needs to be brought up to speed on a 
whole number of issues that are there. This may result in some 
adjournments but more often it will result in some very heavy 
work and quick work by all of the lawyers involved in the case 
to make sure that the perception of the judge that this child 
needs some special advice and special representation in the 
hearing is dealt with as quickly as possible. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, you end up then with this situation where a lawyer is 
appointed and then is brought in to be an extra set of eyes and 
an extra perspective on resolving the case. 
 
Now sometimes the role of that lawyer who is appointed on 
behalf of the child in protection is to actually be an interpreter 
or a person who explains to the child what the court proceeding 
is all about. And often the child is not even directly involved in 
some of the aspects of what’s happening, but they do need to 
have a sense that their interests are being protected. 
 
I note that in the minister’s comments in the second reading 
speech, he does indicate that there’s a hope that, with the 
appointment of a lawyer in this situation as a representative of 
the child in the protection hearing, that many of the cases will 
actually be resolved without a full hearing, and I think that’s a 
laudable goal. But I think we have to be careful that it isn’t a 
shortcut or it isn’t a way of diminishing the full vetting of a 
particular case because, if that happens, then we’ll all be 



5170 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2014 

concerned that the matter is not being dealt with. 
 
Now one of the things we do note here though is that there’s a 
continual recognition and a statement that, no matter what 
happens here, the child is not a party to the proceeding. And I 
think that that’s a distinction that needs to be maintained, but it 
needs to also be explained to all the people who are involved. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have some legislation here that I think is a 
step in the right direction, and it has a substantial number of 
safeguards to provide for counsel for children at risk when 
they’re in a child protection hearing. I think that’s a good idea. 
But there are a whole number of questions around how this is to 
be implemented. I know that I will have some questions about 
this when we get into the committee stage, and I think that we’ll 
get some of the better explanation of how this is actually 
intended to work. If we identify areas that need to be shored up 
in the legislation, I’m sure the minister will listen to those 
suggestions. But at this stage, I have no further comments. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 132, The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment 
Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, the 
minister moved second reading. Sorry about that. The minister 
moved second reading of Bill No. 132, The Public Guardian 
and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 132, The 
Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — Bill No. 132 stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 133 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 133 — The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant 
la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 133, An Act to amend The Queen’s 
Bench Act, 1998. Mr. Speaker, this is a bilingual bill and it’s a 

complementary bill to Bill No. 132 that we were just talking 
about, relating to the appointment of lawyers in protection 
hearings for children. And because The Queen’s Bench Act has 
some other provisions in there, it’s important that this 
legislation go ahead as well. 
 
I think one of the key aspects of this legislation is the fact that 
the Court of Queen’s Bench is that court where the judges have 
an inherent power to make decisions even if there’s no 
legislation in place to give them the power to do it. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this relates to the history of our courts, where the 
Court of Queen’s Bench is the court that had the powers of 
equity, which is the powers that came out of the church courts, 
you know, centuries ago. And often when you are dealing with 
a difficult issue in a court case as a lawyer, one of the things 
you would always ask yourself is, well if there’s no law 
anywhere that tells us how to resolve a particular problem, is 
there the ability to use the inherent jurisdiction of the Court of 
Queen’s Bench to solve a particular issue? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what has happened over the years in this 
particular instance as it relates to providing counsel for children 
in these protection hearings is that this inherent jurisdiction of 
the Court of Queen’s Bench has been used to appoint counsel to 
represent these children even though they’re not parties to the 
litigation or the court hearing themselves. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
when we’re dealing with this particular bill, we’re dealing with 
that broader aspect. Now there’s nothing that’s being done here 
that diminishes that special power or special right of the Court 
of Queen’s Bench to step in and make some equitable kind of 
ruling, but what this does do is it further gives direction to the 
judges of the Court of Queen’s Bench who might be involved in 
some of these particular cases. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now in Saskatchewan, we have a type of family court system 
that’s evolved over the years which allows for both the Court of 
Queen’s Bench and Provincial Court jurisdiction to be dealt 
with in the same court. And so once again this legislation 
reflects that particular development that we have in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, once again the legislation is there to make 
sure that there’s an orderly process for the appointment of 
counsel for a child in a protection hearing. That child will not 
be a party to the proceeding. The power is given to the judge to 
direct the child to go to the Public Guardian and Trustee, who 
would then in turn, will use their discretion to appoint a lawyer 
for the child, all the time knowing that if they exercise the 
direction as a public guardian and trustee in a way that the 
judge doesn’t agree with, there’s some power to even supersede 
that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think the provisions of this bill do fit nicely 
with Bill 132 and that together they deal with the particular 
issue that’s at hand. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any further 
comments on this legislation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 133, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 



April 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5171 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
assigned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 134 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 134 — The 
Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter discussion here as it relates to Bill No. 134, An Act to 
amend The Financial Administration Act, 1993. And you know, 
in many ways this legislation, you could call this bill the no 
more two sets of books Act, Mr. Speaker, or getting with the 
program, or getting with the rest of Canada, Mr. Speaker, or 
compliance with the public sector accounting standards, Mr. 
Speaker. And certainly all of those pieces are long overdue. It’s 
something that, this Act itself and some of the changes that are 
brought forward are something that we’ve been calling for for a 
long time as an official opposition. 
 
It’s important to Saskatchewan people to have their public 
finances reported and prepared in a way that can be trusted, in a 
way that represents the full, true picture to Saskatchewan 
people, one that allows accurate interprovincial comparisons. 
And it was past time that government got with the program and 
joined the rest of Canada and complied with public sector 
accounting standards. 
 
Of course this, you know, has been a newsworthy piece over the 
past few years under this government. We know in this last year 
there was the unprecedented circumstance where this 
government, for the first time ever in Saskatchewan history and 
for the first time ever in Canadian history, actually failed an 
audit of their GRF [General Revenue Fund] books. And we 
know that they had masqueraded what the auditor said was 
close to a $600 million deficit in the GRF as a surplus. And we 
know that the government basically conveniently chose which 
set of books they would report to the public on, the GRF or the 
summary, based on whatever one sort of portrayed a better 
picture. 
 

But it was of course a concern to all Saskatchewan people in 
December of last year when this government actually failed an 
audit of its books, as I say, in an unprecedented way. And 
we’ve been calling for a long time that nothing short of books 
Saskatchewan people can trust would be acceptable for us as the 
official opposition and for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
It’s worthy to note that as a household, one doesn’t chose the 
accounting rules that they adhere to. Certainly it’s tax season 
right now, and that’s important for all households. It’s also 
important to note that the businesses across Saskatchewan — I 
remember chatting with all sorts of Saskatchewan businesses 
and to the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce and all their 
businesses across the province — they don’t get to choose the 
accounting rules or standards put before them. Those are 
independent. What they do is they adhere to those rules. They 
comply with those rules. That’s what they do. 
 
And it shouldn’t be any different, shouldn’t be any different for 
government. And I know it was sort of, you know, it was a 
concern to many that the governments could play fast and loose 
with accounting standards and the presentation of our finances. 
Certainly there’s all sorts of consequences, legal and otherwise, 
in the private sector that could be applied to a company or a 
person who didn’t comply with accounting standards. We’re 
pleased to see some steps taken in this budget, steps that we’ve 
called for. And I believe in some ways this Act is a reflection of 
that, a direct consequence of that. 
 
Now I don’t think it’s been entirely figured out by this 
government yet how they’re going to account for things like the 
growth and Fiscal Stabilization Fund. We’ll be following up 
with the minister to just get the understanding on that front. 
We’ll be following up to get a full understanding of the changes 
he’s making, and making sure that the changes that we make 
today do provide Saskatchewan people with the honest books 
that they should be able to trust, Mr. Speaker. Nothing less 
would be acceptable to us as the official opposition. So we’ll be 
tracking the implementation very closely. 
 
We’re certainly skeptical in some ways of a government that’s 
played fast and loose with accounting policies. We’re also 
concerned that, you know, this is the government that brushed 
off the independent Provincial Auditor’s concerns. And we’re 
getting lots of noise from the Minister of the Economy, but 
maybe he should take to his feet and explain the changes that 
they’re bringing forward here. 
 
The one piece that I find noteworthy is that this pulls the GRF 
out of the purview of the auditor from government’s 
perspective. What’s important for Saskatchewan people to 
know is that the auditor can audit the GRF that this 
government’s putting forward or its core operational plan as 
well as all aspects of government. And it’s going to be 
important for government to make sure they’re fixing the 
problems that caused them to fail the audit. And of course we 
know this was this new accounting scheme created by that 
government as it related to school boards, as it related to health 
authorities, Mr. Speaker, and those pieces still need to be 
addressed. 
 
And I know sometimes that government likes to pretend 
somehow that this is some matter of opinion amongst 



5172 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2014 

accountants. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a strange way to 
characterize it when it seems that it’s only the Premier and the 
Economy minister and the Finance minister who sort of present 
this opinion when the independent accounting community of 
this province have solidly weighed in — the big firms, the small 
firms — and have supported the auditor on the concerns around 
the accounting scheme and the improper accounting of this 
government. 
 
So we’ll continue to track the finances of this government very 
closely. We’re going to make sure that the implementation of 
the new system provides Saskatchewan people with a 
transparent, proper display of their public finances. Of course 
they deserve nothing less. We’ll challenge government at every 
step when and if they choose to present something that’s not 
reflective of the reality when it comes to our finances. 
Saskatchewan people deserve the full and true picture of their 
finances, and they also deserve better management, Mr. 
Speaker, of their finances. 
 
Now we’ll have time to follow up with the minister in 
committee with further questions. I don’t believe I have any 
further questions or comments at this point in time. Thanks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy . . . excuse 
me, the Minister of the Economy if he wants to carry on the 
conversation . . . I gather he wants to just stay sitting and talk. 
 
The minister has moved Bill No. 134, The Financial 
Administration Amendment Act, 2014. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When will the Minister for the Economy 
come to order? To which committee shall this bill be referred? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 134, The Financial Administration Amendment 
Act, 2014 be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 135 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 135 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time.] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into discussion of Bill No. 135, The Income 
Tax Amendment Act, 2014. I think most of the questions I 
would have for this bill here for the minister are of a technical 
nature and certainly would be best dealt with at the committee 
structure. But I would have a few comments to it. 
 
I know that a couple of the changes that we see here today are a 
consequence in part of changes that were made federally 
without any consultation with Saskatchewan people, 
stakeholders, or even that government. And you know, that’s a 
concern, Mr. Speaker, when you have a federal government and 
a provincial government that are not understanding the changes 
that they’re making when there’s a consequence for 
Saskatchewan people, organizations, and certainly the 
government as well. This is an area that needs to be improved 
between the federal and provincial government, I would 
believe. 
 
But two of the pieces that I want to address, one of them is the 
credit union changes around taxation. And I just want to say 
that I was, and I’ve conveyed this to government, I was pleased 
that they finally arrived at the right position on this one. 
 
The federal government of course last year put a surprise tax 
hike on the credit unions of Saskatchewan, over 55 credit 
unions, credit unions that do over 50 per cent of the small- and 
medium-sized business lending in this province, a key part of 
our economy, key part of our communities, that have a presence 
in communities that the traditional banks have long left, Mr. 
Speaker, and serve our province in a very important way. 
 
And I should also say that our credit unions are in a very 
different capital environment, Mr. Speaker. They’re not 
publicly traded as our banks are. They cannot gather capital in 
the same way that the banks are, and they should be treated 
differently. And that was the point of the taxation regime that 
was built out for credit unions. And it was a concern to many 
when the federal government hiked taxation, something we 
oppose, something we spoke out federally on as well, Mr. 
Speaker. And it was a concern that this government couldn’t 
give that same commitment, Mr. Speaker. And for the better 
part of the year, they left credit unions with an awful lot of 
uncertainty. That being said, we’re pleased they came to the 
right position on this. 
 
Over the course of the last year as Finance critic for the official 
opposition, I’d advocated directly with the Finance minister and 
with the Premier to not follow suit of the federal government, 
certainly explained the important economic role that credit 
unions fulfill to the people of this province, and pressed the 
government to make a commitment to the credit unions of the 
province, one that they deserved, one that wouldn’t have them 
hiking the taxation of our credit unions. 
 
Although I was frustrated throughout the year that this 
government was unwilling to provide that commitment, I was 
pleased on budget day to see the government finally arrive at 
the right decision and not hike the taxes of credit unions, as had 
been contemplated by government, to the tune of well over $7 
million a year, almost 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker, a hike that 



April 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5173 

would have had its consequences in communities across 
Saskatchewan, a hike that would have had its consequences in 
the economy of this province, and a hike that certainly would 
have impacted many. 
 
So we’re pleased to see that change, which is in part a piece that 
certainly we support in this bill to make sure we respect the 
roles of credit unions. I also know there’s changes as it relates 
to taxation of dividend income. These I guess come about as a 
result of federal changes as well. I have some technical 
questions more or less on that front. I look forward to following 
up with the minister to discuss the consequences intended or 
unintended on this front as well as what sort of consultation 
he’s engaged in as it relates to the subsequent provincial 
changes he’s brought forward on that front. And I know as well, 
there’s changes in here to accommodate the multi-unit 
residential tax structure that’s there to apparently incent the 
development of multi-unit residential structures, buildings. And 
certainly it’s important for us to see more of those buildings 
built. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And we just want to make sure that the government’s following 
through in a thoughtful way with the changes to this Act to 
support that goal, and to make sure that the changes they’re 
putting forward are the best way to do that. But certainly, the 
goal of increasing the number of multi-family residential 
buildings is something that’s really important. 
 
And then I will follow up with some of the questions around 
just the wind-down of the royalty tax rebate program, which I 
understand is no longer necessary because of the changes that 
the federal government has made. 
 
And a couple of other changes that maybe the minister might 
sort of refer to as housekeeping, but certainly we want to make 
sure, as the official opposition, that they don’t just get swept 
aside from consideration. We’ll look at each of those changes at 
the committee structure and make sure that the minister is able 
to clearly communicate the changes that he’s bringing forward, 
the reason for those changes, as well as the broad set of 
consultation that we hope has occurred on each of these fronts. 
 
But as I say, the important piece out of this one, there’s some 
practical changes, it would seem, maybe some of a 
housekeeping nature. We will get into the detail of those. But 
from this I was pleased, as I say, to see government finally 
commit to credit unions at a time where they were given too 
much uncertainty after a federal tax hike that impacted them in 
a negative way. 
 
And we’re pleased that government came to the position that 
we had been advocating, as the official opposition New 
Democrats, all along that it would be wrong for this government 
to hike taxes on our credit unions. 
 
With that being said, Mr. Speaker, actually I’d like to thank on 
this front, the chairs, the boards of credit unions across the 
province, administration, members who engaged with 
government, engaged with the opposition, spoke out publicly in 
communities because I think it was those voices that were really 
critical in influencing government to finally commit and to 

finally make the right decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With that being said, we’ll be following up with these in 
committee. And I don’t have any further questions or comments 
at this point in time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 135, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred to? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 136 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 136 — The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 136, An Act to amend The 
Oil and Gas Conservation Act and to make related amendments 
to The Mineral Resources Act, 1985, The Pipelines Act, 1998 
and certain regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again this is a budget bill that has been 
brought forward by the minister. And it’s obviously brought 
forward as a budget bill because it does relate to the revenues 
that come from the oil and gas industry and it also relates to 
certain expenditures that are being made by the ministry as it 
relates to oil wells, gas wells in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you summarize the Act, in many ways it’s 
about taking a whole number of fees that an oil company might 
pay and wrapping it all up into one fee that they would pay as it 
relates to a new . . . or drilling an oil or gas well. So a new well 
has a certain fee. Now, Mr. Speaker, when you look, the 
legislation is actually quite long because of the fact that we’re 
having to deal with 10 separate fees that are being paid for by 
oil companies. And so just on the straight administrative side, 



5174 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2014 

there are clearly some advantages for the ministry, the 
government agency that’s handling all of this work on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so on that basis alone, I think there’s quite a bit of merit in 
what’s here. But when you look through the types of fees that 
are there and the fact that you wrap it all into one, there may be 
some places where we’ll need to think it through a little more as 
we move forward. 
 
And perhaps I’ll just talk about the types of fees that were 
involved here. Basically right now, if you want to drill a well, 
you have to pay a fee. If you want to transfer the well licence to 
somebody else, you have to pay a fee. If you want to do a 
structure test hole, you have to get a licence and pay a fee for 
that. If you want to change the name of the well to something 
else, you have to pay a fee. If you want a facility licence, in 
other words you’re putting some kind of facility there at the 
well, you have to pay a fee for that. And if you’re going to then 
transfer that to another company, you have to pay another fee. If 
you’ve got an abandoned well and you want to make it deeper 
or if you want to re-spud it, in other words drill another hole in 
the same area, you have to pay a fee for that. And you also have 
to pay a fee for a pipeline, in other words the pipeline that goes 
from the well to the collector pipeline system that’s out in the 
field. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there are . . . And then there’s also a fee if 
you want to change the pipeline licence, and there’s a further 
fee if you want to extend the pipeline, in other words make it 
longer. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a whole number of fees that are there. 
Now one of the things from the perspective of industry is that, 
on any particular well, they may not pay all 10 of those fees 
because some of them are maybe not necessary. And so we 
need to look to make sure that we’re not in a situation where 
some of the fees are going up in a dramatic way that are 
counterproductive to what’s happening now. 
 
Now I don’t think that that’s going to be the case because we 
have the word of the minister that a number of the people in the 
oil industry and gas industry have said this kind of a structure 
makes sense. We also have the experience of our neighbouring 
province to the west that has a structure I think that’s closer to 
where we’re going. So we know that some of these things make 
some sense that way. 
 
But often there are unintended consequences when changes like 
this are made. We know for example that a few years ago there 
was a change in the size of the performance bond that was 
required for gas wells that were drilled on land, and the result of 
that was that some of the smaller oil companies couldn’t get the 
size of performance bond that they required to continue to work 
on the gas wells. And so they just said, well that’s too 
expensive for us; we’re not going to drill those kinds of wells. 
And so then we have complaints from primarily the farmers 
who were getting lease payments that . . . Well the lease 
payments have dried up because of an administrative change 
within the Saskatchewan government ministry related to the oil 
and gas regulation. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we need to keep our eye on the 

suggestions and the changes that are being made here to make 
sure we don’t have similar kinds of unintended consequences 
because I don’t think there’s any intention to effectively cause 
some difficulty, especially for some of our smaller, 
home-grown oil and gas companies. 
 
And so practically we have a situation where there’s going to be 
one annual fee for that particular well as opposed to a whole 
number of different ones, fees that kick in at different times in 
the life of the well. 
 
Now one of the factors as well is that there’s an indication that 
the fees, as they’re going to be set, are going to be equivalent to 
about 90 per cent of the cost of the regulation of the oil and gas 
industry, which amount will be set each year by the Premier and 
cabinet. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think in other provinces they set 
it at 100 per cent but, Saskatchewan, we’re going to start at 90 
per cent. I guess that’s better than 50 per cent, but maybe it’s 
something that should be looked at as well. 
 
But practically what it means is that there’s an ongoing 
adjustment that will be made each year to these fees, and we’re 
hoping that that will be done in a very predictable way. Because 
what we know from the types of oil and gas royalty and revenue 
policies that were set by the New Democrat government 10 
year, 12 years ago, that they had very direct results in the kinds 
of activity and then therefore the revenues for the people of 
Saskatchewan. But when you think about well what was done, 
well it was the predictability, in other words it was the clarity 
and the knowledge that those kinds of royalties were set and 
were going to basically be there as the industry moved forward. 
 
We know that’s the case because when Premier Stelmach, who 
was visiting us last week, made some indications in Alberta that 
they were going to take another look at their royalty structure, 
there were some pretty dramatic changes in the political support 
for his government in Alberta. And ultimately he ended up 
moving out of the job as premier as a result of some of the 
uneasiness that was caused around this. 
 
We also know that in Saskatchewan, when the government 
changed in 2007 and going into 2008, that any comments by the 
Premier to take a look at the structure that was set up by the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] were quickly met with comments 
from the oil and gas industry. And as we’ve seen, those royalty 
structures have remained and continue to provide a situation 
where the Saskatchewan oil and gas industry can expand and 
grow. So our hope is that the provisions that are part of this 
legislation that relate to these fees will be something that works 
well to complement the previous government’s royalty structure 
and not something that’s going to cause uneasiness about how 
these things go forward. 
 
Now the other area that is talked about in the legislation — and 
this where we’ll have to ask some questions in committee but I 
think also watch carefully as the programs are developed — 
relates to the services that are provided to the industry from the 
government. There’s an indication here that they will be 
enhanced, that they will be in a better place on many different 
levels — everything from approving horizontal drilling to 
enhancing the air quality monitoring and enforcement, dealing 
with contaminated sites, and dealing with the, you know, 
operating, monitoring, and enforcements. 



April 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5175 

As we know, the more activity that you have in the oil and gas 
field, the greater chance there is for something to go wrong, and 
so the fact that there is an indication that some of these things 
will be monitored more closely, I think that’s important. But it’s 
our job as legislators, it’s our job as members of our 
communities across the province to identify things that don’t go 
quite correctly and make sure that they’re fixed as soon as 
possible. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And so practically we have legislation that is eliminating lots of 
pieces of paper or lots of applications and lots of bills going 
back and forth. That’s I think probably a very good thing. But it 
also has this other aspect of using what resources do come in to 
enhance the service, enhance the monitoring, enhance the 
community scrutiny of an important industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that there are a number of good things 
about the bill, but there are also some things that we’ll need to 
get some further explanation about when we’re in our 
committee setting. But at this point, I have no further 
comments. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Energy and Resources that Bill 
No. 136, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2014 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 136, The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2014 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
order to facilitate the work of committee, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:32.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5157, 5158 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5157 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5157 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5157 
  Docherty ........................................................................................................................................................................ 5157, 5158 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5157 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5157 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5157 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5157 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5158 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5158 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5158 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5158 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5158 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5159 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5159 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5159 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering Jim Flaherty 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5159 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5160 
 Congratulating Hill School of Business 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5160 
 Protest Supports Equal Rights 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5160 
 Sod-Turning for New Transition House 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5161 
 Saskatchewan Country Music Association Awards 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5161 
 Aboriginal Bursary Program 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5161 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Health Care Workers and the Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5161 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5162 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5163 
 Ministry of Education Sector Plan 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5163 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5164 
 Provision of Occupational Therapy and Other Student Supports 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5165 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5165 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5166 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 132 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5166 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5167 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5170 
 Bill No. 133 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5170 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5171 
 Bill No. 134 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5171 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5172 
  



 

 Bill No. 135 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5172 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5173 
 Bill No. 136 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2014 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5173 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5175 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


