




















































Hansard: March 25, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 39B  TUESDAY, MARCH 25, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4913 

 March 25, 2014 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. I 

recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was able to 

wrap up my substantive comments before the supper break. I’ll 

just clean up now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was doing a few thank yous as is tradition during 

the budget speech, Mr. Speaker. I’d certainly like to thank my 

constituency assistant, Brittany, who does great work on behalf 

of the people of Regina Dewdney. 

 

Of course I’d like to thank the minister, the minister and the 

treasury board who do a lot of work, Mr. Speaker. For the folks 

that might be watching at home, this is basically a year-round 

event. We hear about the budget once a year, people out there in 

the province, but this is a very substantive, long process. And 

certainly we have one of the best Finance ministers, I believe 

the best in Canada, so we’re very fortunate that he’s on our 

side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly I’d like to thank of course and I always will try to do 

this every time I can, thank the constituents of Regina Dewdney 

who put their trust in me, a rookie person in politics, and they 

put their trust in me a couple of years ago in the last election, 

Mr. Speaker. So I thank them for that, certainly. And when I 

think about the people of Regina Dewdney, and of course all 

the people across the province, I think of all the great growth 

that continues to happen in our constituency, and I think of the 

families in our constituency, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Wascana Plains talked about her parents. I’m lucky enough to 

have them in my constituency, and those are the type of people 

that worked so hard to build our province, Mr. Speaker. They 

are people that opened up business, they farm in our province, 

they work hard to support their families. And that’s certainly 

the people I continue to look forward to represent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of the small-business owners, and certainly in Regina 

Dewdney there are a lot of them. I think about the area along 

Quance Street, Victoria Avenue East and that corridor there; 

there’s all kinds of businesses. Certainly people think about the 

big box stores along there, but a lot of the companies that have 

opened up recently are small businesses, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s certainly the backbone of our province: the people that 

take risks, that put their money in harm’s way to follow that 

dream to be able to be their own boss, Mr. Speaker. I have a lot 

of respect for those folks that do that. And certainly like I 

mentioned, very important to the economy. And they employ a 

lot of people, Mr. Speaker. So I’m certainly very honoured and 

happy to represent them. 

 

I also think about the volunteers in our great province of 

Saskatchewan. And I know we have the highest volunteer 

participation rate in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And I think of 

someone like Phyllis Bamford, Mr. Speaker. She’s the president 

and has been for many, many years of the Dewdney East 

constituency — not constituency, but the Dewdney East 

community group, Mr. Speaker — and they do great work in 

that community, as recently with the member from Northeast at 

a Community Connections event, Mr. Speaker. And it was a 

chance for people to welcome newcomers to Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and I was able talk to people from the Open Door 

Society, and they do just great work with newcomers in our 

province. And of course we know that we have records amount 

of people coming to our great province, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 

a refreshing change from what we had seen for many years 

previous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think of Phyllis. And they’ve also opened many, a couple 

of parks — swing sets and play structures and those kind of 

things in the area, Mr. Speaker. So those things are quality of 

life things, and people like Phyllis, they don’t do it for money, 

obviously. They do it because they think it’s important to give 

back, Mr. Speaker. They volunteer their time, expect nothing in 

return, and they make our province so much better. So when I 

think of the families and the good folks and the people that 

work so hard in our province and the people of Regina 

Dewdney, I’m very happy to be able to represent people like 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thought I’d turn my comments . . . It seems 

lately on the backbenches you get to watch things that are 

happening in the House. And lately there’s been talk from the 

members opposite. It seems it’s been a bit of fascination, or 

they seem to be hung up on Japanese terms for things that are 

going on in government. And I thought it’s kind of interesting. I 

think it’s in a few situations I’ve seen tweets and things on the 

Internet and it’s almost like they are mocking those terms, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think it’s sort of a distraction as to what the 

important work that’s going on. 

 

I know a few of them. They’ve been talking about sensei over 

and over. They’ve said that many, many times during question 

period. They’ve talked about the word kaizen and, Mr. Speaker, 

I have a little bit of history with the word kaizen, Mr. Speaker, 

so I didn’t have to look it up as to what it was. I knew about it. 

And I heard that many, many years ago, many years ago when I 

was playing football and one of the coaches I had at the time, 

that was sort of one of his mottoes. And what kaizen means is 

continual, never-ending improvement every single day. And 

that sort of became a motto of ours at the time, Mr. Speaker. 

And I thought, you know, that’s a pretty good saying. That’s 

pretty interesting. It kind of sort of hit home to me. I remember 

it all these years later so it must of sort of sunk in a little bit. 

 

And another thing that coach talked about all those years ago 

was not related to that, but it was, it takes no talent, it takes no 



4914 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

talent to do those little things every single day that will get you 

better. And it may be something as easy as watching a little bit 

more film, getting in the weight room just the five extra more 

minutes, Mr. Speaker. And so those are one of those things that 

you can get just a little bit better every day. His philosophy, that 

coach, was if you get just a little bit better every day, that will 

add up. That’ll add up, and you will get better, and you’ll get 

better. 

 

And certainly when I think about those years, I think that year 

was a turning point certainly in my career. I got better. We were 

a young group then, but the coach would always ask, not every 

day but most days, what did you do to get better? What little 

thing did you do? What did you concentrate on to get just a 

little bit better? 

 

And of course you would have to fill him in. Well you know, I 

really worked on my first step. I worked on my hand placement. 

I watched a little bit more film, Mr. Speaker. And sure enough 

. . . And like I said, we had some real young, raw guys that 

worked really hard. He made us work quite hard, but we got 

much, much better. And we bought in a little bit to that motto, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I don’t bring that up, and obviously, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

not . . . The word isn’t why we achieved more. We got better. 

And I should mention that history proved that that group, it was 

young but over time there was many players that went on to 

very good things, very good things in the league. 

 

And so again, the point here is what . . . I’m not trying to make 

that that was a magic word that just automatically things 

happened, but sort of a mindset. And certainly I think it 

illustrates that if we had, if I . . . I don’t want to speak too much 

for my team, my former teammates, but if I took the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] attitude of just sort of mocking that word and 

saying, oh that can’t work; it’s a silly word; it doesn’t mean 

anything; it’s something I don’t understand — if we had taken 

that attitude, I don’t think good things might have happened that 

year. So I think, as I mentioned before, the members opposite 

are maybe getting a little bit hung up on the words and 

worrying about the wrong thing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I thought I would help the members opposite 

to realize that the words aren’t that big of a deal, but also get 

them a little more comfortable with some of the sayings and 

how they apply to this budget. So I looked up a few words that I 

think are applicable to the current budget, Mr. Speaker. And 

one of the words is kinkouyosan. It means a balanced budget, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve had seven balanced budgets since this 

government took office, Mr. Speaker, three since I’ve been able 

to be an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], Mr. 

Speaker. And the other term, mattaku zouzei shinai, no tax 

increases, Mr. Speaker. No tax increases. 

 

And certainly I think those two sayings, or not the words 

necessarily but what happens and what it means, is enough for 

me. Just those two things, if I heard that I’d be more than happy 

to support this budget, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to do that for 

sure. 

 

But what else does it mean? It’s not the words, but what it 

means to our province, Mr. Speaker. One example is $50 

million less in interest costs just this year alone, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s $50 million that will no longer have to be paid to banks 

outside our province, Mr. Speaker. That’s nearly $1 billion in 

saved interest payments since ’07. So we’ve been paying off 

NDP debt for all these years, Mr. Speaker, and it allows us to 

invest rather than pay out to banks and bondholders, Mr. 

Speaker. And so I would like to commend the government in its 

first term who paid off large amounts of debt, Mr. Speaker. We 

paid off 44 per cent of the GRF [General Revenue Fund] debt in 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again we’ve talked about the growth plan on 

this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. It’s a plan that we have to 

grow this economy to be able to make strategic investments, not 

only strategic investments but also the money we’ve saved on 

paying off NDP debt, Mr. Speaker. And of course that growth 

helps for the following. I’m going to focus on a few things that 

are important in the budget to the people of Regina specifically. 

But of course my colleagues have much more eloquently said 

many things, the great things this budget has done for our 

province, so I’ll just hit on a few, Mr. Speaker, while I have 

time here. 

 

Certainly we’ve been able to do great work on the municipal 

revenue-sharing side, Mr. Speaker. Now I hear when I talk to 

my constituents out there, a lot of them say we need the roads to 

get better, we need the roads to get better in our cities. And 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, I hear that a lot. And constituents of 

course, sometimes when you’re a politician at their door or 

you’re talking to them at the mall or whatever, they’re not sure 

which level of government that city roads are a part of, Mr. 

Speaker, who they belong to. But certainly the city of Regina 

this year is getting roughly $40 million in revenue sharing, up 

154 per cent since 2007, Mr. Speaker, obviously a lot of cash 

there. I know our mayor certainly calls this the envy of . . . 

What happens in our province, 1 per cent of the GST [goods 

and services tax] goes directly to municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

He calls it the envy of Canada, and I certainly commend the 

cabinet for taking that move, Mr. Speaker, and helping with that 

municipal infrastructure. 

 

Certainly in this budget we’ve seen from the minister long-term 

care upgrades in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. That 

will be coming. That’s important work. We’ve heard from the 

members opposite a lot about long-term care and their concerns 

about that. We’re acting on this and it’s good to see that’s 

happening in our capital city. 

 

Work continues on road infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. I 

mentioned just earlier, on the municipal side they’re able to do 

so much more with the money we’ve helped them out with, but 

the Ministry of Highways has worked diligently on overpasses 

and bypasses in the Regina area, which are again so important. 

The west Regina bypass recently, the overpass at Pinkie was 

opened and work continues there, moving north towards 

Dewdney on Pinkie Road and certainly to the great work that’s 

happening at the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of course, the east bypass, it wouldn’t be a speech of mine if I 

didn’t talk about the east bypass. And certainly Victoria Avenue 

East runs through the heart of Regina Dewdney and certainly a 

thing I hear lots from my constituents over and over is the 

traffic, the traffic that is along Victoria Avenue. There’s seven 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4915 

traffic lights between Prince of Wales Drive and the Ring Road. 

And there’s a lot of heavy hauling going on, which is a good 

thing. It’s a good thing to see that, Mr. Speaker, but certainly if 

we could bypass some of that through the outskirts of the city of 

Regina, it will alleviate that congestion. It also speaks, Mr. 

Speaker, to safety certainly with that increased traffic and with 

the overpasses. And the plans that are being worked on will 

help with that safety factor and that issue. 

 

And certainly it’s a massive project, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to 

cost a lot of money. It’s going to take quite a bit of time, but 

we’re working on it. And that’s great to see, and that’s good 

news for Regina and area certainly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 1.8 billion has been spent on highways since 

2011. Well on our way to the promised $2.2 billion of highway 

infrastructure. So that’s good for our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget as well there’s $50 million for the 

stadium, for the Regina revitalization initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s a big project for our city, another big project. 

Certainly not only is it going to be a great facility, something to 

be very proud of for our province and certainly the city of 

Regina of course, but also the revitalization of the footprint of 

the current Mosaic Stadium, there’ll be revitalization there. So 

certainly a big game changer for the city of Regina, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[19:15] 

 

And certainly it falls along with a lot of things that are 

happening in the CFL [Canadian Football League] in terms of 

stadiums, Mr. Speaker. I know in BC [British Columbia] they 

put a retrofitted, retractable dome that came with an over $500 

million price tag, and that certainly puts our project into 

perspective, Mr. Speaker. Winnipeg’s opened a new stadium. 

Coming new this year is Hamilton, has a new facility coming, 

Mr. Speaker. Ottawa is coming back in the league. One whole 

side of their stands is going to be brand new, Mr. Speaker. And 

there’s talk in Toronto of course of the Argos moving to an 

outdoor facility. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s exciting news. Of 

course I’m off on a tangent here, but that’s okay. It’s good news 

for our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One thing I haven’t heard though, from the members opposite, 

is they’ve been very quiet on this stadium issue, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly it’s a big project for us and it is a large price tag, Mr. 

Speaker. But I think back to the 1930s and 1940s; I’m sure they 

said the same thing about the current stadium now, Mr. 

Speaker. And you think about what that facility, what that field 

has meant to this province and this city, Mr. Speaker. It brings 

all sorts of people in during the games, also concerts, those 

types of things, Mr. Speaker. And just the relationship the 

Roughriders have with our community and with our province, 

Mr. Speaker, and all that would have been lost if there wasn’t 

those investments made. 

 

And certainly, when you look at the current stadium, it is a 

large price tag, Mr. Speaker. But again up front, yes, it does 

cost a lot of money, Mr. Speaker, but think of all the events that 

will happen in the next 50 or 60 years. This is a long-term 

project, Mr. Speaker. And so you think about all the 

relationships that are built in the stands. You think about all the 

amateur sports that happen on the field, Mr. Speaker, and boy, 

it’s just sort of a magnet and a meeting place for our 

community. And it’s going to be exciting to see what it looks 

like, first of all, when it gets start being built and of course 

when we see the new stadium right there on the exhibition 

grounds there, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be an exciting day, 

and we look forward to that. 

 

But I also mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they 

usually, you know, they oppose everything basically. They 

oppose everything, and I haven’t heard them say, come out yea 

or nay on the stadium. So where do they stand on it, Mr. 

Speaker? I’d be interested to see. I believe the member from 

Elphinstone-Centre hasn’t spoken yet. I’d like to see what he 

has to say with the infrastructure build right in his constituency. 

 

And speaking of that also, Mr. Speaker, in this budget we have 

12 homes for Habitat for Humanity being built, $750,000 on top 

of the millions of dollars we’ve contributed to that great 

initiative, Mr. Speaker. So we’re excited about that. I’ve been to 

a few key ceremonies. I’ve been able to contribute some of my 

time to those projects. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, many of those builds happen in the 

constituency of Elphinstone-Centre, Mr. Speaker. They happen 

right there. So I guess we’ll wait and see, Mr. Speaker, about 

how that member votes on the budget on Thursday, but those 

are new homes. Those are new families moving to that area. It’s 

about urban renewal. It’s about families getting a chance to own 

their own home. So, Mr. Speaker, I would urge that member to 

think, consider and think about how he’s going to vote because 

these are important infrastructure bills in his constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Speaking of another new initiative, Mr. Speaker, is we’re 

having . . . Well I have the Japanese term for it. I’m continuing 

my education here. Atarashi gakkou, that’s the word for new 

schools. Those are new schools that are happening right here in 

Regina, two new schools. Sacred Heart and Connaught School, 

Mr. Speaker, those are important to our city. Again they are 

right in the constituency of Lakeview and Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

So I urge that member . . . I know the NDP has a big track 

record of opposing everything. They simply oppose everything. 

And, Mr. Speaker, so they simply oppose everything but they 

also . . . Important to that also is they have no kaikaku. They 

have no kaikaku. They don’t have a plan, Mr. Speaker. They 

don’t have a plan for what’s going to happen for our province, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to simply oppose 

everything, and that’s fine. That’s what they choose to do. So 

you know, it’s been said before if you oppose everything, you 

oppose nothing. 

 

But what we’d like to see, and certainly I think the people of the 

province deserve, what would they do differently. It’s easy to 

oppose; anybody can do that, Mr. Speaker. But what would you 

do? And more importantly, what would you do differently? 

How would you pay for it? How would you pay for it? I think 

that’s two very important questions the members opposite just 

haven’t answered, Mr. Speaker. And I think the people of the 

province deserve to have that debate happen. This is what this 

House is for. That’s what this beautiful building is all about, 

having that debate. And so we’ll see what happens, Mr. 



4916 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Speaker. 

 

But I’d like to thank my constituents once again. I’d like to 

thank the minister and the treasury board once again for tabling 

a great budget, Mr. Speaker, certainly the envy of many, many 

jurisdictions. Like I said before, a balanced budget with no new 

taxes. Many, many, many, many jurisdictions — national, 

subnational, municipal — would love to be able to say that. I 

think that would make the front page. We’ve gotten fairly used 

to it here, Mr. Speaker. The last seven budgets, as I mentioned, 

have had that situation, Mr. Speaker. So I think a lot of places 

they’d have a parade or they’d have some sort of celebration to 

note that accomplishment, Mr. Speaker. We’re very lucky 

we’ve had prudent management of our resources. That’s what 

the people expect from our government, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

what we’ve been able to do in this budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to wrap up my comments and listen to 

my friends here, my fellow MLAs. They will be able to talk 

about the steady growth budget far more eloquently than me, 

Mr. Speaker. But I’d like to say that I definitely will be, on 

behalf of the people of Regina Dewdney, be supporting this 

budget. So thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good evening. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand in the House and represent 

the people from Moose Jaw North and to express a note of 

thanks to all the people in Moose Jaw, especially in Moose Jaw 

North, who support me. 

 

Also a great deal of thanks to my family, my wife, Debbie, for 

all the support she gives me, as well as the constituency office. 

I’ve got three people that work there regularly, two part-time, 

Deb Mutlow and Rosalie Boots; and then my full-time assistant 

is Judy Hatfield who is very diligent in working with the 

constituents for the constituency, doing a great job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister delivered the Saskatchewan 

Party government’s seventh balanced budget in this Legislative 

Assembly just last Wednesday. The budget was entitled Steady 

Growth, planning for economic strength and caring for the 

people of Saskatchewan. Growth really is what this budget is all 

about. It’s common sense, fiscally responsible, beneficial to all 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, since last Wednesday, the Finance 

minister has been making presentations to different groups, 

different locations throughout the province. And yesterday I sat 

down with him for just a few minutes and asked him, what is 

the reception that he’s getting with these presentations at 

different locations of the province? 

 

And without a doubt, the presentations are being very well 

received. Everybody is quite excited that this is a balanced 

budget. There’s no tax increases. It’s investing in infrastructure 

and investing in people and it is controlling spending. And I 

think that’s very prudent of this government to come up with 

this. I want to thank the minister for his guidance on this, and 

his ministry and all the people involved in bringing this budget 

to fruition for the people of Saskatchewan. The Finance 

minister could have . . . could see, hear no negative impact on 

this budget, and we appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at last week’s budget presentation there was a 

number of guests that I had brought into the budget 

presentation. They were delighted to be here. It’s always nice to 

be invited and especially I appreciate them coming in to the 

House here to hear the budget. After they were here, they all 

expressed a great deal of gratitude and appreciation for the 

minister and the Premier for the leadership that he provides. 

 

They did have one thing that they were very disappointed in, 

and I kind of went into some discussion with that. I guess with 

the amount of space on that side of the room, they were seated 

behind the opposition benches, and the one guest of mine was 

very frustrated with all the nattering that was going on. And if I 

can quote him: “I was frustrated at the ignorance, disrespectful 

manner of the member from Athabasca.” The guest was 

astounded at the reaction of this member who had really 

tarnished his visit to this House. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

unfortunate that the uncouth actions of a member actually 

ruined the visit for one of our visitors to their Legislative 

Assembly, and especially on this historic day of our budget 

presentation. 

 

And it was a historic day. This is the seventh balanced budget 

that this government has brought out. There’s no tax increases. 

It controls spending while investing in infrastructure and 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, probably, and this has been gone over before, but 

probably the biggest change was the actual budget reporting 

strategy. The government is now reporting on the summary 

financial for the province, which includes all aspects of 

government finances, including the Saskatchewan Crown 

finances as well as the core income and expenses of our 

government. This change is to accommodate recommendations 

of the Provincial Auditor. And this has been something that 

they’ve mentioned, over the last six years since I’ve been 

involved, that this is something they would like to see changed. 

So I think it’s very well done that this government has decided 

to make that step and go into the summary finances. 

 

Whereas the summary financial figures were always reported, 

the actual business of the government was reported more 

specifically on the income received from taxes and resource 

revenue, and compared with the expenditures of programs, 

invested in programs like health care and highways and social 

services, parks, corrections, education, and so on. The Crowns’ 

financial had been reported separately and now it’ll be included 

with the summary finances. 

 

Because the Crowns are so unique to Saskatchewan — we have 

more than most provinces — the summary financials statement 

is a little bit more elaborate and takes a little bit more planning. 

But the summary financial will be the total financial picture of 

the province. We will also continue to report the income and 

expenses of the government core operations; however the 

reporting will be around the summary financial statement. 

 

This budget projects less revenue, smaller revenue than the 

previous year, and that’s understandable with the revenue from 

resources, especially potash. And we’ve had to react 

accordingly. So this balanced budget is balanced by controlling 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4917 

spending through programs and expenditures of the 

government. 

 

It is for the betterment of all Saskatchewan people that this 

budget was designed as a balanced budget with major projects 

all throughout the province. If you go through the budget you 

will hear major projects in Yorkton, La Ronge, North 

Battleford, Swift Current, Lloydminster, Estevan, Prince Albert, 

and Moose Jaw. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And I’m pleased, but not particularly surprised, that there is 

funding included for the completion of the new hospital. It’s the 

lean design, proven efficiencies, and better patient care. Mr. 

Speaker, when the hospital was announced three years ago, the 

minister of the day told me quite distinctly that we would not 

announce it unless we knew we had the funds to carry it 

through and actually see it built. So it was not surprising but it 

was certainly pleasing to see the expenditure for the completion 

of the hospital in Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the opposition is against lean, and I have 

no idea why. Lean is a proven program that has been proven 

over the years in different aspects of all society. So the lean 

concept is being introduced in our health system and is being 

very efficient. In fact yesterday the CEO [chief executive 

officer] of the Five Hills Health Region, Cheryl Craig, 

expressed her support for the lean principles in her interview on 

CHAB radio. 

 

Also in this budget, Mr. Speaker, there’s funding provided for 

major renovations for Sacred Heart School in Moose Jaw and 

funding made available to make sure the progress of Valley 

View Centre continues appropriately. My colleague from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow this morning was at the key presentation 

for the Habitat for Humanity this morning, for another family. 

And Habitat for Humanity is another program that this 

government is very in support of, and there’s money in the 

budget for continuing the Habitat for Humanity. 

 

Steady growth is probably the best description that I can put for 

my city of Moose Jaw. When we think of Moose Jaw, Mr. 

Speaker, we think of tourism obviously: the Temple Gardens 

Mineral Spa, the Tunnels of Moose Jaw, the murals. There are 

three outstanding museums, the heritage buildings. 

 

And unfortunately just about 10 days ago, one of the heritage 

buildings burned down. Thank goodness there was no loss of 

life, but it does disrupt the people there. I want to mention, 

Nelson Reid was one of the owners of a little bookstore right 

beside where the fire took place. Nelson was the first one to 

smell the smoke and certainly reacted very quickly in helping to 

alert all the residents and get everybody out. So I certainly want 

to recognize him for doing that. 

 

There are still a good number of heritage buildings in Moose 

Jaw, and there’s good gift shops and good shopping. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a good place to live. And I’m pleased to represent 

the people in this legislature. 

 

There’s a lot that happens in Moose Jaw. We have the largest 

CP [Canadian Pacific] rail centre between Calgary and 

Winnipeg. The new K+S potash mine continues to go into 

construction and develop with a lot of spinoffs in major 

construction around the area. The industrial corridor with 

Mosaic and Yara Belle Plaine potash and the ethanol plant, all 

part of the growth of the area and the growth of Moose Jaw. In 

Moose Jaw there’s manufacturing of windows, there’s Doepker 

Industries, there’s CJAY Trailers manufacturings. Moose Jaw’s 

the medical centre for the Five Hills Health Region, and that’s 

why the hospital is so important for the city. 

 

There is a lot that’s happening in Moose Jaw. There’s two new 

car dealers that are building to go along with a lot of the car 

dealers that have expanded in recent years. A lot of businesses 

along Thatcher Drive, with the new hotels, autobody, carpet 

stores, service centres, restaurants. Most important of all to 

Moose Jaw, even though it’s a great centre with a lot of things 

happening, but agriculture is very important to the city of 

Moose Jaw. Even though Moose Jaw North, my constituency, is 

considered an urban constituency, we really rely very heavily 

on the sector of agriculture to grow the city and keep the city 

active. And I want to spend a few minutes talking about 

agriculture and how it pertains to the budget and to the city of 

Moose Jaw. 

 

This government realizes the importance of agriculture and 

understands the need to support and present agricultural 

producers’ interests in this province. Agriculture investment in 

the budget includes research, education, regulations, and 

investment in value-added sector. Direct support is provided to 

farmers through loans, income stability programs, and insurance 

programs. Agriculture investment is in Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation, the Saskatchewan Agricultural 

Stabilization Fund, Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, the 

Pastures Revolving Fund, Prairie Diagnostic Services, the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, and Livestock Service 

Revolving Fund. This government supports our agricultural 

producers. 

 

In and around Moose Jaw, agriculture is a huge industry. We’ve 

got the big grain companies like Cargill Limited, Viterra, 

Parrish & Heimbecker. And we’ve got a couple of real specialty 

plants like Simpson Seeds who is in their second generation of 

supporting the agricultural in split peas and lentils and specialty 

crops.  

 

We’ve got a new . . . expanded in that area and that was 

Agricorp. This was a $10 million investment that opened just 

last year, Mr. Speaker. It’s a huge facility just on the edge of 

Moose Jaw, and already they’re planning an expansion of $3 

million. To them, Mr. Speaker, the grain transportation is a 

huge issue. And to Agricorp, I was talking to them on the 

weekend, and their first allocation of grain cars for this month 

came on the weekend. March 21st was the first grain car 

allocation they received. So good for this government to be 

proactive and encouraging the federal government to take action 

and step up and get the grain moving. 

 

Yet, you know what, Mr. Speaker? The Leader of the 

Opposition has not made a phone call. He’s not wrote a letter. 

He’s not even wrote one email in support of producers on the 

grain transportation issue. Mr. Speaker, that side over there has 

very little comprehension about agriculture. There’s no 

understanding about agriculture or agricultural problems. And 



4918 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

they continue to be out of touch with agriculture. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, just on March 13th the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, the agriculture critic implied that the biggest 

and worst, and I’m quoting from Hansard here: “The biggest, 

worst thing that could happen right now is a bumper crop again 

this year.” The biggest and worst thing that could happen right 

now is a bumper crop again this year. What a crazy thing to say. 

It just doesn’t even make sense, and it doesn’t make any sense 

to anybody on this side.  

 

And I even asked a few of my agricultural friends, what would 

be the worst thing that could happen. Well one guy said, you 

know, if we couldn’t get our seed in the ground, that would be 

the worst that could happen. And I said that’s the worst that 

could happen? Well, he says, no, maybe not. The worst that 

could happen is if we got the seed in the ground and then it 

didn’t grow. And I says, well that would be the worst that could 

happen. Well, maybe not. He says if you got the seed in the 

ground, you put all the chemicals and fertilizer, and sprayed it, 

and then a hail storm came and wiped it all out. That would be 

the worst. And I said, well that would be pretty bad. 

 

Well, he said, you know, if you put the seed in the ground and it 

grew and you put all the chemicals and fertilizers with it. And 

then you went and combined it, your combine started on fire, 

burned all the grain, and took the whole house and the 

homestead with it. That would be the worst thing that could 

happen. And I said, well what if you had another bumper crop? 

How would that fare? Well that would be pretty good, he 

thought. You know, so where they’re coming from, I don’t 

know. But the worst thing that could happen wouldn’t be 

another bumper crop, that’s for sure. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the movement of grain is vital to the 

survival of farming, the farming business. And it certainly 

would be devastating to around Moose Jaw if it didn’t happen. 

That’s why this government placed a motion in support of grain 

transportation. That’s why there’s a policy in place in this 

budget to assist agricultural producers. We believe in 

agriculture. We care about farmers. We work for them to assure 

agriculture is sustainable, and we have programs in place to 

assist where needed. In the budget there’s care for agriculture. 

 

The budget is balanced. There’s no tax increases, and this is a 

huge issue in the province as the province continues to grow. 

Mr. Speaker, over the last six years our government lowered 

taxes, making Saskatchewan one of the lowest tax jurisdictions 

in Canada from being one of the highest under the NDP. 

Personal income tax was lowered. Property tax was lowered. 

Small business corporate tax was also lowered. With no tax 

increases and controlled spending there remains the major 

investment to benefit all of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Infrastructure remains a priority of this government as well. 

There are increases in spending and health care and education, 

in highways as well as increased benefits to assist seniors and 

those with disabilities. Families will benefit from more daycare 

spaces, new schools, and post-secondary investments. Programs 

like the graduation retention program and the Saskatchewan 

Advantage Scholarship will continue to assist families and 

students. Major Crown corporations will continue to invest to 

upgrade the system and keep planning for the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget will keep Saskatchewan on the path to 

steady growth. It is a budget to benefit all Saskatchewan 

citizens with these major points. It is a balanced budget. There 

are no tax increases. It controls spending. It’s investing in 

infrastructure and investing in people. This is a budget I will 

support, and I will not support the opposition amendment. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 

enter into the debate tonight on the budget. This is actually the 

fifth opportunity I’ve had since I’ve been an MLA to wade into 

the budget discussion here. And usually it’s nice to start, to 

have the opportunity to thank some of the important people in 

our lives who allow us the opportunity to be able to serve here 

and do the best we possibly can. 

 

I have to start actually with my 16-year-old daughter. This time 

16 years ago, Mr. Speaker, I was holding a two-hour-old baby. 

It’s my daughter Hennessey’s 16th birthday today. And really, 

Mr. Speaker, it was the birth of Hennessey when I was 27 years 

old that changed my outlook on life. Her birth, our relationship, 

our time together when I was home with her for several years, 

her needs as a child, my needs as a parent, those all helped 

shape my political perspective and actually compelled me into 

my own experience as an activist at that point. I had grown up 

in an activist family, but it wasn’t really until Hennessey was 

born where I found the place where I felt like I needed to make 

a difference, and that was on ensuring that families have the 

support they need to lead the best possible lives. So happy 

birthday, Hennessey. Hennessey usually doesn’t like any 

attention being drawn to her whatsoever but . . . Again I’m glad 

to be in this budget debate tonight, but I am a little sad that I’m 

not there with her celebrating her 16th birthday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Does she have her driver’s licence yet? 

 

Ms. Chartier: — That’s another discussion, Minister of 

Finance. 

 

I also want to thank my six-year-old, Ophelia, who is quite an 

amazing little girl, fiercely independent and a little bit sassy, but 

she’s bright and knows far more about politics than any 

six-year-old should ever know and spends a great deal of time 

listening to the radio — we always have the radio on in the 

house — and always has questions about the news. So I think 

the two most important people in my life, Mr. Speaker, are 

Ophelia and Hennessey, and they make huge sacrifices so their 

mom can serve the people of Saskatoon Riversdale and the 

province of Saskatchewan. And one of the reasons I’m doing it 

is for them, too, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not without some 

difficulties. 

 

I want to thank my mom and dad, who continue to be there 

whenever I need them. They live two blocks from me, Mr. 

Speaker. I live two blocks from where I grew up and my parents 

have been in that home for almost 60 years, actually. And 

Grandpa Rusty still walks down to the school when Ophelia’s 

finished kindergarten and picks her up and brings her home. 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4919 

And Grandma Georgie makes cookies with Ophelia. Grandpa 

Rusty makes ice cream. And they hang out. And I’m really 

grateful that I have parents who are willing and able to spend 

time with my kids. I think it’s pretty special to have parents 

close by and parents who are still well and totally keen on being 

the awesome grandparents that they are and awesome parents to 

me. I couldn’t do this job without my parents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My sister Michelle and her husband, John, who I mention every 

time I have an opportunity. My sister is like a second mother to 

my children, and in my absence today on Hennessey’s birthday, 

Michelle was there picking up Ophelia from child care at lunch, 

racing over to the high school to take her a cupcake, and 

coming home and then going out and seeing Hennessey again. 

So my sister Michelle makes sure that my kids are good and 

that I’m good too. And for that I’m grateful for Auntie Mich 

and Uncle John. 

 

[19:45] 

 

My assistants, my constituency assistants, both Vanessa and 

Judy and Puck, when Puck is in my office, they do a great job 

of ensuring that people in Saskatoon Riversdale have what they 

need, and I am grateful for their incredible skills. They bring to 

that office compassion, integrity, and determination to get good 

things done, and all three of them are incredibly smart women. 

 

I would be remiss if I didn’t actually mention my child care 

providers, Aryn and Carly. Ophelia goes to child care with four 

little boys actually, and Ophelia at six is the matriarch of these 

. . . of the child care, actually. These four little boys, who are all 

under four, absolutely adore Ophelia, and Ophelia absolutely 

loves and nurtures them. Like I said, she’s a little bit sassy, but 

she’s incredibly nurturing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to also thank my kids’ dads for being there when 

I’m not there as well, to ensure that my girls have what they 

need when they need them. 

 

And last but not least in thinking about — well actually this 

isn’t last but not least — the people of Saskatoon Riversdale 

who continue to trust me to do work for them, who share the 

good and the bad of their lives, and on a daily basis to help me 

come prepared to the legislature, to have the privilege of being 

their voice in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to thank actually all the caucus staff we have. 

Sometimes I think as MLAs we always remember our 

constituency staff, but sometimes forget to thank or 

acknowledge all the hard work that our caucus staff does. We 

have a small staff who I think does a mighty work, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think, in general, the staff in the legislature, all the 

legislative staff, right from the committees branch to the 

cafeteria and everyone in between does a great job of ensuring 

that all of us, every MLA in this building, is well supported to 

do the work of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now to the task at hand. I’d like obviously to talk about the 

2014-2015 budget here tonight. It’s interesting hearing from the 

members opposite who talk about opposition as opposing 

everything. The reality is, Mr. Speaker, our job is to hold this 

government to account, and where they aren’t doing what they 

need to do to ensure people in Saskatchewan are well supported 

and are leading full and meaningful lives, it’s our job to call 

into question and point out the holes where the government is 

failing, Mr. Speaker. That is a big part of our job. 

 

But it’s also interesting to hear members on their feet say, well 

there’s no plan. What else, what would the NDP do differently? 

And I will get to that, Mr. Speaker. But we have a private 

member’s . . . Mr. Speaker, we have a private member’s bill 

before this legislature, Bill 606, The Residents-in-care Bill of 

Rights Act. That’s a fine place to start, Mr. Speaker, but I will 

speak about that a little bit further down, Mr. Speaker. That is 

one of the things that we would do differently, among many 

others. 

 

There’s a few areas that I’d like to cover, but sort of in light of 

thinking about my children, I would like to start with this 

government’s record on child care in this particular budget, Mr. 

Speaker, and what some of the problems in this budget are with 

respect to child care. 

 

So child care, Mr. Speaker, is about economic development. It’s 

about economic development, Mr. Speaker. People cannot be 

engaged in employment or education if they do not have 

reliable child care that they trust and that they feel comfortable 

in. So that’s one big piece of child care: economic development. 

You can’t ensure that people are in the workforce if they don’t 

have child care that they can rely on. 

 

Another piece, it’s about also ensuring our children are well 

equipped, Mr. Speaker, from pre-K to grade 12 

[pre-kindergarten to grade 12] education and beyond so they 

have the brightest future possible. Those are two of the things 

that child care is about: economic development and ensuring 

our children have the best possible start to ensure a long-term 

future both for them and for the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there is nothing worse, nothing worse, Mr. Speaker, than 

leaving your child in care that you don’t quite trust. You know 

you don’t have any other options, but this is where you have 

arranged and you go to work or you go to school in the morning 

with this feeling of unease, Mr. Speaker. And every day you go, 

you drop your child off and, you know, you’re just not feeling 

great about that, but you have no options, Mr. Speaker. That is a 

huge reality for so many people today, Mr. Speaker, here in 

Saskatchewan. In the last week, in the last week I’ve spoken to 

two people who have had their child care arrangements fall 

through, and it’s incredibly frustrating and stressful, creates 

huge amount of anxiety for individuals. 

 

And the reality is women still carry a huge, the bulk of child 

care responsibility, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s providing care in 

the home or making arrangements for child care. The reality is 

children are . . . women are still carrying the bulk of the 

responsibility for child care, and it weighs heavily on many 

people, Mr. Speaker. In fact, with a daughter now in 

kindergarten, I run into other families. And school, Mr. 

Speaker, school is not child care nor should it be considered 

child care, but I speak to so many families, Mr. Speaker, who 

cannot wait until their children start school, until they hit 

grade 1. 

 

And the reality is that’s not a perfect child care arrangement. 

There’s still common dismissal days, there’s still Christmas 



4920 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

holidays, Easter holidays, the summer to figure out, where you 

book your kids in a million different camps because you need to 

find something for them to do. 

 

But parents are relieved when their children hit school age. And 

the reality . . . It’s sort of like hurry up and turn six, which is 

really unfortunate. I know now from experience. I have two 

children, a 16-year-old and a six-year-old, and that time when 

they’re little goes so incredibly fast, Mr. Speaker. Had you 

asked me that 16 years ago today, I would have had no idea, but 

reflecting back, it goes so incredibly fast and I hate the idea that 

there are parents who don’t have the opportunity to savour 

those really precious days with their young children because of 

stresses around child care. 

 

I’d like to outline a few facts here, Mr. Speaker. Last year in 

estimates the previous minister, we had a discussion about 

quantifying the demand for child care. I asked the minister if he 

knew what the demand for licensed child care in Saskatchewan 

was. He didn’t know and he said, at this current time there is no 

way of quantifying that. Well, Mr. Speaker, we can figure out 

how many people we’re going to have in corrections facilities, 

how many people were going to use certain roads or bridges, 

but we can’t figure out how many people need licensed child 

care, Mr. Speaker? I would beg to differ with the minister on 

that. 

 

And we talked about, we had a discussion about what Manitoba 

does. I was hoping this would have been in the budget. 

Manitoba has an online child care registry, Mr. Speaker, and 

that online child care registry does a couple of things. First of 

all, it simplifies not having your name on 25 different child care 

lists, Mr. Speaker. That is the first thing it does, makes it simple 

for parents. But the second thing it does is it provides 

governments with the opportunity to be able to quantify or have 

a sense of how many child care spaces that they need. So last 

year the minister tells me that 500 is aggressive, and I said, well 

how do you know 500 is aggressive if you have no idea what 

the need is? The reality is you can predict those things, Mr. 

Speaker. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? I would like to talk 

a little bit about the context here. I’m going to quantify it for the 

minister. 

 

So let’s talk a little bit about numbers, Mr. Speaker, numbers in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite 

should stop beaking and start listening to some of these 

numbers. There are currently 73,298 children under the age of 

five in Saskatchewan, compared with 63,332 five years ago. 

This is from Doug Elliot of the Sask Trends Monitor. So there 

are more than 10,000 children — a 16 per cent increase — and 

the equivalent of an extra 10,000 preschoolers in Saskatchewan 

in the last five years, Mr. Speaker. Then the number of children 

under 12 has increased almost as quickly, growing by 11 per 

cent over the same number. Which is great, but you know what? 

That means families need services, and adding 500 spaces a 

year is a drop in the bucket, Mr. Speaker. If we want people . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Martensville is telling me to settle down and take a deep breath. 

I talk to families every day, Mr. Speaker. I talk to families who 

are experiencing real difficulties because of the lack of child 

care. This is not something to scoff about, Mr. Speaker. This is 

a real issue for many families and it makes me angry that the 

members think this is funny. This makes me angry that the 

members think this is funny, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the reality, Mr. Speaker, is the number of working women 

with preschoolers at home increased 32,400 to 38,000 between 

2008 and 2013. So perhaps this would suggest that the demand 

for child care will have increased by 17 per cent in the last five 

years. I believe it’s incumbent on this government to ensure that 

they have an accurate picture of what the demographic looks 

like and ensure that the services are there for families who need 

them to work. 

 

We hear the talk of labour force shortage. If you want families 

to work, if you want families to work and get an education, you 

need to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that you are providing the 

services that they need, and that is not happening. It’s 2014, Mr. 

Speaker. There is more than . . . There is huge challenges for 

families who need child care and that is the cold, hard reality, 

Mr. Speaker, the cold, hard reality. 

 

I believe in some budget documents it mentioned almost being 

up to or over 14,000 spaces after these 500 are added. When 

you look at 73,000 children under five with 70 per cent or 

almost 70 per cent of mothers with children under five in the 

paid labour force, there is a huge disconnect there, Mr. Speaker, 

a huge disconnect. And the government needs to start to address 

this. And we have some stories actually. You can look . . . 

 

So in terms of context here, this government is adding 500 new 

spaces. Two news stories from last week alone, Mr. Speaker, 

about the University of Saskatchewan having to, for now . . . 

They would have been the ones who would have gotten some of 

these child care spaces I believe, in the last year’s budget, that 

haven’t opened up. So when the government talks about 14,000 

spaces, those spaces aren’t open. The ones from last year aren’t 

open. I’ll be eager to sit down with the Minister of Education 

and get an exact number on how many spaces are in fact 

operational at this point in time. So I look forward to the 

Education estimates to have those questions answered, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The reality is, the University of Saskatchewan had a project, a 

2011 survey. So three years ago, Mr. Speaker, a survey of 

employees and students suggested the campus could use about 

800 child care spaces but the demand was actually put closer to 

1,000. So in fact, all the spaces, the reality is 500 spaces is a 

drop in the bucket. That’s just at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] that they need 1,000 child care spaces, Mr. 

Speaker — at the University of Saskatchewan, one location in 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t speak to the 500 spaces 

that need to be spread out across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another story, Mr. Speaker, the daycare in Warman — this is 

from CTV last week — parents in Warman are concerned about 

a lack of daycare and they are frustrated with having to arrange 

for care in Saskatoon. The government doesn’t seek out places 

that need daycares. They wait for requests, so a group of 

volunteers has put together their request, registered, and came 

up with a financial plan and a budget. So the reality is, Mr. 

Speaker, there are people asking for child care spaces. Five 

hundred spaces is a drop in the bucket and doesn’t do what’s 

necessary. 

 

I think it’s important to talk about some stories too around what 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4921 

people go through when they don’t have adequate child care. 

Last summer at the end of August there were stories that 

appeared . . . Well on CBC news was one of them, but there are 

stories that families, Mr. Speaker, were leaving children in care. 

There’s a man who says he paid a woman $400. He took his 

child there to child care. The quality of care was not there. The 

child was in a soaking diaper all day. There were huge concerns 

with care. 

 

There have been news story after news story about concerns 

around unlicensed child care. The onus is on this government to 

ensure that there are high-quality, affordable child care for 

families that are well monitored, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

interesting, Mr. Speaker. I hear the members opposite 

commenting about parents not having any responsibility. This is 

a government who wants parents to work, needs parents to 

work. We have a labour force shortage. Parents need support in 

child care, Mr. Speaker. There is empirical study after empirical 

study that shows what high-quality child care does for both 

children and families, Mr. Speaker. Those kinds of things, Mr. 

Speaker, are good for kids, they’re good for families, and 

they’re good for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[20:00] 

 

I think it’s important to talk a little bit about . . . When we talk 

about child care it’s important to talk about another piece of 

child care. So we have, under the Ministry of Education that is 

responsible for child care spaces, but under Social Services, 

Social Services is responsible for the subsidies that are offered. 

The one thing that I would have expected or would like to have 

seen in this budget is addressing the turning point, Mr. Speaker. 

The turning point is the place at which you no longer receive 

the full subsidy. The reality is families might be making a little 

bit more money than they used to, but they’re not making very 

much ground. Everything has gone up — housing, food, 

utilities across the piece. It’s very expensive for families to 

make ends meet, Mr. Speaker. So the turning point again is the 

income level up to where the full subsidy is available. And it 

has not changed, Mr. Speaker, since the early 1980s. That is the 

fact of the matter. This turning point has remained at $1,640 

since the early ’80s. 

 

So any dollar you make over $1,640, you no longer are eligible 

for the full subsidy. And make no mistake that full subsidy does 

not cover the whole cost of child care for any family. So with 

the turning point here, it’s interesting that since the 1980s this 

has not changed, Mr. Speaker. This would have been an 

opportunity to help ensure families have access to child care. 

The number in Social Services, Mr. Speaker, the number in 

Social Services, the child care parent subsidies, this budget is 

$14.675 million, and that has gone down from previous 

budgets, Mr. Speaker. And why has it gone down? Because 

fewer people are eligible for it, Mr. Speaker, because they 

haven’t changed the turning point. 

 

They have an opportunity here. This government has record 

revenue in this province, growth that needs support by good, 

quality child care and ensuring that parents have an opportunity 

to access that. There are all kinds of pressures that parents feel, 

and this government has an opportunity to help relieve one of 

those in those first five years of a child’s life, and actually 

basically up to the year of age 12. So if you’re making 

minimum wage, Mr. Speaker, and working 40 hours a week, 

that’s about $1,600 a month. You would still be eligible for the 

full subsidy, but barely. And again like I said, make no mistake 

that full subsidy does not necessarily cover the cost of child 

care. So you’re not getting rich, Mr. Speaker, and able to tap 

into this subsidy. 

 

The reality is I’ve talked to directors in child care facilities who 

are advocating on behalf of families who say that they see this 

as a real barrier for care for families. 

 

Another thing around child care that would be interesting and 

would be good for this government to address is, and when we 

get to Social Services estimates around the subsidy piece, what 

happens right now, Mr. Speaker, and this goes to staffing 

complements in the various ministries. 

 

So a person starts using child care and applies for the subsidy. 

So you might be enrolled in an educational program. You put 

your child into care, Mr. Speaker, and you apply for the 

subsidy. But it takes about three months. It can take up to three 

months to find out if you get the subsidy. So in the meantime 

you’re racking up a debt at that child care facility. You’re not 

100 per cent sure that you’re eligible and then what ends up 

happening is, it takes the government three months to process 

the request. They reject you. You’re not eligible for the subsidy, 

Mr. Speaker. And then you have no money to pay the debt, so 

you walk away from child care. You have to exit your 

education, Mr. Speaker, and the child care is left with that bad 

debt. Spoken to child care after child care who has had that 

experience of being left with a bad debt because of the slow 

processing the child care subsidy, Mr. Speaker. That’s a huge 

difficulty. 

 

Some other things that have come up that, again, once we get to 

estimates under Social Services, this government has paid out a 

subsidy of 25 cents. I’ve asked written questions about the 

range of subsidies, Mr. Speaker, and the lowest this government 

has paid out a 25-cent child care subsidy. What an incredible 

insult to whomever received that 25 cents, Mr. Speaker. What 

an incredible insult. 

 

So there is much work to do in child care, Mr. Speaker, and this 

government has barely scratched the surface. They can pat 

themselves on the back, but it’s Saskatchewan families with 

young children who are seeing that child care is not getting 

better in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in fact there’s several people in this House who will be 

tapping into child care likely in the next years and they will see 

for themselves that it is a huge challenge, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps 

when those young families on the opposite side of the House 

have an opportunity and have to start looking for child care, 

they might become huge advocates instead of heckling me on 

the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker, because it is a real 

problem, a real problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So moving from support of our youngest, most vulnerable, I 

think I need to talk a little bit about seniors’ care and support 

for our more mature residents who also can be incredibly 

vulnerable as well, Mr, Speaker. 

 

The one thing I would have liked, and we would have liked to 



4922 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

have seen in this budget, Mr. Speaker, is the government’s 

commitment to minimum quality of care standards. A few years 

ago, Mr. Speaker, this government cut the minimum quality of 

care standards and we’ve seen seniors’ care decline in this 

province because of this. We’ve heard abysmal story after story 

about how our seniors are being treated in long-term and 

personal care homes, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard story after 

story. 

 

So you know what? A year ago, Mr. Speaker, in this house, the 

NDP and others started raising the issue, saying, there’s a real, 

there’s some huge red flags going up around seniors’ care in 

this province. And initially the minister said, nothing to see 

here; no problem, no crisis. It was pushed hard enough and he 

called for a CEO tour. He was going to send his CEOs out to 

long-term care facilities to figure out what the problem was, 

Mr. Speaker, to see if there was a problem. 

 

Well they reported in July, Mr. Speaker. The report wasn’t 

made public. We did a freedom of information request, a 

freedom of information request. After the second, after the 30 

days the freedom of information request didn’t come back. 

There was an extension of that freedom of information request 

for a report that was already compiled, Mr. Speaker. The day 

after the freedom of information request, or the day that it was 

to come to the opposition, that’s when the Minister of Health 

had his news conference announcing the critical, the urgent 

action fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government made this report public after 

much prodding, Mr. Speaker, after much prodding. And I can 

see there were absolutely shameful things in this report, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’d like to talk about some of those things . . . out 

of Central Parkland Lodge in Lanigan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we were arguing that a big part of the 

problem, we and other people who have come forward to talk 

about some of the issues, have talked about part of the problem 

being, or the root cause of the problem being a lack of staffing 

in seniors’ homes, Mr. Speaker, that people didn’t have . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not in every facility. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — And the minister is heckling, not in every 

facility. Yes, not in every facility but where it’s happening it is 

absolutely not acceptable how our seniors are being treated, Mr. 

Speaker, absolutely not acceptable. So, Central Parkland Lodge 

in Lanigan: 

 

Staff member commented they sometimes struggle with 

priorities. For example, when feeding one resident and 

another rings to be toileted, they don’t know if they should 

interrupt the meal which in turn gets cold for that resident, 

or if they should go to the toilet with the person who may 

soil themselves. 

 

Stensrud Lodge, quote, they can hear people crying for help in 

the evening because of staffing shortages — 1 to 25 care aid 

ratio on evenings. 

 

We have Spruce Manor Special Care Home in Dalmeny, 

Martensville. “Staffing levels are inadequate to meet the needs 

of residents due to the increased level of acuity. Residents want 

a bath more than once a week. Think that the care their loved 

one is getting very good, however there isn’t enough because 

staff are too busy.” 

 

Saskatoon Extendicare. “They don’t always get help when they 

need it and have to wait to get up. Sometimes they need to get 

up at 6:30 a.m. even though breakfast isn’t until 8:00 a.m. 

Comments that it’s a shame seniors aren’t prioritized for 

funding. Building is not appropriate.” 

 

This is heartbreaking, Mr. Speaker. And again, the lens through 

which I see this is that of my parents who are both 81 years old, 

who are still in their own home and, as I’ve said before, provide 

care for me still, Mr. Speaker, when I speak about my children 

and how great my parents take care of me and my other siblings 

and the grandchildren and great-grandchildren in my family. So 

I’m glad my parents are still in their home and still able to be in 

their home. But when I think about what I’d want for my own 

parents and I hear some of these stories, it absolutely breaks my 

heart. 

 

One woman actually says, “My husband was taught when he 

was a child not to pee in his pants, and now they are telling him 

to just go in his pants. He tries to go to the bathroom by himself 

but they tell him he is at risk of falling . . . Go to bed at 5:45 

p.m. and up at 9:00 a.m. — way too long [to be] in bed.” 

 

Parkridge Centre in Saskatoon. “Response time is not good. 

Waiting up to 20 minutes most of the time. Sometimes residents 

feel this is personal against them because they have to wait so 

long. Residents don’t get their teeth cleaned regularly, shaving 

is rushed causing neck rash. Only bathed once per week. 

Walking program is neglected and there is a lack of physio.” 

 

Porteous Lodge. “Need more people to answer buzzers. The 

average wait time is 40 minutes. Need more staff. Residents 

want at least two baths per week. They feel dirty and even in 

jail they get more than that.” 

 

These are the feelings . . . These are some of the things that 

came out of the CEO tour, Mr. Speaker. There’s more. There 

are pages and pages and pages of it. 

 

At the Mennonite Nursing Homes in Rosthern, “Staffing levels 

are inadequate to meet the needs of the residents due to 

increased levels of acuity.” 

 

The reality is, in our seniors’ care homes, Mr. Speaker, 

long-term care, there’s levels 3 and 4, for the most part, in 

long-term care facilities. The reality is that that level of acuity 

has increased. Personal care homes for that matter, Mr. Speaker, 

from my understanding, that level of acuity has increased. It’s 

getting harder and harder to get into long-term care homes, Mr. 

Speaker, which is not acceptable. 

 

We had a story, Mr. Speaker, here in the House a couple of 

weeks ago, Ron Caron. Ron Caron suffers from dementia. He’s 

a senior, a young senior. He’s 65 years old and has a high level 

of dementia. He currently is living at the Dubé Centre, an acute 

psychiatric facility in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People at the Dubé Centre are incredible folks. They are trained 

to deal with people with mental health issues. Dementia is not a 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4923 

mental health issue, Mr. Speaker, and being in a psychiatric 

facility is not the place for someone with dementia. Being in a 

hospital is not the place for someone with dementia. You get 

the same meal on Monday . . . And particularly at the Dubé 

again, it’s a hospital setting so there are times where tension is 

ramped up. You have people in psychosis. First of all it’s not a 

residence. It’s not a residence for anybody, Mr. Speaker, and it 

certainly isn’t a place for someone with dementia. 

 

And when I first spoke to Ron’s daughter Sheila and she told 

me that she was told that he was too high needs for long-term 

care, I thought, like my initial reaction was, well what do you 

mean? That can’t be possible. That’s the only place for him, is 

in a long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker, with the proper 

supports. But he is a complex case and needs a lot of care, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I’ve since learned that there are people who, in the 

Saskatoon Health Region — I don’t know; I haven’t had a 

chance to confirm in other health regions — who don’t ever 

make it on to long-term care lists. They’re sort of people living 

in limbo, because when they’re assessed, they know at CPAS in 

Saskatoon, client/patient access services, that there is not any 

place for them to go. So CPAS doesn’t put people on the 

long-term care list because there’s no facilities or services for 

complex cases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So people are sitting in limbo, people like Mr. Caron, who still, 

more than two and a half weeks later, is still at the Dubé Centre 

in Saskatoon, a place that is not for him despite staff who want 

to do their very best. They are not equipped to do that. 

 

[20:15] 

 

But Mr. Caron isn’t the only person who doesn’t belong in the 

Dubé Centre. The reality is there are other people who . . . I had 

asked some written questions about community living service 

division clients living in acute psychiatric facilities because we 

were aware that there were some people in facilities throughout 

the province. And I believe a fellow has just celebrated — well 

celebrate is not the right word — has just marked two years in 

the Dubé Centre, Mr. Speaker. Two years in an acute 

psychiatric hospital, Mr. Speaker, a place where you shouldn’t 

be more than about six weeks until you’re stabilized and you 

leave. That is not acceptable. And the reason that happens is 

because we don’t have the facilities for these individuals, Mr. 

Speaker. So part of it is about needing more facilities, so 

building more is part of it. But the reality is the facilities that we 

currently already have, Mr. Speaker, are not being staffed 

appropriately to provide the care that seniors need and deserve, 

Mr. Speaker. So it’s not just about building facilities and 

putting in place home care. And that’s a discussion we’ll have 

in a moment here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is a complex issue and there’s multiple parts and pieces to it, 

but the reality is this government ignored $8.5 million of urgent 

requests that were raised in the CEO tour last fall. The minister 

put a $10 million urgent action fund together with an additional 

$3.7 million, and that was to deal with urgent action items, but 

the reality is that fell $8.5 million short for urgent items, Mr. 

Speaker. Staff to take you to the washroom, call bells, dementia 

units aren’t extras in health care, Mr. Speaker; those are the 

basics in our ever-changing, aging demographic, Mr. Speaker. 

When we talk about the increased level of acuity, the level 3 

and 4 in long-term care and increased levels of acuity in 

personal care homes, I know in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, that 

the firefighters actually get phone calls to do lifts in personal 

care homes, Mr. Speaker. So taxpayers in Saskatoon — and 

firefighters that I’ve spoken to have never complained about 

this; they’ve pointed it out to me — but they are getting calls to 

personal care homes to do lifts because the personal care homes 

do not have the proper complement of staff to be able to do a 

lift when someone falls off a toilet, falls out of a chair. 

 

So the Saskatoon Fire and Protective Services, Mr. Speaker, 

goes and lifts people up in personal care homes. And like I said, 

I’ve not heard the fire service complain about this, but they 

have acknowledged that they do it on a regular basis, Mr. 

Speaker, and the Saskatoon Health Region last spring was 

tracking that at the request of the fire and protective services. So 

that is not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is not 

acceptable . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and the Minister of 

Finance said we’ll check into it. He can happily check into that, 

Mr. Speaker, and he’ll find out that in fact Saskatoon taxpayers 

are supporting personal care homes by going in and doing lifts, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve talked a little bit about Ron Caron. I think that there’s some 

challenges when we . . . I know having spoken to people about 

being housed at the Dubé, whether it’s someone like Ron Caron 

or community living service division clients, there is some fear 

that this government, around the closure of Valley View, hasn’t 

put the proper plan in place. And the proof is in the pudding, 

Mr. Speaker, that there are people at Valley View who should 

be in the community, Mr. Speaker. So this was before Valley 

View started discharging or moving people into community, 

Mr. Speaker. So I hope that the government sees that there is a 

need for huge community supports and proper housing for not 

just seniors who have behavioural issues but younger people as 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ve talked a little bit about the long-term care and personal 

care home difficulties. The home care piece, Mr. Speaker, so 

this government has touted last week putting I believe it was 

$4.5 million into the Home First/Quick Response home care 

pilot program to keep people out of long-term care to ensure 

people can stay in their homes, which is great. But today, Mr. 

Speaker, today, Mr. Speaker, we heard about a memo in the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, Mr. Speaker, about people 

not being able to get the home care that they needed. 

 

I had an opportunity to chat with a licensed practical nurse 

tonight who actually had this very experience himself about not 

. . . one of his clients isn’t going to get the service she needs 

next week, a long-term client, Mr. Speaker. And he had said to 

me, how is it that a government can announce $4.5 million in 

one hand and on the other say that there’s no home care 

available? We’re cutting services for people, Mr. Speaker. This 

is a huge disconnect. It makes absolutely no sense, Mr. Speaker. 

There is something not quite right by a government who’s 

announcing money in one program and then the same program 

is not able to deliver the services that it needs to do, Mr. 

Speaker. That is hugely problematic. That is hugely 

problematic. 

 

The one thing that I also need to address around health regions, 



4924 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, is the efficiency targets, the $51-plus million. The 

reality is what happened last year when the government did the 

same thing to health regions, the various units had to start out in 

a deficit, Mr. Speaker. So I’m speaking about the Saskatoon 

Health Region in particular. So you start out in a deficit 

position, Mr. Speaker. And you know what? It doesn’t matter. 

You might be the most efficiently run unit in the Saskatoon 

Health Region, but you’re still told to find efficiencies. The 

reality is, Mr. Speaker, you can only find so much efficiency 

before you start impacting service. And that’s what we’re 

seeing in the Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve had story after story. For example, we’ve heard about 

vacancy management. The Royal University Hospital in 

Saskatoon, we’ve heard from people who’ve spoke up here in 

the legislature, who have written letters to the editor, pointing 

out the filthy state of Royal University Hospital because of a 

lack of cleaning staff, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve heard about people not getting pain medication in ample 

time because of a lack of staffing at RUH [Royal University 

Hospital]. The reality is when you tell whatever unit it is in the 

Saskatoon Health Region that they have to start in a deficit, it’s 

going to start impacting services, Mr. Speaker. And it has. 

We’ve seen that, Mr. Speaker. We have seen that. 

 

There’s one particular program that I’d like to touch on that’s 

had a decrease, Mr. Speaker — family health benefits, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know the minister and I will chat about this in 

estimates, but I had an opportunity a couple years ago to chat 

with a woman and her family who received the Saskatchewan 

employment supplement, Mr. Speaker. And the Saskatchewan 

employment supplement is for lower income families. It 

provides them, lower income working families, Mr. Speaker, it 

provides them a top-up, and family health benefits can be 

hugely beneficial that . . . those come with employment 

supplement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I had a family a couple years ago who had, I believe, three 

small children, and he was a custodian and she, in fact, was a 

day home provider. They weren’t rich, Mr. Speaker. And in fact 

he got a $25 raise which they were happy about and then . . . or 

he had a small raise which put him $25 over the eligibility for 

the Saskatchewan employment supplement. They weren’t 

concerned about losing the employment supplement, but he was 

diabetic, Mr. Speaker, and some of their children had some 

serious challenges around health. Those family health benefits 

were incredibly important to them, Mr. Speaker, and they no 

longer qualified. And their family was going to take a huge hit 

and they weren’t quite sure how they were going to deal with 

that. 

 

So we have, in the budget, estimated in last year it was 5.362 

million and this year it’s 4.712 million. So that’s a decrease, 

Mr. Speaker, and I think the minister may explain that as less 

uptake, which would make sense, less utilization, as the Finance 

minister’s pointed out. But part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, is 

utilization is tied to income thresholds. And people in 

Saskatchewan might be making a little bit more money, but 

everything else has gone up too. 

 

Again we talk about housing; we talk about all our utilities, Mr. 

Speaker. We talk about all kinds of things. So you bump 

yourself . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member from 

Walsh Acres is saying a little bit more, Mr. Speaker. This 

person was $25 over the employment supplement threshold — 

$25, Mr. Speaker, over the employment supplement threshold 

— which I want to talk about. 

 

So the threshold for this family, Mr. Speaker, three children, 

two adults, Mr. Speaker, the threshold was $3,570 a month, 

which is I believe $42,840 a year for a whole family, Mr. 

Speaker, for five people — five people, Mr. Speaker — which 

is not a heck of a lot of money. So this family lost their 

employment supplement and with it family health benefits. But 

I need to point out that the eligibility criteria for the 

employment supplement has not changed since 2008, Mr. 

Speaker, and we are eight years on — eight years on, Mr. 

Speaker. What has happened in those eight years? Everything 

has gone up, including the cost of housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — ’08 to 2014 is six years. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Sorry, six years, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to 

the members opposite for their help. They’re incredibly helpful, 

Mr. Speaker. But the reality, that has not changed since 2008. 

What has gone up . . . It seems like they’ve been here forever, 

Mr. Speaker. I think that that’s what part of the problem is here. 

It seems like they’ve been here for a very long time. Seven and 

a half years, Mr. Speaker, is a long time. 

 

So the reality is I will have that discussion about utilization of 

family health benefits. But the fact that that employment 

supplement, the income threshold hasn’t changed is problematic 

and has real impacts on families, Mr. Speaker, families who are 

employed, who are working their butts off to try to make a go 

of it, and it has a real impact on these families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about . . . I’m a woman of 

many papers here, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to take my time. I 

need to talk a little bit about ER [emergency room] wait times. 

There is just so much to talk about here, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 

. . . lots to talk about. ER wait times. 

 

So the government has in fact put some money into reducing 

ER wait times, but the reality is they should figure this out, Mr. 

Speaker. Pasqua ER in Regina, the capital city and one of the 

most booming provinces in Canada almost closed this fall. Mr. 

Speaker, that almost closed, Mr. Speaker, and almost wasn’t 

very satisfactory for many of the people who were going to . . . 

It came down to the wire, Mr. Speaker. It came down to the 

wire, Mr. Speaker. So they almost had to close the ER at Pasqua 

at night, Mr. Speaker. Huge problem. 

 

The reality is, according to the latest CIHI [Canadian Institute 

for Health Information] data, the reality is Saskatchewan has 

ER times three hours longer than the average Canadian wait, 

Mr. Speaker. So the wait time, according to CIHI, is almost 11 

hours in an emergency room. That is not . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So people in 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4925 

Saskatchewan on average are waiting almost 11 hours in an 

emergency room. Anybody who’s gone to an emergency room 

in an emergency, Mr. Speaker, 11 hours is not acceptable. If 

you’ve ever gone to an emergency room with a young child, it 

is not fun whether the wait is 2 hours long or, heaven forbid, 11 

hours long. I’ve only had the occasion to do that in 

Saskatchewan here once when my daughter had pneumonia, 

and it was not a pleasant experience, Mr. Speaker. Being in the 

ER at any time isn’t a pleasant experience, but let alone if 

you’re having to wait for up to 11 hours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that investment is more than welcome, and hopefully they 

can start doing something about this record. The only province, 

I believe, that is below us in terms of this record is Manitoba, 

Mr. Speaker. We don’t have a very proud record in that case 

here, Mr. Speaker. The reality is, Mr. Speaker, 11 hours, up to 

11 hours in an emergency room here in Saskatchewan — three 

hours longer than the average in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have to talk a little bit about priorities, Mr. Speaker. And 

when we talk about priorities this government says, well where 

else would you spend money, or what would you do 

differently? Well, I think a $40 million contract and counting, 

and counting — the meter is still running, Mr. Speaker — that 

would be a place that we would scrap a contract and put money 

into front-line care, Mr. Speaker.  

 

The reality is, I think about my dad who has always said, you 

know, we hire consultants to look at our watch and tell us what 

time it is, Mr. Speaker. And is that not why we pay managers in 

health care, Mr. Speaker, is to find efficiencies and to listen to 

front-line workers, Mr. Speaker? Is that not why, is that not 

why we pay for front-line health care workers, Mr. Speaker? Is 

that not what the role of managers is? 

 

[20:30] 

 

And you know, lean, Mr. Speaker, what I take issue to right 

now is the $40 million contract with an American consultant 

and a meter that continues to run, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had an 

opportunity to speak to many people in the Saskatoon Health 

Region, both front-line workers and managers, who express 

their concern about the $40 million contract. They talk about 

the one thing the minister hasn’t talked about, is the lost hours 

or the net cost, Mr. Speaker. The cost of when you’re pulled to 

do a rapid process improvement workshop, rapid progress 

improvement workshop, that you’re pulled on to one of these 

for upwards of seven weeks, Mr. Speaker. So you have a 

manager, someone who is paid more than $100,000 a year, and 

many other staff to focus on one of these workshops, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

How much of their other work are they getting done at this 

time, Mr. Speaker? So what is the opportunity cost of giving 

that up? The reality is they are struggling to do their other work 

and being pulled away for weeks at a time. And it’s not . . . So 

the minister has not given us a net cost of what that is, Mr. 

Speaker. The reality is these aren’t employees who are being 

paid $50,000 a year. These are people who are being paid much 

more than that being pulled away from their regular work to 

engage in these processes that may or may not produce results. 

And I sure hope that they do produce results, Mr. Speaker, 

because we’re spending a heck of a lot of money on them. 

We’ve got the $40 million John Black contract, $17 million 

kaizen promotion offices. And the minister said, oh these are 

offices that already existed, but the reality he also mentioned 

that they’ve pulled staff and redeployed staff into these kaizen 

promotion offices. My question is, well what were those staff 

doing before if they were redeployed from somewhere else? 

Like who is doing the other work that they were doing, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

So $17 million for the kaizen promotion offices, $730,000 for 

international travel for health administrators for two years, 

$30,000 each for docs to get lean training, $3,500 per day for 

Japanese sensei, plus the $2,000 flight to get them here each 

time, Mr. Speaker. So what are the other expenses, Mr. 

Speaker? And I don’t think the minister has answered that, the 

net cost of lean. We don’t know what this net cost is going to 

be, and I think the people of Saskatchewan want to know. 

 

I think something that’s near and dear to my heart, Mr. Speaker, 

is midwifery. And as of late, I’ve received many, many letters 

about the lack of midwifery services in Saskatchewan. The 

reality is, since 2008 midwifery was proclaimed in the 

legislature in February. I believe it was February 2008, early 

2008 anyway. We have gone up and down with the number of 

midwives in Saskatoon, very few midwives in Regina and one 

other health region. I’ve asked some written questions to get a 

handle on exactly how many midwives there are, but I do hear 

from women who, when they find out they’re pregnant, they 

call the office to try to get on the list and discover that they 

can’t. There is a huge waiting list, huge demand for midwifery 

services. And women in Saskatchewan, across this province — 

not just in those three health regions, Mr. Speaker, but across 

this province — deserve access to midwifery services. 

 

But the reality is, even in those health regions that have 

midwifery services, they’re not getting the services that they 

need. There are demands, there are unmet demands for 

midwifery services which . . . Midwifery in a normal 

pregnancy, Mr. Speaker, has been shown to have health care 

savings for the government, Mr. Speaker, and better outcomes 

for women and babies. And that’s what it should be about, Mr. 

Speaker. And this government has an opportunity to lead on 

that, and they have chosen not to do that, Mr. Speaker. They 

could put designated money aside. They could send a message 

to the health regions that this is something that needs doing and 

they should be doing it. And I hear that from women over and 

over again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Something else, Mr. Speaker, that caused me a little bit of 

concern. Mental health and addictions is an area in which I’m 

personally very interested, as I think most people in here know. 

I have a nephew who tragically died last summer after suffering 

from bipolar disorder for a few years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know, well last May I believe it was, the government 

announced a plan to pursue a mental health and addictions 

strategy and action plan and started a consultation process. And 

my argument is that I was hoping that there might be a place 

marker in this budget. The report, I understand the 

commissioner will be reporting late spring or early summer, and 

I was hoping that there would be a marker in this budget to 

make some of those expenditures in this fiscal year. The reality 

is last year the government did that with Valley View. They put 



4926 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

$5 million aside when they knew something was coming down 

the pipe. They knew Valley View would be closing and they set 

money aside. I would have liked to have seen this government 

take mental health seriously and put money aside for the 

recommendations that the commissioner will come up with in 

the summer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reality again is this is an urgent issue. This is a matter of 

life and death. People die because they don’t have mental health 

services or the proper mental health services. And I am 

speaking from experience, Mr. Speaker, coming from a family 

who has a very capable brother and sister-in-law who are 

incredible advocates who worked very hard for my nephew, 

Jordan, to get him the services that he needed. And they still 

couldn’t get what he needed. 

 

There are huge gaps in our system, and I would have liked to 

have seen a placeholder in the budget so families weren’t 

waiting two years from the time . . . And who knows? Well 

we’ll see what we see in next year’s budget, which is a year 

away. And I hope that this government can come up with some 

mid-year money to address some of the things that the 

commissioner’s going to come up with. 

 

I am a big believer in consultation and real and meaningful 

consultation, Mr. Speaker. But the government has also done 

work in the past, and I think that there’s that fine balance 

between making sure you’re talking to people and engaging. 

But there was an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government had done a paper actually: 

 

The Ministry of Health Community Care Branch and 

Prairie North Regional Health Authority have partnered to 

develop a provincial project that addresses the lack of 

adequate mental health facilities and community resources 

for persons with severe psychiatric illness and/or persons 

considered to have high complex needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government already had some idea of people 

who work with or have family members who have mental 

health challenges, know where the holes are. You leave an acute 

psychiatric facility like the Dubé Centre and there’s nowhere 

for you to go. So you come out of an acute phase, and hopefully 

you’ve got a family like my nephew had. My brother and his 

wife still had Jordan living at home and tried to offer him as 

much support there, but there are many people who don’t have. 

 

And that’s not an easy thing, Mr. Speaker. Jordan wasn’t an 

easy . . . He was a great kid, amazing young man, but wasn’t an 

easy young man, as many people who have mental health 

challenges are not always easy, Mr. Speaker. But there’s lots of 

people who don’t have those kinds of supports. And so they 

leave a facility like the Dubé in Saskatoon, an acute psychiatric 

facility, and have nowhere to go. 

 

And I know in this paper they recommended step-down beds, 

residential step-down beds. I’ll give you some numbers here, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Intensive Residential Support Beds are living 

arrangements that would provide duplex or small group 

home-type residences for clients and would provide 

24-hour support to ensure safety for clients and staff. 

That was one recommendation. They were recommending 15 in 

Saskatoon Health Region, 15 in Regina, 5 in Prince Albert 

Parkland, and 5 in Prairie North, for a total of 40 beds. 

 

Step-Down Beds are living arrangements that provide 

apartment-style accommodations or small group homes for 

clients. Twenty-four (24) hour support is provided with 

one staff per . . . patients per shift. This support would be 

less intensive than that of the Residential Support Beds 

option described above. 

 

They were recommending 25 in the Saskatoon Health Region, 

25 in Regina, 10 in Prince Albert, 10 at Prairie North Health 

Region, and 10 in Five Hills Health Region. So those are a few 

of the things that I would have liked to have seen in the budget. 

 

Under health as well there was no direct . . . Under health there 

was no money for the hospital in North Battleford. I understand 

in SaskBuilds there’s $2 million planning set aside, so it sounds 

like the government is in fact going to pursue a P3 

[public-private partnership] with the North Battleford hospital 

and correctional facility, which we’ll have some concerns with 

and we’ll look at more carefully when the government goes a 

little bit further down that path, Mr. Speaker. But that is where I 

would have liked to have seen a little bit more money spent or 

any money set aside, a marker set aside for the work that 

they’ve had this commissioner doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would be remiss if I did not talk about the summary financials, 

Mr. Speaker. So I’ve been here since October 2009, and my 

colleague from Regina Rosemont has I think placed a petition 

almost every day calling on the government to move to 

reporting the government’s finances on a summary financial 

basis. So the reality, Mr. Speaker, is over recent years, every 

other jurisdiction has made that move. But this fall we heard 

that this government failed an audit on its General Revenue 

Fund. First time in the history of Canada, Mr. Speaker, that a 

government failed its audit on the General Revenue Fund. 

 

And I’ve heard the Minister of Finance on several times get up 

when the member from Rosemont asked questions and tried to 

spin it as this is a practice that had been happening for many, 

many years. The summary financial reporting on a GRF versus 

summary financial wasn’t the issue. The auditor had described 

and laid out some very specific points, Mr. Speaker, and 

particularly some that impacted other bodies, Mr. Speaker. This 

sitting, in Public Accounts, as of a couple months ago, we heard 

that five health regions had qualified audits, Mr. Speaker, 

because of this government’s failed audits, because they had to 

adhere to the government’s new scheme, Mr. Speaker. So this 

government had no choice but to move to summary financial 

basis. Like they’re all over there, crowing about moving to 

summary financial basis, which it’s about time, Mr. Speaker. 

And they had no choice but to do it. They had no choice but to 

do it, Mr. Speaker, after being shamed with a failed audit in the 

fall, Mr. Speaker, after . . . 

 

The other points, Mr. Speaker, as I’m just wrapping up here, is I 

need to talk a little bit about debt, Mr. Speaker. So I’ve heard, 

I’ve heard the members opposite over the last couple of days 

talk about debt not going up. But I don’t know if any of them 

have taken a look at page 66 of their own budget, Mr. Speaker, 

where the reality is debt is going up, year over year, between 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4927 

last year and this year. So public debt is going up $1.5 billion, 

Mr. Speaker. That is not acceptable. So I don’t understand how 

members opposite, if they looked at page 66, wouldn’t realize 

that their debt is going up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look at 2009, the total debt, government debt in 

Saskatchewan was $7.7 billion, Mr. Speaker. It’s forecast this 

year for 11 point eight one five point two billion dollars. That is 

an increase, Mr. Speaker, by a lot. So for a government to talk 

about debt not going up is patently false, and I don’t know how 

they can stand and claim that it’s not going up. So that is 

something to be of some concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The last thing that I want to just briefly touch on — I know I’ve 

taken far more than my fair share of time here — is as the 

former Culture critic. As a former Culture critic, Mr. Speaker, 

when this government two years ago cut the film employment 

tax credit, we saw an exodus of people. Well we had a huge 

outcry from people in the film industry saying, you will not 

have a film industry in this province if you do this. The reality 

is I continue to hear about the exodus of people from 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There was someone who has been in Regina for all his life. His 

wife works here. He’s not been able to get a job in the film 

industry in the last couple years. He’s now in BC right now, Mr. 

Speaker, test driving a job for the next few months to see if 

Vancouver is where they want to be. And his wife, who is 

connected here, who has roots in Regina, will leave her job. 

And this couple may and this family may be leaving Regina. So 

the effect of the cut to the film tax credit continues to have 

ripple effects, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s interesting that just this fall, WolfCop, which was a 

film that was made here in Saskatchewan, ended up tapping into 

the expired film tax credit only because they had some 

connections with someone who had an application in. But they 

needed the film tax credit, Mr. Speaker, to be able to make the 

movie here. 

 

And so the reality is we no longer have a film industry. There 

are a few people who make films, Mr. Speaker, but we do not 

have a thriving film industry here in Saskatchewan anymore 

thanks to this government’s cut to the film employment tax 

credit. 

 

So I’ve taken more that my fair share of time, Mr. Speaker, but 

with that . . . And I’m glad to hear that the members have been 

so engaged in my comments tonight. I’m glad to hear they were 

so engaged and interested in what I had to say. But with that, I 

will be supporting the amendment and will not be supporting 

the motion. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the debate on the 2014-15 

Saskatchewan provincial budget, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin 

my remarks on the ’14-15 budget, I do want to, as all members I 

believe have done as they enter debate on the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, begin with a couple of thank yous, first of all to the 

people of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been eight years, it’ll be eight years in June 

since they first selected me to represent them in their 

Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, it’s been an incredible 

honour to represent the people of the constituency of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. Mr. Speaker, the time has gone by quite 

quickly but it has been an honour and a privilege to serve the 

people in this institution, Mr. Speaker. From time to time I 

often just think of the fact that with, especially with the growing 

province, Mr. Speaker, that with 1.117 million people 

inhabiting the province of Saskatchewan, that at any given time 

there is only 58 people that are chosen from amongst more than 

a million people to be able to stand in this place and speak on 

behalf of the people that we represent and to say our piece, Mr. 

Speaker. And so I’m always mindful of the honour that people 

of Weyburn-Big Muddy have given me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the eight years I’ll say that the hair’s probably a 

little bit more grey than it was in 2006. But certainly the energy 

and the commitment and the determination is still there for me, 

Mr. Speaker, to represent the people to best of my ability. And 

certainly I just want to again thank the people of Weyburn-Big 

Muddy for their support over the years, particularly in the last 

two years as I’ve taken on a new challenge as the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my constituency assistant Marcie. 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve mentioned that I’ve served the people of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy for eight years, but Marcie in fact has 

served the people of the constituency not long after the 1999 

election, Mr. Speaker. She has been a devoted, faithful servant 

to the people, always has a smile on her face to greet the people 

of Weyburn-Big Muddy regardless of why they’re coming to 

the office. And she does a tremendous job for me, and I’m very 

much in appreciation of the work that she does. 

 

I want to thank the people that work here in the office, in my 

ministerial office, Mr. Speaker. Brittany, Cole, Christopher, and 

Morgan, Mr. Speaker, do a great job day in and day out for me. 

For the most part, all of them are fairly new to the office and the 

Minister of Health. They’ve come from other offices around the 

building, Mr. Speaker. And in fact we have a fairly young 

office in this building, Mr. Speaker. But they bring a lot of 

energy and hard work to the role that they provide and serve me 

and the Ministry of Health and the Government of 

Saskatchewan. They do a great job. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

they’ve only, as I’ve mentioned, most of them have only been 

here for a couple of months in my office, but you’d never know 

it by how quickly they have taken on the role as working in my 

office, Mr. Speaker, and how quickly they’ve come up to speed. 

So I want to thank them. 

 

I also want to thank the Minister for Rural and Remote Health 

and those that work in his office. We have a good collaborative 

relationship between the two offices. Often times there’s a bit of 

a blend in terms of the work that the people that work for us do, 

and so they do a tremendous job as well, supporting not only 

the member from Biggar but also myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I also do want to thank my wife, Amanda. Mr. 

Speaker, Amanda has been incredible support for many years, 

Mr. Speaker, both in my involvement in elected life but as well 

even outside of elected life, Mr. Speaker. 

 



4928 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very blessed, particularly in the last 

couple of years. Mr. Speaker, I think you’ll know we’ve had the 

opportunity in the last two years or so to move to a farm, Mr. 

Speaker. We have had the opportunity to purchase the original 

quarter section that my great-grandparents, when they first 

came to the province, where they first settled here in 

Saskatchewan and took up farming, Mr. Speaker, when they 

came to Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so we’ve lived in fact in the, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we’ve lived in fact in the same, not only the same 

quarter section but in fact the same yard site where my 

great-grandparents and my grandparents and my father would 

have been raised. And it’s just always humbling just to think 

about the hardships that they would have endured, Mr. Speaker, 

the years of plenty and the years of not so plenty, Mr. Speaker, 

and the determination that it took for them to not only survive 

through droughts and wars and other hardships, but also to 

settle in Saskatchewan and decide to raise a family. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on the topic of blessings, I’m pleased to be 

able to say that while I’m the fourth generation of my family to 

live on this particular piece of property, Mr. Speaker, we will be 

welcoming, Amanda and I will be welcoming the fifth 

generation of our family later this year that will be raised on the 

northwest quarter of the third section, Mr. Speaker. And so 

we’re very excited about the upcoming birth of our first child 

later this summer, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

growing province, and we thought we’d better do our part to 

further the growth agenda of this province and this government, 

and so we’re very excited about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the eight years that I’ve had the pleasure of 

being in this role, often what usually happens, and it’s usually 

the same reporter from the local Weyburn Review, somebody 

that I’ve known for many years, going back to school, after 

budget day I’ll phone the reporter and give my comments. And 

the first question is always usually the same, you know. What 

does this budget mean to the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, to 

the people that you represent? And what do you think that 

they’ll think of this budget when they get into the details, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And I just think of, you know, just in terms of the broad themes 

of the budget, in terms of with the fact that it’s a balanced 

budget, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t have any tax increases. In fact 

as the Minister of Finance has pointed out, it does include, 

because of the indexation of the basic personal exemption, a 

small personal income tax decrease. It invests in infrastructure, 

which I’ll talk a little bit about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It controls 

spending, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it invests in the people of 

this province. 

 

And so my reaction to this budget, as it has been in the past 

number of budgets under this government, is that I believe that 

the people of my constituency will support this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, because it speaks to the values of what the people of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, what they tell me when I talk to them in 

terms of what they expect out of their government. They expect, 

Mr. Speaker, that the government will live within its means. 

They expect that the government will only ask from the 

taxpayers, will only ask from the people the dollars that it needs 

to actually provide for the services that are required. No more 

than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whenever possible. 

 

It provides for investments into our communities, into our 

municipalities, into our network of our highway system, into 

our health care, into our education system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it invests in the people of this province, particularly, Mr. 

Speaker, those who may require the help of the government and 

of their fellow citizens. And it does it in a meaningful way and 

one that I am proud to support. And while I will say this at the 

end if I remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for all of those reasons, 

for all of those reasons why I think that the people of my 

constituency can support this budget and for the reasons why I 

think they will support it when they learn the details over the 

coming weeks and months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be 

supporting the amendment, but I will be supporting the budget. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, just I’ll talk briefly about my constituency 

and some of the areas that I think this budget will have a 

positive impact. Obviously as has been I think well known over 

the last number of years as we’re seeing the province grow, 

we’re seeing the province’s economy really thrive and do well 

in terms of job creation, in terms of providing opportunity for 

those in this province and for those that are calling this province 

home, perhaps again after having left a number of years ago but 

as well for those who are calling this place home for the first 

time, Mr. Speaker. What is taking place in Weyburn-Big 

Muddy is no different than what you’re seeing around the 

province. But I think there are some special things to note about 

the southeast and the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, just some of the, as I look around my 

community and some of the developments, first of all it’s just a 

growing population. The new people that you see in the 

Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency that are calling it home for 

the first time, are coming in droves to the Weyburn area in part 

because of the oil activity and the Bakken Formation and the 

role that technology and hard work and determination and 

ingenuity has played in unlocking, Mr. Speaker, a resource that 

for many years had thought not to be accessible with the 

technology of the day. Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And hard work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — And the hard work of the people that 

work in that industry, absolutely. I have a number of family 

members that work in that industry, would be glad that I 

mentioned that this evening. And perhaps I’ll talk a little bit 

about them later. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look around Weyburn, just in the 

last couple of months we’ve seen what is becoming almost an 

annual rite of spring, and that’s a brand new hotel opening up in 

the city of Weyburn. So this would be the fourth brand new 

hotel that just opened up. I believe it’s a Microtel hotel. It’s a 

beautiful location, just on the edge of the city on the south side 

of the city, in an area that has become home to a lot of 

development around other hotels and other commercial 

enterprises, new restaurants and the like that are expected to 

pop up. We’re seeing new developments, housing 

developments, and a real, a good mix of housing developments 

in terms of not just single dwelling but as well as apartment 

buildings, condominiums that range the entire spectrum of the 

price point for people that are looking for housing in Weyburn. 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4929 

We’re seeing the old Souris Valley development, grounds being 

developed. That’s where one of the old Saskatchewan hospitals 

was, a beautiful location in Weyburn. And I’m pleased to see 

the city council in the last couple of years have had I think a 

great foresight in seeing what this beautiful part of the city 

could be in the future in terms of development, making sure that 

we preserve a little bit of the past and understanding what that 

facility and what the grounds meant for the people of Weyburn 

and the people of the province. And there is, you know, I think I 

could probably on another day get into a debate about that part 

of our history, but certainly it’s an important part of the 

community’s history. 

 

So there is developments happening there. There is 

developments on South Hill that’s I think going to be a 

rejuvenation for that part of our community. We’re seeing 

developments on the northeast part of the city, on the east side 

of the city on Highway 13, both some rural developments in the 

RM [rural municipality]. Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing great 

partnerships, and I’ll maybe speak about this a little bit more in 

the next couple of weeks, between the RM and the city of 

Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those are some of the things that I’m seeing right in the 

Weyburn area. And the same would be true, Mr. Speaker, in the 

optimism that you see in other parts of the constituency, 

whether you’re in Ogema, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or one of the 

communities that borders the Weyburn-Big Muddy 

constituency and the Estevan constituency is Radville, which is 

I think benefiting from what we’re seeing all across this 

province. And we’re looking forward to opening up the new 

integrated facility in Radville in the next couple of months, Mr. 

Speaker, that I know will be a great development for that 

community and the people in that community. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as it relates directly to the budget, a 

couple of areas that I do want to highlight, I will talk a little bit 

about the ministry that I have the responsibility for. But I do 

want to talk about a couple of other areas. Certainly I’ve talked 

a little bit about the impact, the positive impact that the oil 

industry has had for many, many years, but also I would say in 

the last number of years with some new developments across 

the entire southeast part of the province and what that’s 

meaning for jobs and opportunities for people of the 

constituency. But of course I wouldn’t be able to speak about 

Weyburn-Big Muddy without talking about the positive impact 

that agriculture has, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Particularly I want to 

mention two things. First of all, agriculture is obviously a 

dynamic industry. There is always a lot of change. There is 

always a lot of entrepreneurship and ingenuity in terms of what 

producers are doing to transform the industry and to be 

competitive with all the other competitors all across the world. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, just recently there’s been, I think, a significant 

change for my area in terms of the business of agriculture that I 

just want to briefly talk about. In the last couple of weeks, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, as people will know, the shareholders of the 

Weyburn Inland Terminal have made a decision that they’re 

going to sell the company to another organization that has a 

long-standing history in the ag industry. Mr. Speaker, this has 

caused, I think, a lot of debate around the community and, I 

think, around the province in terms of this institution and what 

its fate would’ve been during this whole process. 

 

And I just want to, Mr. Speaker, I just want to recognize those 

who with a lot of vision, Mr. Speaker, and a lot of I think 

criticism at the time in the mid-1970s from, at the time, from 

organizations, from churches, from provincial governments, 

from other ag industries, ag businesses who put a lot of cold 

water on what these farmers wanted to do, to really take control 

over their own destiny as much as they could. And you know, 

some of them are, you know, are still in the industry or perhaps 

have retired from industry. 

 

Some of them have since passed, and I think of Art Mainil 

would’ve been one of them and, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 

recognize the . . . while the business is going to be changing 

hands, just recognize the hard work, the determination, and the 

entrepreneurship that, what was at the time termed and today 

termed just a bunch a farmers that decided to do in building the 

Weyburn Inland Terminal into one of the premier businesses, 

ag businesses in this province, Mr. Speaker. And so I just 

wanted to take the opportunity to recognize all that they did to 

build that business over several decades, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to . . . I think that this . . . Well 

I look at my constituency in terms of agriculture. Obviously 

ranching is an important part of it, especially in the Big Muddy, 

Mr. Speaker. That is some of the most beautiful country in this 

entire province, Mr. Speaker, and some of the most 

hard-working individuals, who for many generations have 

grown their businesses, grown their herds, weathered some 

difficult times, Mr. Speaker. And I know that there’s a lot of 

positive news in terms of some of the supports that are now 

going to be in place in terms of the livestock program, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I think just support that perhaps wasn’t there 

in the past that will now be available, particularly to those 

families that are perhaps transitioning to the younger 

generation, and we have a lot of those in the Weyburn-Big 

Muddy constituency. 

 

And on that topic, on both that new support program, but as 

well as what the government’s response has been in terms of the 

challenges that we’ve seen in moving grain over the last couple 

of months, on behalf of my constituents, I can only thank the 

Premier and the Agriculture minister and members of the 

government caucus and cabinet that have worked diligently on 

this issue for more than a year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in light of 

what we were going to be seeing, not just in terms of last year’s 

harvest, but what we have envisioned for the growth of the Ag 

sector in this province and knowing that the other sectors that 

are important — the transportation industry and the rail industry 

— what they would need to do to be able to meet the challenge 

that I . . . that we believe that our producers will be putting in 

front of them over the next number of years as we grow this 

industry, as the industry grows itself. And so on behalf of my 

constituents, Mr. Speaker, my thanks to the Premier and 

especially the Ag minister on the great job that they’ve been 

doing on this very important file for the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so that’s a little bit about agriculture and my 

constituency. We’re seeing a number of good developments 

within the constituency, particularly around the role of 

education, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I want to thank the 



4930 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Minister for Advanced Education for, as well as the cabinet and 

the treasury board, for the $1 million investment into the 

continued work around the Southeast Regional College. It’s an 

important project, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that when, you 

know, you look at the role of both the K to 12 [kindergarten to 

grade 12] system as well as the advanced education system, 

whether that be adult basic education, whether that be the 

ability for a student — much like I did when I was finished high 

school — to be able to begin their university education right at 

home, closer to home. And that’s what I did at Southeast 

Regional College. 

 

I think what Weyburn is doing and what the education system is 

doing is really, I think could serve for a model for other 

communities where we have co-located on one campus what is 

now the high school which will be turned into the junior high 

plus the high school, that will include the Southeast Regional 

College. And that includes, I think, an important enhancement 

to our community that the government — frankly, and I think 

this is a good thing — didn’t fund. This was a 

community-supported initiative with the city and the citizens 

and a great board that did a lot of fundraising: a $4 million 

performing arts centre, all located right on the same campus. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so the investments into advanced 

education as well as continued construction is, I think, a 

positive for the educational system and what we can offer our 

students, both on the K to 12 side as well as after their grade 12 

year ends, and building a bit of a hub for the community around 

all those types of services. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a bit of the infrastructure that’s taking 

place in terms of educational infrastructure. I also, you know 

. . . One of the things that did come up in terms of my 

constituents immediately after budget and especially in the 

news is the work that is going to begin, in terms of the 

preconstruction, looking at the twinning of 39 and 6 highway. 

This is one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think from some of the 

earliest days when I was first elected, as we saw increasing oil 

activity, as we saw increasing population. 

 

Keeping in mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just as an example in I 

think the short time that I’ve been a member of the legislature, 

the population of Weyburn itself would have been around 

probably 9,400, 9,300 people. And in that time it’s grown to 

probably, you know, we’re pushing 12,000 people, probably a 

little bit over that. And that’s happening in Weyburn. 

 

It’s happening as well to probably the same extent if not a little 

bit bigger in Estevan. It’s happening in the communities all in 

between, and that’s caused I think a lot more traffic that we’re 

seeing on our highways. Especially if you look at how 

important that network of the highway, 6 and 39 . . . It’s part of 

the national highway system. North Portal, which is on the 

other side of Estevan, is the major port in which we see a lot of 

traffic come through from the United States, and a lot of that 

feeds up through Estevan, Weyburn, and then on to Regina. 

And then from Regina, it can get to either going west to Calgary 

or going northwest to Saskatoon and Edmonton. 

 

And so the work, this has been something . . . Especially in the 

last couple of years, there’s been a lot of attention based on, 

unfortunately, some tragic situations, tragic accidents that have 

taken place on that busy stretch of highway. And so this 

government signalling that this is a priority in terms of 

increasing, improving the safety, improving the free flow of 

goods to and from our major trading partner in the United 

States, I think bodes well for just the continued growth that 

we’re going to see in the southeast part of the province. And so 

that’s an important project in the constituency. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to talk a little bit about health 

before my time is finished here. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want 

to talk a little bit about the health budget. So this is an increased 

budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We will spend, just in terms of 

what the government spends either through the Ministry of 

Health or our regional health authorities, $4.99 billion — nearly 

$5 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Works out to a little bit over 

$552,000 an hour, 24 hours a day. So in the time that the 

member from Riversdale spoke, we spent about a half a million 

dollars in the health care system. That’s about the rate that we 

spend, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now some members thought it would have been a little bit 

higher than that. Maybe, you know, $2 million or $2.5 million 

while she was speaking. But she spoke for an hour, so it was 

about $550,000 that we spent. Represents about 42 per cent, 43 

per cent of the provincial budget. It is a 3 per cent increase. 

 

As the Finance minister and the Premier had indicated in the 

lead up to the budget, that it was going to be a bit of a tighter 

budget this year, and so a 3 per cent increase translates into 

about $144 million based on what we spent last year. I think 

even within what would be a tighter budget, especially with a 

health budget, a 3 per cent increase, I think we’re going to 

move forward with a number of important initiatives, some that 

have already begun in previous years and some that are new 

that I’ll talk a little bit about. 

 

In terms of capital, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have spent in the 

first six years of our government just over, now with this budget 

it’ll be just over $1 billion in health capital. That’s both on 

equipment . . . That’s on maintenance, mainly on maintenance, 

and new construction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, knowing that there 

is much more that we need to do in terms of renewing old 

facilities, upgrading the ones that we currently have, knowing 

that approximately two-thirds of our health capital was built 

before 1970, and knowing that previous governments had not 

invested a lot in terms of the maintenance of health facilities. So 

this budget does provide dollars, $16 million for the final 

construction of the Moose Jaw Hospital, which we look forward 

to completing at the end of this year as well. 

 

And the member opposite talked a little bit about the 

importance of long-term care. And I’ll talk a little bit about that 

later. But as members will know, a bit of a difference in terms 

of the record of this government versus the previous members 

opposite. In the 16 years that they were government, 16 

long-term care facilities closed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are in the midst of completing construction on 13 long-term 

care facilities. We know that Samaritan Place in Saskatoon 

opened. That’s a 14th. And we’re seeing the renewal of three 

long-term care facilities in Swift Current . . . that’ll be built 

attached to the hospital, the regional hospital in Swift Current. 

So we have invested significantly in long-term care and renewal 

of the capital. $27 million will continue construction on Biggar, 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4931 

Kelvington, Kipling, Maple Creek, and Prince Albert. 

 

As well, on the topic of Prince Albert, when it comes to new 

funding for facility planning, obviously, Mr. Speaker, part of 

what we’re doing in the budget does increase the maintenance 

dollars in this budget for existing facilities. But we know that 

we need to do both maintenance, but we also do need to renew 

capital facilities across the province. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

three and a half million has been set aside for some planning of 

some facilities. 

 

We’re looking at the renewal of several facilities here in the city 

of Regina. I think, as we get more into the details of that over 

this next year, I think people will see that that is going to 

translate into a fairly significant renewal of the beds within the 

city of Regina, which are long overdue. I believe the last new 

beds, new facility in the city of Regina, was in the early 1980s, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we know that we have much to do in 

terms of both here in the capital city. 

 

It also includes planning dollars to begin the renewal of the 

Prince Albert Victoria Hospital, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is an 

important hospital in terms of not just in Prince Albert in terms 

of the population that the area of Prince Albert serves, the third 

largest community, but also the catchment area of people from 

the North, people from other regional sites that end up in Prince 

Albert for care. We know that it is a busy hospital. I believe the 

numbers, one of the stats that I saw is that the facility, which 

was planned in a phased approach in terms of stages — and, 

unfortunately, I believe it was the third stage didn’t actually 

happen back in the early 1990s — but that was a hospital that 

was built for, I believe it was about 1,000 births a year. And last 

year they had nearly 1,500 births take place in that hospital. So 

we certainly know the capacity pressures. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, facility planning for additional 

long-term care beds in La Ronge. Now this is one I want to talk 

a little bit about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On budget day in fact 

I’m sitting next to the Finance minister, and I knew that this 

part was coming up in his speech. He mentioned this part in his 

speech. And knowing the member from Cumberland has really 

asked I think, in my time as Health minister, in the two years 

I’ve been Health minister, I think the only questions he’s ever 

asked, certainly on the floor of the Chamber, is La Ronge — 

when is there going to be more long-term care beds? We know 

there’s a need in La Ronge. When is there going to be more 

long-term care beds in La Ronge? 

 

And so the Minister of Finance announces that the planning 

dollars have been put in place to add long-term care beds in La 

Ronge. And I look over from the member from Cumberland and 

I actually thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thought that he’d 

mistaken what the Finance minister had said. I thought maybe 

he thought the Finance minister said that we’re closing the 

long-term care beds in La Ronge, that we’re closing the facility. 

By the looks on his face, you’d think that we’d just announced 

that we were closing the long-term care facility in La Ronge. 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are 

adding planning dollars in this budget to add long-term care 

beds to the community of La Ronge. 

 

[21:15] 

 

I think this has been well received by the community. We look 

forward to adding those beds and adding the capacity in that 

community, regardless of how the member opposite may vote. 

But I would encourage it. This is the one issue that he’s brought 

forward in this House. This is the one issue that he’s asked me 

questions on. It’s in the budget. I would encourage the member 

for Cumberland to actually vote for this budget and stand up for 

the people of Cumberland and stand up for the people of La 

Ronge. Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that’s the work that we’re doing 

on capital. 

 

On the operational side, what we’re looking at — and the 

member opposite from Riversdale talked a little bit about a 

couple of the programs — one is the emergency department 

wait times. So we’ve added $4 million in this budget for a 

couple of initiatives. One, we’ve set a pretty ambitious goal that 

by 2017 we want to be in a position to have no waits in the 

emergency department. It’s a big goal. It’s ambitious. We have 

a lot of work to do, and the system I think is prepared for that, 

but they know it is a big challenge. 

 

Much of that though is more than just the emergency 

department. It goes to the flow of the patient through the 

system. That’s why other programs such as the Home 

First/Quick Response are so important. If we have a senior that, 

because of an incident that may happen at home, doesn’t require 

emergency care but requires something fairly urgent —and it 

may be late at night, it may be when the home care hours don’t 

provide service — we think that there’s a better way to provide 

services to those seniors. That’s why we’re piloting it in 

Regina, in Saskatoon, and Prince Albert to provide that 

additional support to hopefully defer or delay placement in the 

emergency room or an acute care bed and return that senior 

back home as soon as possible. That will help on the emergency 

department wait time strategy. 

 

We’re also looking at providing . . . And I know the members 

opposite have said there’s no new money for seniors in the 

budget. I’m looking forward, if I have time, to dispel that myth 

because the budget does include $800,000 to begin a new 

program for house calls for seniors who are living at home who 

may need some additional support so that we can hopefully 

keep them out of whether it be long-term care or a personal care 

home. 

 

So that is new dollars that is in this budget and relates back to 

the patient flow into the emergency departments, as well 

hot-spotting, which is going to be looking at those patients in 

the system . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, people I think would be 

shocked to know that 1 per cent of the patients in the system 

account for about 21 per cent of what we spend in the system. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have instances, and this just shows that 

as a system we’re not serving these people well, where people 

are showing up in the emergency room department in some 

cases as many as 150 times in one year. Obviously we need to 

catch that sooner, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re going to put 

together a pilot in Regina and Saskatoon to identify these 

individuals and personalize a care plan around them so that we 

can hopefully defer a trip to the emergency room and free up 

the emergency room for what is actually for, which is 

emergencies. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is what some commentators are 



4932 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

saying about the initiative. One of I think the most, perhaps one 

of the most notable health policy health reporters in Canada is 

André Picard who writes for The Globe and Mail. This is what 

he said on January 9th of this year. The title of the article is, 

“Brad Wall’s health-care promise is difficult — but smart.” He 

says, and I quote: 

 

. . . the Saskatchewan Party, which has overseen some 

pretty dynamic changes in the province in recent years — 

among them bolstering the health system to make it what 

is undoubtedly the country’s best . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, he goes on to talk about, and I quote 

again: 

 

Saskatchewan, to its credit, seems to understand this 

complex dynamic, and has invested in a “patient flow 

initiative” to find solutions along the continuum rather 

than just pouring money into emergency rooms. 

 

And he closes the article . . . and again this is André Picard. 

He’s a health columnist with The Globe and Mail, one of the 

most recognized health columnists in Canada: 

 

If other province’s had Saskatchewan’s chutzpah, then the 

needed transformation of the healthcare system might 

actually become a living, breathing initiative rather than 

merely the subject of memos and reports. 

 

So that’s what people across this country, when they look at 

what Saskatchewan’s doing, when they look at the emergency 

department initiative, when they look at what we’ve done on 

surgical wait times, that’s what commentators from across the 

country are looking at. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an ambitious goal, and we only, I 

think, have to look at what this government has already 

achieved, knowing that there is more work to be done. But this 

budget includes $60.5 million in the surgical wait times to 

support . . . What we’re trying to do is get to three months for 

the offer of surgery, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That was a four-year 

commitment. We know that there is more work to be done. 

Saskatoon’s going to need a few more months, later into this 

year. Regina’s going to need an additional year as well. But to 

date we’ve spent $186 million. But it’s more than just spending 

money. It’s how you spend the dollars. It’s being smarter about 

the dollars that you are spending, and this is what has been 

achieved since the government changed. 

 

The number of people waiting more than 18 months is down 97 

per cent. In prior days, going back to 2005 and 2006, we 

actually used to count the people waiting longer than 18 

months. If you can consider that, not even the wait from when 

the person sees their family physician to actually see the 

specialist, but the wait from when the specialist actually says 

you’re a candidate for surgery and you’re going on the wait list. 

We used to count the number of people that waited longer than 

18 months from that referral by a specialist to when the surgery 

actually took place. We used to count that by the thousands, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, 2 and 3 and 4,000 people waiting longer than 

18 months. That’s down 97 per cent, almost down to zero in 

terms of waiting 18 months. 

 

Waiting more than one year, down 93 per cent. Waiting more 

than six months, down 83 per cent. Waiting more than three 

months, down 70 per cent, to the point where 80 per cent of the 

people in the system are having surgery performed within three 

months, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s why this government has 

taken an ambitious plan for wait times, knowing that there’s 

more work to be done, but why we think that we have the 

people in place and have the processes in place and have the 

goals and the ambition to be able to achieve the same type of 

results on the emergency departments and the flow of the 

patients, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk a little bit about, if I 

have some time left, I also want to talk a little bit about, I want 

to talk a little bit about — and this is important — two other 

things. One thing that I do want to note is that what this budget 

does include, and what I think was a good move on behalf of 

the government or by the government and treasury board, is that 

the budget once again includes dollars to recognize the 

population growth in this province. So $24 million has been 

earmarked that’ll be dispersed to the regional health authorities 

based on the fact that the population is growing and that we’ll 

see more patients through the system. 

 

To date, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of population growth 

that we’ve acknowledged, we’ve spent $73 million just in 

population growth dollars within the health budget. Obviously, 

Mr. Speaker, at a time when the province was losing people — 

and we know what years those were — obviously you don’t 

need dollars for population growth. You don’t need dollars for 

demographic challenges. But that is something that we’ve 

recognized, that the province is a growing province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to mention before I move to 

my concluding remarks, the member opposite from Riversdale 

talked about the efficiencies that the regions will have to find. 

$51.9 million is the target that we’ve set for the Ministry of 

Health, for the RHAs [regional health authority], and for the 

Cancer Agency. This is something that is not unexpected, and 

as the member opposite alluded to, the regions have had to I 

think work very hard to come in line in terms of their budgets in 

the last year. The Saskatoon Health Region believed that they 

would have a $30 million deficit at the beginning of this fiscal 

year that’s ending at the end of the month. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

they’re on track to not have a deficit this year. So they’ve 

worked really hard to try to come in line in terms of what their 

allocation was. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think when all the regions report on a . . . 

what to this year, the budget year that ends in March, what is a 

$4.84 billion budget, I think that we will see, in terms of all the 

regional health authorities, an overall deficit of regional health 

authorities that will be I would say less than double digits — 

somewhere under $10 million for a system that will spend $4.84 

billion. Mr. Deputy Speaker there was a time — and while 

that’s a concern, obviously it’s a very small fraction of the 

overall health budget and the regional health authorities budget 

— there was a time and it wasn’t that long ago, when the NDP, 

the members opposite when they were in the government put 

out a news release that actually said, good news, only 28 of the 

32 health regions are running deficits this year, and it’s only 

$50 billion. 

 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4933 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was at a time when the health 

budget was only $2.5 billion. Put it into today’s dollars. That 

would be as if the health regions were running a $100 million 

deficit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In terms of the supports that we’re 

providing to the region and to the system, we ought not to take 

any lessons from the members opposite when it comes to fiscal 

discipline within the health regions. 

 

And on the topic of efficiencies, we’ve done this in the last 

number of years. We’ve said to the health regions, on average 

we want to find 1.5 per cent in efficiencies. We need to bend 

the cost curve. All health regions, all Health ministries, all 

provincial governments for years — and this just hasn’t been 

recently, but for years, going back to even not long after the 

days when medicare was actually introduced — the question of 

sustainability actually became an issue, and whether or not it 

was fiscally sustainable for provincial governments to not only 

run the system but also improve the system. 

 

So this idea that we’re asking regions to find efficiencies, this 

has been done for many years. In fact under the former 

government, as I mentioned before in question period, in 2004 

. . . in fact we’re only six days away from the 10th anniversary 

of the budget when it came out in 2004, in a year when the 

budget went up 6.3 per cent. So more than twice what it is in 

this ’14-15 budget, 6.3 per cent increase. 

 

What did the Health minister of the day ask the regions to do? 

He asked to find efficiencies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In fact we 

know where they did find their efficiencies. They closed 90 

beds, including 50 long-term care beds in 12 communities. 

They cut 92 jobs including 40 nursing jobs. And then the 

minister of the day, the member for Lakeview said, and I quote 

. . . This is what The Western Producer says: “Another 160 jobs 

could go because Nilson said the regional health authorities 

must find 20 million in cost savings through administrative 

efficiencies.” 

 

So this idea that we’re trying to find efficiencies is certainly not 

new, but I think what the difference is and what is new is the 

approach that we’ve taken. And I do, as my closing remarks, I 

do want to talk a little bit about what I think has got a little bit 

of attention in the last couple of days and the last couple of 

weeks, and that’s this government’s work around implementing 

lean within the health care system. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve made a decision as a government 

that we want to replicate what other high-performing health 

systems are doing in terms of improving quality, improving 

safety, and finding efficiencies within the health care system. 

This is something that, as I mentioned before, provinces, former 

governments, other jurisdictions have been grappling with even 

from the beginning days of medicare. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the members opposite were 

the government, Ken Fyke did an inquiry on the health care 

system and, as is reported in Jeffrey Simpson’s recent book, 

Chronic Condition, this is what Ken Fyke had to say: “Quality 

and efficiency problems are the true enemies of sustainability.” 

 

So I think we have a choice. We’re running a health care system 

in this province as all other provinces are, as previous 

governments have done. We have decisions to make in terms of 

how do we make the system more efficient and sustainable, 

especially in light of the demographic challenges that we’re 

going to face as a province and as a health care system across 

the country. We can take a path of laying people off and ending 

positions and cutting nursing positions and going back to a day 

where we had 600 vacancies, 600 not only vacancies but 600 

RN [registered nurse] positions that were required for the 

system, or to the days where 450 doctors were let go from the 

system. 

 

That’s the approach that we can take, that this province has 

taken in the past, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I think that what 

we’re doing is we’re taking a different approach. It does 

involve, Mr. Deputy Speaker, making an investment. But in 

terms of the words, in the words of the member from Riversdale 

of opportunity costs, I just would remind the member opposite, 

even today what we have, even if you set aside the work around 

quality improvements and lower wait times and the work in 

terms of safety, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because all of that is 

waste to the system. 

 

When we cause harm to a patient, that is waste in the system. It 

doesn’t do the patient any good, and obviously we’re going to 

have to correct the mistake that we do. So we’re going to have 

to pay for that as well. When we have people waiting on 

wait-lists, that is no good for the patient and it’s not good for 

the system as well. We need a more efficient way to move 

patients through the system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So what we’ve already saved, if you leave aside even on the 

quality and on the safety side, just in terms of the efficiencies, 

we’ve saved to date $39.9 million. And some of those savings, I 

think, are pretty well known, but I want to talk a little bit about 

them. We’ve saved $35 million since we began the lean journey 

in blood and plasma products through lean improvements. And 

you know, what that actually means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

people that freely give of their blood products. They don’t get 

paid for it. They do it on their own time. This is something that 

people are very generous in this province and in this country. 

 

[21:30] 

 

For the typical blood product, typical red blood products have a 

shelf life of about 41 days. And what we were doing prior to the 

work of lean and why this is so important, what the savings 

actually mean is that we are throwing, to date have thrown $36 

million worth of blood products, we’ve thrown less that 

amount. I’ll maybe try to say that in a better way. Had we not 

gone through the lean improvements, we would have thrown 

away blood products. 

 

So people donate their blood. They expect that it’s actually 

going to go into a patient and be used. But the way that the 

system has worked is we would throw those products away. It 

reaches its end life. It reaches its expiry date, and we throw it 

away. Because of the work of lean and improving the system, 

we’re not throwing as much product, we’re not discarding as 

much product away. And this has been recognized by the 

Canadian Blood Services. 

 

In terms of opportunity costs — and I know the member from 

Riversdale talked about the importance of mental health and 

addictions and not waiting to make improvements for when the 



4934 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

commissioner reports, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the number of 

cancelled appointments at the Regina Qu’Appelle mental health 

and addictions clinic have gone from 42 per cent, cancelled 

appointments happen 42 per cent of the time, has gone down to 

zero. That means that the wait-list for people that are accessing 

that help has gone from 400 clients down to 70. That means that 

we are able to provide services in a more timely fashion, which 

I do not believe anybody, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can put a price 

tag on what that has meant for those patients and those families, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And lean has been a big part of that, 

finding out from the front-line staff what actually will improve 

the processes so that we can see these people, treat these people, 

and provide supports more timely, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We have seen in Regina Qu’Appelle the rate of cancelled MRIs 

[magnetic resonance imaging] go from on average 12 a week 

down to one a week. Now if you think about what that means, if 

you reduce it from 12 a week, which we average, down to one a 

week, we can do 650 more scans a year without any additional 

resources. If we apply that same principle and that same 

productivity level across the entire system, that would be 2,600 

additional MRI scans, meaning 2,600 people would not be 

waiting as long as they do right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I could go on and on in terms of the improvements that we’ve 

seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through the work that we’ve seen 

with the work that we’re doing with lean. And I would say this. 

When we announced a contract with John Black and 

Associates, it was in August of 2012. And in that article . . . It’s 

Janet French who wrote the article. It’s a very I think a very fair 

article which is nearly a year and a half old. All of that spelled 

out what we’d spent on consultants, all of that spelled out in the 

article, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’d spent on travel. Yes, it 

is an investment. It’s point two per cent though of what we’ll 

spend in the health system. Even over the four-year period, over 

four, if you can think about this, over the four-year period that 

that contract will run, it’s about a cost of $40 million, but in that 

time we will spend as a health system close to $20 billion, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So we believe that it is an investment that will 

pay dividends and already is paying dividends. 

 

But in that article of Janet French’s in August of 2012, it talks 

about a similar example. The Cleveland Clinic, who is one of 

the highest rated health organizations in the United States, has 

an employee base similar to what the entire health care system 

in Saskatchewan does. They as well invested $40 million in 

lean and in the first five years saved $100 million, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I think that that’s what we can provide to our 

patients and to the taxpayers of this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is not a contract that we 

entered into lightly but understanding what the benefits will be, 

the long-term care benefits, the long-term benefits to the 

system, and to the transformation agenda that we are 

championing in this province to an extent that nobody in this 

country is doing. No other jurisdiction is going to the lengths 

that we are to improve quality, to improve efficiencies, and to 

improve patient safety, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

That’s why I support the work that we’re doing. That’s why I 

support the work that the health regions and the Cancer Agency 

and all of our partners are doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. No 

matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps the criticism that we’ll 

face from the members opposite, but that’s why we’re doing it. 

It is for our patients. It’s in line with the Patient First Review 

that we did. And for all of those reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

will not be supporting the amendment. I will be supporting the 

budget. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Indeed it’s an honour for me to rise in the House on behalf of 

the constituents of Regina Douglas Park and make some 

comments and remarks about the 2014-15 budget. However 

before I begin those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to applaud 

the Minister of Health for that explanation and purposeful 

speech regarding lean. It needed to be said. Well said, Mr. 

Minister, and thanks for that. It’s a direction we need to take. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise on behalf of the 

constituents and bring some comments about this balanced 

budget, our seventh balanced budget, a budget that contains no 

tax increases. In fact, Mr. Speaker, as was explained to us last 

night by the very eloquent and loquacious Minister of Culture, 

Sport and Recreation, there’s actually an efficiency, a tax 

efficiency in this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, it was a 

challenge . . . in this budget, Mr. Speaker. We’ll get to that a 

little later. It’s a budget that controls spending. It’s a budget that 

highlights investments in infrastructure and of course most 

importantly, an investment that invests in the people of this 

great province, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a balanced budget, a budget 

with no tax increases, a budget that controls spending, has 

investments in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, and investments in 

people. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour and a privilege to rise 

again on behalf of the constituents of Regina Douglas Park. It’s 

still very much and for me always will be an honour to walk up 

the steps of this magnificent legislature. The shine, so to speak, 

has not come off the shoes. Now until last night, I thought that 

was a pretty good metaphor, but the one-horse pony took it. 

And I think the one-horse pony will be a legend, probably one 

of those icons of the twenty-seventh legislature, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and so I yield to the Minister of Infrastructure on that 

one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re blessed with a very great leader. And I want 

to thank our Premier for the leadership that he provides this 

province, this legislature, our government, our cabinet. I want to 

thank our cabinet for the commitment, Mr. Speaker, the 

dedication that the women and men of our cabinet provide the 

people of this province. It’s an onerous job, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I have the utmost respect for our Premier and the 

members of our cabinet. 

 

Of course my caucus colleagues who have become friends and 

who share their expertise, their experience, and their knowledge 

with folks like us newbies, and I’m really appreciative of that 

and I’ve enjoyed every minute. To the legislative staff that 

provide support and resources for us on a daily basis, Mr. 

Speaker, thank you. 

 

I also want to acknowledge several other people. You know, my 

parents, they’re not with us anymore, but I can’t help think 

about how they would feel about their Saskatchewan, Mr. 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4935 

Speaker. They loved this province and contributed so much to 

it. My dad served in the Second World War, in the Italian 

campaign, fought the battle at Monte Cassino. My mom raising 

four boys on the 7 block of College Avenue in a 

700-square-foot house, Mr. Speaker, and I can remember no 

cupboards on the door and my dad was a carpenter . . . no doors 

on the cupboard and my dad was a carpenter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My older brother Pat and his wife, Sharon. Pat’s a paint 

contractor. He’s been a paint contractor in the city and southern 

Saskatchewan for about 45 years, Mr. Speaker. His support 

with me in this endeavour going forward has been very 

meaningful to me. And I also have a sister in Regina and her 

husband, Brian. My sister Lois is a nurse in management at the 

Regina General Hospital, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I thank 

them for their contributions. 

 

Of course my wife, Karen, my partner and best friend; my sons, 

Christian and Cameron; my daughters, Michelle and Melanie; 

and seven wonderful grandchildren and soon to be eight, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Yes, it’s pretty neat. 

 

I need to mention my constituency assistant of course, Becky 

Mason, who keeps things going over at the constituency office. 

Becky, thank you for all that you do on a daily basis to help us 

meet the needs of our constituents. 

 

My friends, personal friends of course who have stood by me 

throughout my term. And of course the people of Regina’s 

Douglas Park, the most important people, the people why we’re 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina Douglas Park has 16 seniors’ centres. And 

I want to list them all for the record to acknowledge the 

contributions that our seniors have made to this great province. 

And so I thank them. I thank the seniors at the Bentley, at the 

Marion Gardens and Marion Chateau, the College Park 

Retirement Residence. I want to add that I’ve spent several 

times visiting the residents at College Park. We’ve had a very 

good time. Annually they raise funds with an activity called the 

seniors’ Olympics. Now I’m not a participant athletically in that 

event, Mr. Speaker, but it is indeed a lot of fun. And so I salute 

the people over at College Park Retirement. 

 

To the seniors over at the Prairie Place; the Heritage; Cornwall 

Village; the Hamilton Plaza; First Baptist Place; Embury 

Heights; Cedarwood Manor; the Horizon; Mary Helen 

Herchmer; Milton Heights; Selo Gardens, the 

Ukrainian-sponsored, supported seniors’ complex, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker; the Broadway Terrace; and the Qu’Appelle House 

down on College Avenue, Mr. Speaker, a salute to the seniors 

in those 16 residences in the heart of Regina Douglas Park. 

Thank you for your contributions to this province. 

 

To the seven schools that we have in Regina Douglas Park, Mr. 

Speaker, and almost 4,000 students — 3,779 students in the 

seven elementary and high schools that we have in this 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let me get to the budget. Mr. Speaker, the 

budget is truly a collaborative effort. And in that vein I would 

like to thank our Minister of Finance for the leadership and 

diligence that he provides, as has been alluded to many times in 

the House already, one of the best, if not the best, Finance 

minister in our country. We’re very blessed to have him, Mr. 

Speaker, and I thank him for his diligence. 

 

To treasury board, again, the members of treasury board, their 

commitment and due diligence in bringing down or bringing 

forth, rather, a budget of significance, a balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker, yet a budget that allows us to move forward. It’s my 

understanding, 43 days of deliberations basically line by line to 

make sure that we get things right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

presenting this budget. And of course our caucus, they have 

significant input and influence into a budget that is again one of 

Canada’s best. 

 

So what about this budget? You know, the budget begins with a 

vision. And our government has very clearly articulated that 

vision, Mr. Speaker, and that’s to be the best place in Canada to 

live, to earn a living, and to raise a family. And once that vision 

has been articulated, Mr. Speaker, then one needs to ask the 

question, how do you get there? How do we fulfill that vision? 

How do we get to that end, Mr. Speaker? Well, you develop a 

plan. It’s just, it’s that easy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I found it very interesting reading the Leader-Post 

last weekend. I was reading Bruce Johnstone’s editorial, and he 

was quoting Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland. He was 

paraphrasing the Queen of Hearts when she stated here, and I 

quote, here we have to run as fast as we can to stay in one place. 

And he went on to paraphrase that. And there are many 

interpretations, but certainly suffice to say that there’s a lot 

happening in Saskatchewan, and still we’re able to hold the line 

and record steady growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:45] 

 

It was interesting to me to see that Alice in Wonderland quote in 

his editorial because when I was preparing some of these 

remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had thought about the Alice in 

Wonderland story. And there’s another scene in that story, and 

it goes something like this. Alice is having a chat with the cat. 

And she says, “Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to 

go from here,” asked Alice. Well that depends on where you 

want to go, replied the cat. And Alice’s response was, I don’t 

really know. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see that dynamic repeating itself 

virtually every day across the floor. No plan, no policy, no 

leadership, no direction. I guess no problem. Mr. Speaker, so 

unlike the members opposite, we have a plan. We have a map 

for our future, Mr. Speaker. And you know what? I think, I 

think the people like it. I think the people like our plan. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, I know they like it. Forty-nine on this side, nine 

on that side, so I think our plan has received some approval. 

 

Of course the plan . . . And we’re not afraid. We’re quite proud 

to acknowledge and articulate that we base this plan on a set of 

guiding principles. And very quickly, Mr. Speaker, no. 1 

principle is the economic growth and job creation through the 

private sector, not more government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

No. 2, smaller, less intrusive, more efficient government, Mr. 

Speaker. And I believe that we will reach our 15 per cent 

reduction over the course of the four years. 



4936 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Controlled spending and balanced budget as evidenced by the 

seventh balanced budget that we have presented today, Mr. 

Speaker. And this budget obviously contains controlled 

spending. 

 

High quality health care for all of our citizens. And you’ve 

heard the Minister of Health articulate our investment in health 

care. And for a government to allocate 42 per cent of its overall 

budget to health indicates the commitment we’ve made to the 

citizens of this province, with regards to health. Not crumbs, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

A strong social safety net for those who need it. We are 

committed for Saskatchewan to be the best place to live for 

people with a disability. 

 

Democratic reforms to better serve the people. 

 

No. 7, individual freedom and the equality of opportunity for all 

Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And no. 8, complete all of the above within a strong, united 

Canada. 

 

Witness, Mr. Speaker, the Olympic champions from 

Saskatchewan. Witness, Mr. Speaker, our commitment to the 

cause in Afghanistan, our veterans, and we salute them. Witness 

the Highway of Heroes, Mr. Speaker. And that’s our 

commitment to a strong Saskatchewan and Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. Even the wall of heroes in St. Andrew’s School, Mr. 

Speaker, where a classroom of grade 6 students has 

acknowledged the contributions of our veterans through a wall 

of heroes, Mr. Speaker. So the principles that our budget is 

formed on, Mr. Speaker, are very solid, and we’re proud to take 

those, take that budget based on those principles forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said there’s a lot happening in this budget, a 

lot of very positive initiatives and support that I will elaborate 

on a couple of areas in a few minutes. But very, very, quickly, 

Mr. Speaker, as it pertains to investments in infrastructure, our 

little brochure here outlines it very, very clearly: the Regina 

bypass project and the Estevan bypass; commitment for a 

Saskatoon commuter bridge; twinning projects of Highway 16 

east of Saskatoon, Highways 6, 7, and 39, Mr. Speaker. And I 

could go on. 

 

With regards to investments in people, Mr. Speaker: record 

funding in health care includes funding to meet the three-month 

wait list target, support for primary care centres and 

collaborative emergency centres, etc.; increased benefits for 

recipients of the seniors’ income plan, personal home care 

benefits, Saskatchewan assured income for disabilities, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as our Minister of Health mentioned in his remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, this government recognizes the unusual growth that’s 

taking place in this province, Mr. Speaker. And for the first 

time, well this budget represents the second time in our history 

there is funding to help students to . . . enrolment growth in K to 

12 schools. A very significant, in fact the most significant 

support for our school boards, Mr. Speaker, because that 

funding allows them to plan for education today, happening in 

our classrooms immediately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s a 

very significant initiative, Mr. Speaker. As I said, I’ll elaborate 

on a couple in more detail shortly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2007 we made a number of promises. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m very pleased to acknowledge that we’ve kept 

many of those promises, over 130 to be exact. The graduate 

retention program, for example, rebating up to $20,000 in 

undergrad tuition, promise kept; created the Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund, promise kept; hired 120 new police officers, 

promise kept; exceeded our promise to hire 800 more nurses, 

promise kept; 40 new physician training seats and 60 new 

medical residency positions, promise kept. I think you get the 

message, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t need to go on. 

 

The point here is that action, not words, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

This is a party, this is a government of action, and we intend to 

continue to move in that direction as we go forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget has been crafted of course with our 

principles in mind, crafted with our growth plan always at the 

forefront, keeping in mind reality, limited resources, and the 

ability to pay, Mr. Speaker. A balanced approach, not a wishful 

thinking, unrealistic pie-in-the-sky, Mad Hatter approach, if I 

may, Mr. Speaker, used by the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me remind you of the $2.7 billion platform that 

was announced last election, Mr. Speaker: $450 million on 

health, $783 million on housing, $417 million on education, 

$72 million on the environment, $503 million on family, $402 

million on other promises, Mr. Speaker. Add it up and you have 

a $2.7 billion worth of spending with absolutely . . . Well, that’s 

not exactly true, Mr. Speaker. They were going to raise potash 

royalties. Now wouldn’t that be great, given the market today, 

Mr. Speaker? Not only would we be not selling any potash, Mr. 

Speaker, we wouldn’t have any companies producing. We 

would have jobs lost. Pack your suitcase; I’m out of here. 

That’s where we’d be today, Mr. Speaker. Think about it. My 

dad used to say, Russ, I was born at night, but not last night, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons I got involved politically was 

because I love the new attitude that exists in our province. Mr. 

Speaker, we have direction. We have purpose. We have pride. 

There’s a feeling of optimism. Mr. Speaker, something freeing 

is going on in Saskatchewan. We’re free from the good-enough 

syndrome. We’re free from apologizing for being from 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s more. You know, 

there’s something freeing about seeing your assets and your net 

worth growing. Look at Saskatchewan’s population today, 

1,117,503 people. Our manufacturing leads the country, Mr. 

Speaker. Our exports, and as our Premier often says, not bad for 

a province without a port. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s something freeing about knowing where 

your money’s going, where it’s going today, where it’s going 

tomorrow, next week, next month, 10 years from now, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s because we have a plan. We have a plan. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s something freeing about planning ahead and 

having the cash to do so. Look after your pennies, and the 

dollars will take care of themselves. Mr. Speaker, there’s 

something freeing about seeing your debt being eliminated — 

44 per cent reduction in the debt, Mr. Speaker. There’s 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4937 

something freeing about never having to worry about how 

things are going because you have taken care of business at 

home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I read recently an NDP slogan that read I believe, 

“focused on what matters.” I ask, Mr. Speaker, how can you 

focus on what matters without a plan, without direction, Mr. 

Speaker? I guess it’s that no plan, no focus, no problem. So let 

me just make a few remarks about what matters. And I really do 

want to concentrate a little bit on our seniors, Mr. Speaker. As I 

articulated, 16 seniors’ complexes, homes in Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

So here’s a little of what we’ve done for seniors, Mr. Speaker. 

The 2014 core operational plan includes the following 

investments that will benefit Saskatchewan seniors: $27.3 

million in capital to continue five previously announced 

long-term care facilities through a government co-ownership 

model with regional health authorities; $4.5 million for the 

Home First/Quick Response home care program to provide 

innovative home care solutions to better serve seniors; $3.7 

million for ongoing funding of items in seniors’ care Urgent 

Issues Action Fund, primarily for staffing and recreation 

supports; one and a half million dollars for planning of 

long-term care facilities in Regina and La Ronge; and $800,000 

for a new seniors’ house call pilot program to develop an 

innovative mobile outreach team to provide home visits to 

seniors with complex health issues, Mr. Speaker. That matters. 

 

The 2014-15 core operational plan also includes the following 

adjustments to benefits that are targeted to Saskatchewan 

seniors. The seniors’ income plan recipients will receive benefit 

increases of $10 a month. Sixteen years they went without an 

increase into the income plan. Seniors’ personal care home 

benefit will be increasing the monthly income eligibility 

threshold by $75, Mr. Speaker, from $1,875 a month to $1,950 

a month for an average benefit of $385 per month. New 

operating funding for 24 long-term care beds at Pineview 

Terrace in Prince Albert, and the senior citizens’ ambulance 

assistance program will receive increased funding for additional 

claims. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on. The point I’m making here, Mr. 

Speaker, is that when it comes to senior citizens, and as we 

heard in other remarks, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to our 

children, when it comes to the health care of the citizens of our 

province, Mr. Speaker, they matter and we care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the pillars of this budget — and I’ll 

conclude with these, Mr. Speaker — one of the pillars of our 

budget is controlled spending. You know, Mr. Speaker, in this 

day and age, it’s very easy to get caught up in spending. 

Spending, it’s like a frenzy, Mr. Speaker, and it tempts us every 

single day. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we create ways to convince 

ourselves that it’s okay to spend. And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, 

even governments get caught up in that. It’s easy to spend. It’s 

okay to spend. 

 

As the Minister of Infrastructure alluded to last night, you 

know, when treasury board receive their submissions from the 

ministries and ministries appear before treasury board, they 

don’t come with bad ideas. They don’t come with bad programs 

for approval, Mr. Speaker. They come with programs that are 

important to the people of Saskatchewan, otherwise they 

wouldn’t waste anybody’s time trying to present these 

programs. And so it’s very difficult to not get caught up in a 

spending frenzy. 

 

You know, if we simplify things, and we look at our own 

personal lives, sometimes we find it very easy to make up ways 

to convince ourselves that it’s okay to spend. We rationalize, 

and we become very good at it. It’s very tempting. And as I 

said, we as governments can get caught up in it sometimes too. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, I know that some of these things are 

familiar. I don’t want to wait. I want to enjoy it now, not when 

I’m old and grey, personally. I didn’t — this is a good one — I 

didn’t buy the $150 one. Buying the $50 one is like saving 

$100. You’ve run that one by, Mr. Speaker. Or I deserve a treat. 

It’s a reward. Or you only live once. Or it’s an investment. You 

see, Mr. Speaker? It’s very easy to spend. 

 

So how do you control that spending? How do you control that 

spending when there are so many forces tugging on a very 

limited amount of resources? Well the answer to that is simple, 

Mr. Speaker. You have to make tough decisions. But in order to 

make tough decisions, Mr. Speaker, you need to have some 

tools. 

 

Very quickly and very briefly, one of the tools we have of 

course is the whole budget process, the treasury board process 

led by our Ministry of Finance, Mr. Speaker, a group of people 

that take that task on very, very seriously, line by line. They 

argue. They discuss. They think through the proposals and the 

budgets that are presented them by the various ministries, Mr. 

Speaker. And in the end, they make tough decisions. They 

control spending. 

 

[22:00] 

 

One of the other tools that we have decided to employ, Mr. 

Speaker, is — as has already been mentioned by the Minister of 

Health — the lean management system. And I do want to spend 

a couple of minutes on that beyond what our minister has 

spoken about because we have made an investment in lean, Mr. 

Speaker, and it is producing benefits, as has been alluded to, for 

the people of Saskatchewan. Lean’s the term that’s used to 

describe the continuous pursuit of improvement through the 

elimination of waste. How fundamental is that? How bad is that 

when you try to find a way to eliminate waste? It’s just that 

simple, Mr. Speaker. Lean empowers the provider to generate 

and implement value-added, innovative solutions to problems. 

How bad is that, Mr. Speaker? And, Mr. Speaker, the lean 

process is just one of . . . Here comes another metaphor, Mr. 

Speaker — and that’s just one of the arrows in the quiver. 

 

Let me just talk about health. I know the minister has elaborated 

a little bit, but I want to add a little bit. As the first province in 

Canada to apply lean methodology across its entire health 

system, we are committed to providing patient- and 

family-centred, high-quality care to all of the people in 

Saskatchewan. We are equally committed to providing 

taxpayers with the best possible value for their tax dollars. Lean 

improvements have focused on reducing waits, improving 

safety and quality of care for Saskatchewan patients, as well as 

improving the work environment for care providers. 



4938 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, during the period from March the 1st, 2012 to 
January 31st, 2014, a total of 638 lean improvement events 
were completed across the health system. Mr. Speaker, that 
translates into a 31 per cent reduction in space, 45 per cent 
reduction in inventory, 72 per cent reduction in defects — for 
example, medical errors, falls, etc. — and a 52 per cent 
reduction in patient lead time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those aren’t one-time savings. Those are forever 
qualitative efficiencies and benefits that benefit the patients and 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s the product of 
lean. 
 
And if we look beyond just the Ministry of Health . . . One 
more health stat, Mr. Speaker, and then we can look across 
government. In out-of-country claims, Mr. Speaker, there was a 
backlog of 2,200 claims from individuals across the province. 
As a result of lean, the backlog of claims was eliminated. There 
was an 81 per cent improvement in average processing time, 
etc., Mr. Speaker. 
 
From the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney General, 
payments process for Public Guardian and Trustee office. 
Clients were frustrated about paying for a service that was 
inefficient. As a result of lean, client satisfaction increased 
when they received clarity from the staff about when they could 
get their cheques and learned that often they would receive it 
that same day. That’s helping the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
From the Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety, 
labour standards complaint resolution. The time to resolve an 
investigation from employees regarding hours of work, pay, and 
benefits was too long. As a result of work, the time to resolve a 
complaint is down by approximately 30 per cent. Mr. Speaker. 
And I could go on across the ministries, across government. 
 
This process is a deliberate investment by the Government of 
Saskatchewan to improve the quality of life for the people of 
Saskatchewan in terms of how we manage efficiencies within 
our ministries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, with that, I will conclude my remarks. I 
will be supporting the motion for the budget, and I will not be 
supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise in the House today to join into the debate on this 
important document. But before I do so, I would like to simply 
thank my wife, April, for all that she does, for the support that 
she’s given me over the past 28 months. The support that we get 
from our spouses allows us to do the critical job that we do. The 
toughest part of the job may be the fact that we are away from 
home and away from loved ones so much. 
 
I would also like to take the time to thank my CAs 
[constituency assistant], Laurie Hookway and Peggy Gordon 
who do a great job, not only for me but for the people, all the 
residents of the Melfort constituency. And I want to thank the 
people of the Melfort constituency for the faith they have placed 

in me and did so 28 months ago, and for the gracious way I’m 
treated when I’m around in the constituency. 
 
During the past week, I’ve had the opportunity to be 
interviewed by local media back home and I’ve been asked to 
describe the steady growth budget, and I simply said that it’s 
good government. It’s a balanced budget. It’s a budget that 
doesn’t increase taxes. It’s a budget that controls government 
spending. It’s a budget that places priorities on continued 
growth, on skills training, on health care, on seniors, and on 
making Saskatchewan the best place in Canada to live, to work, 
and to raise a family. 
 
We continue as a government to chip away at the massive 
infrastructure deficit that was left to us from the people across 
the aisle, putting much needed capital into the Saskatchewan 
highway system, the education system, the health care system, 
the long-term care system, all needed upgrades when we won in 
2007. 
 
And then I was asked, okay, what about the Melfort 
constituency? What does it do for us in Melfort constituency? 
You know, and we have a great agricultural background there 
and industry there and this does a lot to show stability in 
farming, not only in grain farming but also with beef producers 
and with beekeepers. And you know, that’s very important 
because over the years farming has been up and down and up 
and down and finally we’re getting a handle on it to keep it on a 
level and growing keel. 
 
And I look at the powerful manufacturing base that exists in the 
Melfort constituency, the iron triangle it’s called, consisting of 
Bourgault Industries, Bourgault Tillage Tools, Doepker 
Industries, Schulte Industries, Michel’s Industries, Condor’s, 
FPS [Failure Prevention Services], M & K, Worley’s and so 
many more, all in the Melfort constituency. And that doesn’t 
count the world’s largest potash mine, BHP, that is now under 
construction. But I see in this budget that we have put money 
aside, and we’re starting the manufacturing centre of excellence 
right here in Saskatchewan and really, in the Melfort 
constituency. Where else? What else could happen that would 
help us more? 
 
And then I see improvements in education, health care, 
long-term care, First Nations programs, programs that keep our 
children and our grandchildren right here in Saskatchewan. And 
I sit in this Chamber, and I see an opposition of buzzwords. 
That’s buzz, buzzwords. 
 
You know, they don’t put the research in. They come out with a 
smart economy. They’re going to build a smart economy. I’ve 
heard of smart phones. I’ve heard of smart cars. There’s no 
place that they explain what a smart economy is. Saskatchewan 
today has the most diversified economy in Canada. What are 
they going to do to make it a smart economy? 
 
They have rent-a-school is a term they’ve been bringing out. No 
idea what that means. Wrong-headed. I love that one, 
wrong-headed. Japanese dictionary. And one that actually 
makes some sense until you think about it: minimum care 
standards. 
 
You know, we’ve heard quite a bit on minimum care standards. 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4939 

And like so many of us, when we get into situations where we 
relate it back to our lives . . . And I relate this one to my mother, 
who is and always has been a very strong lady. She raised four 
sons and then had a precious daughter who just had a birthday 
yesterday, and she’s still precious. I’ll leave that there. In fact 
my mother even, mom and dad even brought in a cousin from 
BC just to make sure the house was full. 
 
Mom and dad moved into a care home. I believe seven years 
ago they moved into the care home. And if somebody had told 
them at that time that they’re going to spend two hours a day 
looking after mom and dad, I know how it would have gone. It 
would have gone five minutes of how are you doing this 
morning, Mary, Wes? How are you doing? And it would have 
been five minutes at night, the same thing. It would have been 
an hour and 50 minutes of mom saying, get away from me. I 
don’t need it. Stay away. You know, because you have a 
two-hour minimum. Now unfortunately, mom needs more help 
and she gets it, well over two hours a day. 
 
And you know, too often we hear rhetoric, and we hear this two 
hours a day minimum. So I got thinking about what would it 
look like if we did that. What would it look like? And the only 
thing I could think of is, okay, let’s have a clipboard on the 
front of every door so when somebody walks into the room, 
they sign in. And then they walk out of the room, they sign out. 
If they want to take a roll of toilet paper into the room, they sign 
in. Come out, they sign out. 
 
And then what happens? Somebody at the end of the day has to 
take those sheets and has to add them up, and adds them up to 
come out to maybe an hour and 45 minutes. And what do you 
do then? You supplied all the need, all the care, all the affection 
that they receive in those homes, and it only added up to an 
hour and a half. 
 
What about lunch where they bring everybody together in a 
room three times a day, and you have two people there? Is that 
care or is that not care? Do they sign in or not? 
 
And then you get people totalling these up at the end of the day 
just to see what happens, so we hire somebody for that. And 
then that happens in every institution, every facility. And then it 
goes up to administration to check on that, so let’s hire more 
administration to do that. 
 
And I know if it happened on the other side, and if they made it 
happen when they were in government, it would add cost and 
they would raise taxes. And it would add cost, and they would 
raise taxes. And it would add cost, and they would close 1,200 
beds in rural Saskatchewan. That’s what they did. That’s what 
they would do again. 
 
In the real world, it’s just not like that. When you get done your 
job, when you do a job and you do it well, you go on to the next 
one. You don’t time yourself. You don’t look. You don’t check 
to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you were there long enough. It’s 
just not the real world. 
 
I think 193 pages of regulations is probably minimum standards 
and makes sense. But to put everybody on the watch, on the 
clock doesn’t make any sense. It doesn’t today. It doesn’t 
tomorrow. It doesn’t ever. 

The other day, yesterday . . . And I just really hate to quote my 
seatmate, the member from Coronation Park, but I’m going to 
do it this one time because he does come up with some pretty 
good lines. He was saying that the opposition is against P3s 
because they have no Ps. They have no plan, no policy, no 
platform. I like that. 
 
And yet last week, just for a minute, I thought I saw a plan, 
maybe a gem of a sliver of a policy there. And it happened 
during an exchange between the Leader of the Opposition and 
the Premier, and the Leader of the Opposition kind of explained 
his stand on lean. He said, buy a book and teach everybody else. 
What a great idea. The member from Rosemont I believe is in 
the teaching profession. He probably went to university for a 
few years to become a teacher. He could’ve bought a book and 
went out and taught. 
 
[22:15] 
 
We have a member from Lakeview who could have got a law 
degree in a week and a half by reading a book, you know. They 
would open a library, and they could shut down all the SIASTs 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology], 
all the universities, because you could read a book. Now that’s a 
plan. Not a good one, but that’s a plan. 
 
When I was a kid and I was about 10 years old, I used to work 
at my father’s newspaper. And you know, I did important jobs 
like clean under the presses, move away some paper, try to keep 
my hands out of the equipment, see how dirty, how much 
printer’s ink I could get on in a day. But I was 10 years old. 
And I was thinking the other night about words we used to use 
in that. We used to use Ludlow, reglets — words that meant 
something totally different in the printing industry — words 
like slugs and chases and platens and beds and spacers and 
picas and points and strippers. At 10 years old I knew what they 
all meant. They were strange words, but at 10 years old I knew 
what they all meant. 
 
Now we have the Leader of the Opposition who talks about a 
Japanese dictionary on the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 
website. A Japanese dictionary is the way he describes it. If you 
look it up, it’s a glossary. It’s a glossary of 91 terms; 12, 12 of 
them are Japanese. Twelve words. I have more trouble at a Wok 
Box than . . . You know, it’s just 12 words. They won’t be 
meeting for sushi after the session. 
 
You know, and there’s a few things that I think are just wrong 
and things that happen and things that happen in this Chamber 
that I don’t understand. Because to me being an MLA is 17 
weeks in here trying to decide what we can do that’s good for 
the province. Things like the budget that gives us a year’s plan 
for the budget. And the other weeks we are back home, and 
what we do is we work with individuals, with groups, trying to 
make this province better. That’s how we work when we’re 
away from this Chamber. 
 
The other day, well today I checked my inbox today. And I’m 
not overly proficient at cleaning out my inbox, and I had not 
cleaned it out. And I had 404 messages in my inbox. I’ve 
opened them. I’ve read them, but they’re in there. Last week the 
Leader of the Opposition informs us, he has an inbox full of 
safety concerns from nurses, an inbox full. Can we see them? 



4940 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2014 

No. No, we can’t see them. An inbox. Is that 100? Is that 200? 
Has he got 404, like I had this morning, messages in his inbox? 
We’re talking safety concerns here, safety concerns from nurses 
all across the province, and he won’t share them. 
 
Why won’t he share them? Because they have names on them 
and the people are afraid of it. Well we said, take the names off. 
Gives us the concerns without the names, and he still won’t do 
it. Is that why we’re here? Is that why we’re MLAs? We have 
safety concerns, but we’re not going to tell anybody. We’re not 
going to let anybody know. It baffles me, it really does, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, I am very thankful that we have so many people at 
the Regina Qu’Appelle Health District that understand what’s 
going on, that understands the 12 words in Japanese, that 
understand working together to make things better. And the 
money we save will go into better health care. They understand 
that, and they’re working together. We have an opposition that 
can’t go to a foreign restaurant. 
 
At some point, Mr. Speaker, do the people watching at home or 
the reporters in the gallery or the people in the gallery or the 
reporters in the rotunda, do they ask and begin to lose 
confidence in us, and unfortunately not only the opposition, but 
in all of us as politicians? And I think that is so unfortunate that 
a person who would hold back, according to his own estimates, 
hundreds of safety concerns . . .  
 
We have a member from the other side who stood up the other 
day and read a petition and read the 48 communities it came 
from. It was six communities. Six listed, 48 named. Is that an 
error? I don’t understand it. I just don’t. Is this politics, Mr. 
Speaker? Is this the way we want to conduct ourselves in this 
great Chamber? It may be called politics, and it may be called 
exaggerations, but I know . . . I keep a dictionary from my 
father’s 48 years in the newspaper industry in my office. And in 
that dictionary there are words for things like that, and in every 
other room in this province there are words for things like that. 
 
I think I’m done. I think I’ve had enough to say. But I do want 
to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for reasons of transparent 
government, of caring government, and of good government, I 
will be supporting the budget motion, and I’ll be completely 
rejecting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is indeed 
once again a privilege to stand before this House and speak on 
this year’s budget. I would first off like to thank the team back 
home — I call them team Telfer — my CA, Mary Anne, and 
her husband, Don, who work in my office. I appreciate their 
work, their friendship, and the time they spend on the job. I 
thank them very much for that. 
 
I would also like to thank my wife, Valerie. This fall was 38 
years, and we appreciate what we receive from our spouses. 
And I especially appreciate her for the time and the love and the 
attention and the help she gives me. 
 
I would also like to say . . . I’m thrilled to say that November 

3rd, this past November 3rd, that was my 10th year in this 
House. And I’m thrilled to say that I have represented Batoche 
for these past 10 years. 
 
I would also like to say thank you to the Minister of Finance 
and his fabulous team for the job they did. 
 
And then I would also like to mention the immigrants. To these 
new people of our province, I say thank you for immigrating to 
our Saskatchewan. We love our Saskatchewan, and we hope 
that you will too. And we welcome you to our Saskatchewan 
and hope that you will be achieving your hopes and your 
dreams in our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is the perfect match for this year’s 
economy. Best of all it is balanced, balanced, balanced. To this 
side of the House and to the people of Saskatchewan, this is 
very important. To the NDP, it’s not so important. They say we 
should have spent millions more. First and foremost, our side 
says don’t spend money you don’t have. 
 
I ask of the NDP, if you don’t go into debt, where do you go to 
get the money, that extra money that you would need to still be 
able to balance the budget? Well, Mr. Speaker, let me guess. 
Like past NDP governments, they would extract the money 
needed from agriculture and municipal. Same old NDP story. 
Take it from rural Saskatchewan. And we are still recovering 
from a lifetime of NDP rural pillage. The NDP say the budget 
does not spend enough money on health care, social services, 
highways, and on and on. Have they ever heard the old adage, 
you can never dig your way out of a hole; you only dig deeper? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is tailored to what Saskatchewan needs 
not what the NDP wants. Our government says you should 
spend only the money you have. But do the members on the 
other side of the House not understand the fact that debt 
accumulates more debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would have been interesting to be a fly on the 
wall in the NDP caucus room after they saw the budget. I think 
we would have heard things like, this is going to be a tough 
budget to criticize. Where can we poke holes in this budget? I 
wish we could have written budgets like this when we were in 
power. Wow, it really is balanced. Where do we go from here? 
We’re really going to have to use our imagination on this one. 
Somebody order more coffee; it’s going to be a late night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP believe in spending more than what is 
brought in. If in power, they would have brought in a Stompin’ 
Tom budget yelling, save a lot of money, spending we ain’t got. 
Mr. Speaker, a household run like that is destined to fall, and so 
is a province. 
 
Our government has paid off 44 per cent of the province’s debt. 
That is remarkable. That is real progress. That is something we 
can build on. Mr. Speaker, if the NDP Finance critic, the 
member from Regina Rosemont, ever had a chance to write a 
budget like this, he would be ecstatic. Mr. Speaker, I hope and 
pray that he never has that chance. Mr. Speaker, I might say if 
the NDP would have written budgets like this, they might have 
had a better chance of staying in power.  
 
When faced with a tighter budget, our government cut 



March 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4941 

government spending, not raised taxes. This has to be the path 
of our future. This is the road to success for all of 
Saskatchewan. Now that Saskatchewan is a have province, it 
does not give the government the green light to spend like 
we’ve won a mega lottery. And in order to stay a have province, 
we must be very careful and remember there always is a 
morning after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to quote from the book, Peace, 
Progress and Prosperity by Dr. Gordon L. Barnhart. This book 
is the story of Walter Scott, our first premier. I quote, “To be a 
successful Saskatchewan politician, one had to have rural roots 
and close ties with the land.” Mr. Speaker, that holds true for 
political parties of today in Saskatchewan. By the way, losing 
$34 million on potatoes does not qualify for ties with the land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was born of agriculture. In 1900 
Saskatchewan produced 7.8 per cent of Canada’s wheat and 
Ontario produced 84.7 per cent. By 1910, just 10 years later, 
just 10 years and Saskatchewan produced 50.7 per cent of 
Canada’s wheat and Ontario was down to only 15 per cent. Ag 
is still a huge part on our economic ladder. Ag is still the 
number two . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — It now being 7 p.m., 
this House stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4913 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4916 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4918 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4927 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4934 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4938 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4940 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


