




















































Hansard: April 10, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 49A  THURSDAY, APRIL 10, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5131 

 April 10, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would seek your leave and 

leave of members for an extended introduction this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, and thanks 

to members for that leave. 

 

It’s a great pleasure and an honour for me to be able to 

introduce a friend of the province of Saskatchewan, a good 

friend of mine. Former Premier Ed Stelmach has joined us from 

Alberta, Mr. Speaker. He’s seated on the floor of the Assembly 

today. Later this day, the premier will provide an address to 

Junior Achievement, an excellent organization here in the 

province. That speech will happen a little bit later on in Regina. 

And I just wanted, if I could, to get an introduction on to the 

record and to express the thanks of the province of 

Saskatchewan to Mr. Stelmach for his leadership in Western 

Canada and in the province next door. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he served as premier of Alberta from ’06 to 2011, 

October of 2011. Prior to becoming premier, he held a number 

of portfolios in the government and was a very effective and 

successful cabinet minister in Transportation, Infrastructure, 

and International Intergovernmental Relations. And he was 

also, Mr. Speaker, the Government Whip. He served for 18 

years in the Legislative Assembly, first elected in 1993 for the 

constituency of Vegreville-Viking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he is an active farmer. They are farming still 

today. When I have the occasion to call the former premier, I’m 

usually catching him on his farm, being about the business of 

that. And, Mr. Speaker, I can share with the House as well that 

Ed was the first person of Ukrainian heritage to serve as 

Alberta’s premier and just the second person of Ukrainian 

descent to be elected as premier of Canada. 

 

He and his wife, Marie, who also has become a good friend 

certainly to Tami and I, have four kids and I think seven 

grandchildren now, Mr. Speaker, that they’re enjoying. 

 

And just if I may, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to members 

of the House that shortly after the ’07 election it was the desire 

of the new government to become part of what’s become 

known as the New West Partnership. It was something called 

TILMA, the Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement 

between Alberta and between British Columbia which created 

this pretty dynamic free trade zone, and we wanted to be a part 

of that free trade zone. We wanted to make business an easier 

proposition in Western Canada by being a part of it. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the first call that I made was to then Premier Stelmach 

to ask what he thought of that. And from that day forward he 

was a champion for Saskatchewan to become part of what 

became the New West Partnership, the New West Partnership 

which has now seen the harmonization of transportation 

regulations in the three provinces, the New West Partnership 

that means if you’re registered to do business in Regina you’re 

automatically registered to do business in Edmonton as well as 

knocking down all of those barriers. 

 

I was also honoured to work alongside former Premier 

Stelmach on energy issues in this country, proud of his clarion 

voice of support for the resource sector not just in his province 

but across Western Canada, proud of his work with the federal 

government to make sure we don’t do anything nationally to 

hurt what is increasingly an important economic engine. These 

were manifestations of the leadership of Ed Stelmach. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the other province involved was British 

Columbia, and in terms of the New West Partnership and our 

entry into that, I can tell you that there was a good cop and a 

bad cop amongst those two premiers, and Ed Stelmach was the 

good cop. And I’m hoping that we can send a transcript of this 

particular introduction to Gordon Campbell somewhere in 

London where he can read it there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to welcome Ed to this Legislative 

Assembly today, to thank him for his service to the country, to 

Alberta certainly, but also to Western Canada, and thank him as 

well for his steadfast support of the interests of the province of 

Saskatchewan as well. I’d ask all members to join with me 

please in welcoming former Alberta Premier Ed Stelmach. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I, on behalf of the official 

opposition, would like to extend a welcome to Premier Ed 

Stelmach as well, an individual who has had a long and 

distinguished career as a legislator and as a premier in Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. And I know this evening as he speaks with Junior 

Achievement that they’ll greatly appreciate his remarks and get 

a lot out of it, I’m sure. So I wish Mr. Stelmach all the best 

during his time in Saskatchewan and thank him for his presence 

here in the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly some very special guests 

that have gathered and are seated in your gallery. These people 

are family members and friends of a prominent Regina resident, 

tireless Ukrainian nation builder, family man, and my friend Ed 

Lysyk. Joining us today are Janet Lysyk — just give us a little 

wave — Crystal Lysyk, Kathy Sabo, Angus Sabo, Brian Lysyk, 

Ashley Mantei, and others behind that row. One very special 

person of course is Orest Gawdyda who is the president of the 

UCC [Ukrainian Canadian Congress], Regina branch. 

 



5132 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

Later today, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be making a statement 

commemorating the life of this very influential person. So I’d 

ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of the 

official opposition I’d like to join with the Deputy Premier in 

extending a welcome to the family and friends of Ed Lysyk, Mr. 

Speaker, and pleased to hear that the Deputy Premier will be 

making some remarks later on. But on behalf of the official 

opposition, we’re greatly appreciative for all that was done by 

Ed in the province of Saskatchewan. So welcome here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you 20 grade 12 

students from Winston Knoll Collegiate here in Regina. If you 

would give us a wave. Our students are also accompanied again 

by Scott McKillop. 

 

Scott has been absolutely one of those teachers that we can just 

be so proud of because he always brings his classrooms to the 

Legislative Assembly. They have the opportunity to observe 

some very, most likely, very lively debate that goes on in the 

House. But also we have an opportunity then to meet and 

discuss the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly. So thank 

you very much again, Scott, for bringing your classroom, and I 

look forward to meeting and discussing politics with them. 

 

While I’m on my feet, I would also like to extend a welcome to 

a very good friend of mine, Mary Vogel. Mary Vogel and I 

were realtors, worked many years together, but Mary and I have 

also formed a very good friendship. So again thank you very 

much, Mary, for your commitment to the business community 

but also to the Ukrainian community. So thank you very much 

for attending today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

take the opportunity to introduce a number of guests who are 

seated in your gallery. Joining us this morning is Travis Low, 

the executive director of the Parkinson Society of 

Saskatchewan; Pat Duggleby, board Chair; and John Dawes, a 

member of the Parkinson Society. Also with us are Gordon 

McKay, the associate dean from the College of Medicine at the 

University of Saskatchewan, as well as Chris Stoichef. 

 

I’ll be meeting with representatives of the Parkinson’s 

community today later after question period. And I would invite 

all members to join with me in welcoming them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, it’s my pleasure to welcome the guests from 

the Parkinson Society of Saskatchewan to the legislature. Thank 

you for all the work that you do with respect to advocacy, 

support, and of course research. 

 

My grandpa actually, many years ago, lived with Parkinson’s, 

and I know the challenges that he faced. So again just on a 

personal note and on behalf of the opposition, thank you for all 

that you do, and welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to join with the Minister of Health and the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale in welcoming the Parkinson group 

to their Legislative Assembly. I’d specifically like to welcome 

Travis Low. 

 

Travis worked as a constituency assistant in the constituency of 

Saskatoon Silver Springs in my office. He did an excellent job. 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I want to talk about is Travis’s 

commitment to Parkinson’s. His grandfather and his father both 

have been afflicted with the disease and Travis wanted to do 

something. In his late 20s, I believe, he created a fundraiser that 

is well renowned in Saskatoon, raising hundreds of thousands 

of dollars for Parkinson’s. 

 

Travis has been recognized in the province as one of the top 30 

under-30 leaders. He has been recognized as a youth leader 

across the country, Mr. Speaker. So please, all members, help 

me in welcoming Travis Low and thank him for all that he does 

in our great province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to join in recognizing 

the important work of those advocating for more attention on 

Parkinson’s, and specifically when my colleague makes 

mention of young leaders, I’d like to highlight again the 

presence of Chris Stoichef. Chris is the past president of the 

USSU [University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union], played a 

very, very important leadership role on that campus when it 

came to issues of child care and a number of other 

student-focused initiatives including those focusing on First 

Nations and Métis students. 

 

And so I’d just like to ask you and through your Chair to all 

members of the Assembly in helping welcome Chris and all the 

delegates that are here today to speak about Parkinson’s to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you my uncle and 

aunt, Kerry and Brenda Rendek who came down from 

Martensville today to take in the proceedings, my cousin 

Tiffany Rendek and her friend Paige as well, who are watching 

I think what is their first question period. So I’d like all 

members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5133 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for greater support for education. And we 

know that education is one of the most vital services that 

government provides to citizens. And this government has 

failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision and the necessary 

resources to prioritize the delivery of educational excellence. 

And we know that this government has failed to deliver a real 

plan to close the Aboriginal education gap, support English as 

an additional language students, support community schools 

and their communities and students. And we know that we must 

build the best educational system for today and for 

Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 

long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 

provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan that 

reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 

changes, that is based on proven educational best 

practices, that is developed through consultation with the 

education sector, that builds strong educational 

infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 

the future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 

the unsafe conditions on Dewdney Avenue, the inundation of 

heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue. And the residents 

in the community are looking for action to ensure safety on 

Dewdney Avenue. They note that any further delays by that 

government are entirely unacceptable in addressing a problem 

that was created by that government. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

the rerouting of heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government simply ignored 

the calls to maintain this program. Instead, it cancelled the 

RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is destroyed for 

many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

Signed by many good people of this province. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I stand today to present a petition for highway 

improvements for northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, of 

course highway improvements are necessary all throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan. But this one in particular is for 

northern Saskatchewan, and the people that have signed the 

petition are from Patuanak and from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And this 

particular road that we’re presenting this petition on serves the 

community of Patuanak and the English River First Nation. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

provincial government to commit to repairing and 

upgrading Highway 918. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

to present a petition for real action on climate change. And the 

people who signed this petition bring to our attention a number 

of items, some of which include the fact that Saskatchewan 

produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions per capita in all 

of Canada and that slashing programs such as the Go Green 

Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses energy efficiency program 

set the province on a backward course. And we know that since 

2009 the Government of Saskatchewan has reduced climate 

change funding by 83 per cent, including another 35 per cent 

cut in the most recent budget. 

 

So the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan enact a real plan and allocate appropriate 

funding in the provincial budget to tackle climate change 

by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, helping families 



5134 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

transition to energy-efficient homes, and encouraging 

everyone in the province to take real action to protect the 

environment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Saskatoon, 

Humboldt, and North Battleford. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

National Volunteer Week 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, it’s Volunteer Week in Canada. 

This week gives us a chance to celebrate our volunteers here in 

the province and across Canada. This is the 11th consecutive 

year of the National Volunteer Week campaign. This is an 

opportunity that gives us a chance to recognize the dedication 

of volunteers to their communities. 

 

We are fortunate to have the spirit of volunteerism alive and 

well in our province, and we now have a reputation at home and 

around the globe to have an incredible presence of volunteers 

working to strengthen our communities. Mr. Speaker, 

volunteering takes a number of shapes, but there is a common 

denominator. Volunteers are sacrificing their time for the 

collective good, and it doesn’t get more nobler than that. 

 

Volunteers and volunteer-based organizations in this province 

are a driving force for change. Whether this is delivering meals, 

community service, coaching teams, campaigning, or helping 

build homes, these people are making a difference. 

Volunteering in our communities unites us as a province and 

speaks to each of us across the diversity that is present in 

Saskatchewan. We are fortunate to have strong community 

organizations that support and coordinate volunteer efforts in 

our communities. Organizations like United Way in Regina and 

Volunteer Saskatoon promote volunteerism across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that my colleagues join with me in 

recognizing National Volunteer Week and the generosity of 

Saskatchewan people who transform their time and energies 

into better communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Parkinson’s Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The month of 

April is Parkinson’s Awareness Month, and April 11th is World 

Parkinson’s Day. Every April, Parkinson Society Saskatchewan 

and its regional partners across Canada use the month of April 

to raise awareness for Parkinson’s disease. 

 

The theme chosen for this month is Everyday Heroes. This 

theme was chosen to bring awareness to the strength and 

courage of the many people on a daily basis in overcoming the 

challenges of living with a chronic disease. Parkinson’s affects 

more than 100,000 Canadians, and in Saskatchewan there are 

over 4,000 people living with this disease. Parkinson’s is a 

disease that has no cure. Symptoms include resting tremor, 

slowness of movement, stiffness of muscles, and difficulty with 

balance and walking. 

 

Parkinson Society Saskatchewan is the voice of the people 

living with Parkinson’s disease in our province. This 

organization provides education, support, and advocacy on 

behalf of Saskatchewan residents who have this disease. Mr. 

Speaker, Parkinson Society Saskatchewan is to be congratulated 

for its efforts in raising awareness of Parkinson’s and for its 

work on behalf of those who are coping with this disease. 

 

Saskatchewan health regions provide services to assist 

individuals with Parkinson’s disease manage their symptoms 

and maintain their independence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those living with Parkinson’s disease are truly 

everyday heroes. I ask all members to join me in recognizing 

the remarkable courage, determination, and strength in living 

with this challenging disease. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Parkinson’s is a disease with no 

cure, but there are treatments that can relieve the symptoms and 

improve the quality of life for the 100,000 Canadians who live 

with Parkinson’s. 

 

This disease begins by affecting motor skills and movement. It 

limits mobility. It often results in dementia, and is incredibly 

challenging for those living with it as well as their families. 

While the average age of diagnosis for Parkinson’s is 65, there 

are Canadians as young as 25 who have been diagnosed with 

the disease. Sadly more and more Canadians are being 

diagnosed at earlier ages. 

 

Parkinson Society Canada and Saskatchewan have funded more 

than $21 million in disease research nationally. Parkinson 

Society Saskatchewan has launched a new website, 

livewellwithparkinsons.com, as a tool for patients to find 

information about medications, reading materials, nutrition, and 

even recipes for Parkinson’s patients to live fuller, healthier 

lives. The Parkinson Society also has a fresh tulip sales 

campaign starting this week called Don’t Park Parkinson’s, and 

will be hosting a Parkinson Connection Education Conference 

later this month. Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of the 

House to join with me in recognizing Parkinson’s Awareness 

Month. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Remembering Ed Lysyk 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is with great sadness that I learned about the 

passing of Ed Lysyk on April 3rd. Ed was a prominent Regina 

resident, tireless Ukrainian nation builder, and above all, a 

family man. I had the pleasure of introducing his family seated 

today in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

The son of an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officer, 

Ed settled in Regina after law school in 1977 and practised law 

in the city until his retirement in 2005. Ed was very involved in 

the Ukrainian-Canadian community, both in Regina and at the 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5135 

national level. He served as president of the Ukrainian 

Canadian Congress, Saskatchewan provincial council for five 

years, concluding his term in 2011. He also served as a 

representative on the national board. 

 

Ed was president of the Regina branch of the Ukrainian 

Canadian Congress and was instrumental in supporting 

initiatives such as the adult Ukrainian language immersion 

course held in Trident Camp, also known as Oselya Trizub, at 

Crystal Lake in the great constituency of Canora-Pelly. From 

2009-12 Ed provided his wise counsel as part of the 

Saskatchewan Ukraine relations advisory committee and in 

2010 I had the pleasure of travelling to Ukraine with Ed as 

members of an official delegation. Most recently Ed was 

involved in commemorating the Holodomor and he was 

instrumental in creating the Holodomor memorial statue. 

 

In May 2013 Ed was awarded the Queen Elizabeth II Diamond 

Jubilee Medal for his contributions to the Ukrainian-Canadian 

community. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing the tireless 

contributions of Ed Lysyk. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

May his memory be eternal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Saskatchewan Athlete Competes in Masters Golf 

Tournament 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been a 

momentous year for Saskatchewan athletes on the world stage, 

from Olympic gold medallists to our province’s first Super 

Bowl champion and, Mr. Speaker, at 10:31 this morning, about 

five minutes from now, we’ll be able to add competing at the 

Masters to this list. 

 

We are all very proud of Weyburn’s Graham DeLaet who will 

be teeing off at the Masters, the first Saskatchewanian to ever 

merit an invite in the 78 years of this very prestigious golf 

tournament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Graham had an incredible 2013: third at the 

Travelers; tied for second at the Barclays; competed at the 2013 

open championship, his first major championship; and a 3-1-1 

record at the Presidents Cup, only the second Canadian to ever 

play at this team competition; finishing the year at 32nd in the 

world rankings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he started off in 2014 really where he left off last 

year with back-to-back tied-for-second finishes and, in nine 

starts, five top 10’s and a career high 26 in the world rankings. 

Mr. Speaker, Graham has a game that should be able to play 

well at Augusta National. He’s one of the longest hitters on the 

tour. His average of 303.3 yards is good for 10th overall as well 

as ranking sixth in accuracy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join 

me in wishing Graham DeLaet the best of luck this weekend as 

he represents Saskatchewan at the world stage. Go low, 

Graham. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the real member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Northlands College Gala 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, 

Northlands College Video Essay Contest Gala was held in La 

Ronge. Five videos were selected for the final round of judging. 

 

The evening was sponsored by RAM Safety and C&C Fire 

Extinguisher Services that donated $500 each for a total of 

$1,000, matched with grant funding for a total of $2,000 for 

bursary prizes. Visions North Community Futures Development 

Corporation sponsored the gala and the grand prize trip to Cape 

Canaveral, Florida. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dale Apesis took home the top prize of a $1,250 

bursary as well as the trip to Florida. I should mention that it 

was encouraging to learn that Dale is a first-year student. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Northlands College is helping to build students’ 

leadership skills and personal development so that they become 

role models in their communities. Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to 

recognize the valuable contribution and educational 

opportunities that Northlands College offers to students in 

northern Saskatchewan. In particular it has ensured that a 

skilled workforce is available to meet the North’s labour market 

demand and have increased the participation and success of 

First Nations and Métis people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all the winners from 

the evening and to Northlands College for the great work that 

they do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Dental Hygienists Week 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 6th to the 12th 

is Dental Hygienists Week in Saskatchewan and across Canada, 

a week sure to bring a bright, clean, healthy smile to everyone’s 

face. 

 

Dental hygienists are in the front lines of oral care, and oral care 

is important for overall health. Problems that show up in the 

mouth may be indicators of other health issues. Research has 

shown links in adults between the problems of oral health and 

conditions such as heart disease, diabetes, and stroke, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There are over 500 registered dental hygienists in 

Saskatchewan. Dental hygienists are life-long learners, staying 

current on the best practices, adapting to new technologies, 

adapting to new procedures. They are the professionals that 

help us maintain good oral health. They teach proper care of the 

mouth and how to properly brush your teeth and how to, when 

to floss. Dental hygienists work in dental clinics, schools, and 

public health facilities. They are found in primary care centres, 

hospitals, and are found in home cares and other outreach 

programs. 



5136 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, dental hygienists are involved in research and they 

work for the government developing policy. They are 

invaluable members to the health care sector. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

all members to recognize these valuable health professionals. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Patient Safety and Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has repeatedly said 

that he wants front-line workers to bring forth their concerns, 

but he’s refusing to protect them from retaliation. Here’s a 

quote from SUN’s [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] latest 

newsletter sent out late yesterday afternoon: 

 

On March 28, 2014, SUN requested a letter of protection, 

from the Ministry of Health, for all members coming 

forward with concerns relating to the impacts of model of 

care changes on patient safety or the application of Lean in 

their workplaces. The intended purpose of this letter of 

protection is to ensure that SUN members have a way to 

provide feedback on any changes they feel may be 

negatively impacting the safety of their patients without 

fear of retaliation. 

 

As of yesterday, Mr. Speaker, they received no such guarantee 

of protection. My question to the Premier: why doesn’t he want 

nurses to be able to bring forward concerns about patient safety 

without fear of reprisal or retaliation? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we absolutely want our nurses 

to know, and all of our health care professionals to know, that 

they need to provide very direct and honest input, both to the 

regions and to the elected Government of Saskatchewan, any 

elected member indeed in this House, without any fear at all. 

 

My understanding from the Minister of Health is that this most 

recent letter has come in framed as the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition has just framed it, and that it’s under consideration. 

I think there have been requests dating back even to the 

previous government with respect to whistle-blower protection. 

 

We need to find the very best way — whether it’s legislated, 

whether it’s some other option — the very best way, the most 

effective way to ensure that front-line health care workers feel 

completely confident, completely comfortable and protected in 

bringing forward any information they have in the interests of 

patient safety and patient care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has claimed that he 

wants to hear from front-line health care providers when it 

comes to the concerns that they have around lean. It’s puzzling, 

Mr. Speaker, why they won’t provide the guarantee of safety 

for the nurses who want to bring forward concerns about patient 

safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a review of the government’s lean pet project was 

already in the auditor’s work plan for next year. It’s good to 

hear. We might see that that review happens a bit more quickly. 

But the government’s messaging on this is a bit odd. They say 

they first want to give the auditor some lean training and then 

they will unleash her to do the work, Mr. Speaker. Well we 

think the auditor should be able to do her job, look at the whole 

picture, and not just what the government wants her to see. So 

we’ll be watching this closely. 

 

But what’s absolutely bizarre today, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

government doesn’t want more concerns coming forward from 

nurses and front-line health care providers about patient safety 

because it’s more preoccupied with promoting its lean pet 

project. 

 

My question to the Premier: why does he not want nurses to 

feel safe to raise the alarm over patient safety when it comes to 

his lean project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve learned in recent days 

to double check the facts in terms of the preambles from the 

member who just asked the question. Mr. Speaker, he would 

have this House believe that the government has somehow 

directed or asked the auditor to take lean training. Mr. Speaker, 

I can tell the House and the member that it’s simply not the 

case. My understanding of the situation is that there may be an 

interest in learning a little bit more about lean principles before 

that becomes the subject of the auditor’s work, which would 

make a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look forward to this review of lean because, as you know, 

the particular contract that has raised the interest of members 

opposite, the lean initiatives of the government in general have 

already saved more taxpayers’ dollars than they have cost. And 

we have seen measurable improvements in patient-centred care, 

Mr. Speaker, reductions in wait times, the elimination of 

cancellation of appointments that have plagued some parts of 

the health care system. You know, there’s more work to be 

done. And we want to ensure that we’re improving this lean 

process as it makes its way towards completion and we have 

that capacity in the province. 

 

But nobody has directed the auditor to take any training. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, I would just advise the member of this in case 

he was unaware of it. But in subsequent questions, he may want 

to clarify that in fact the auditor, to the extent she’s interested in 

lean, is going to voluntarily, or on her own, become more 

familiar with its principles. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, instead of spending untold 

millions on his pet lean project, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

should want to know what front-line health care providers, what 

nurses are saying, Mr. Speaker, about the reality in our 

hospitals, in our care facilities, and in our home care programs. 

He should want to hear concerns from the nurses, especially, 

especially, Mr. Speaker, when those concerns are directly tied 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5137 

to patient safety and the concerns that health care providers 

have about it. 

 

Based on the government’s own data, Dr. Mark Lemstra says it 

is “. . . wrong to publicly state that lean has had a positive 

impact when their own data indicates the opposite.” 

 

My question to the Premier: does he agree with Dr. Mark 

Lemstra, or does he stubbornly dismiss the scathing assessment 

that lean is actually having a negative impact on patient safety 

in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we take much of what Dr. 

Lemstra has said very seriously and in the constructive manner 

in which it’s offered. We respectfully disagree with him with 

respect to his opinion on lean. 

 

We would point to groups like the SMA for example, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, the doctors of the province 

— for whom the Leader of the Opposition worked as a 

researcher, I would point out — who have said that this is 

precisely the right approach for the health care system. We 

would point to countless other quotes from nurses and patients 

in the system that have said this is an important process. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with respect to what the auditor has said, 

with respect to the member’s question previous, here’s a direct 

quote. She said in the media today: 

 

We know that lean is an area that we need to do some 

audit work on, but to be honest, we don’t know enough 

about lean to figure out what that would look like. What 

we’re hoping is that the time that will be spend that day 

will give us a better perspective about what audit work we 

can do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition takes that quote and 

torques it as some sort of government directive to the auditor, 

which we’re not in a place to offer those directives; neither 

would we, Mr. Speaker. We’d ask the Leader of the Opposition 

to please finally stick to the facts. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The problem is, Mr. Speaker, the government 

says they don’t agree with Dr. Mark Lemstra, but Dr. Mark 

Lemstra is using the data and the figures from government, the 

data that’s taken, Mr. Speaker, from the Health Quality 

Council’s own website. And this government data, it shows that 

adverse events are up, overall satisfaction of patients is down, 

the number of patients satisfied with their pain management is 

down, the mortality rate for major surgery is up, and the rate of 

infections, Mr. Speaker, has also jumped. 

 

My specific question to the Premier: will he at least admit that 

his government’s own data is accurate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member will know that we are in the midst of 

deploying lean throughout the entire health care system. Mr. 

Speaker, we are at the beginning of what is going to be a 

multi-year commitment to implementing lean within the health 

care system, one of the things that we’re trying to achieve while 

ensuring that the benefits and the efficiencies that we’ve found 

have already paid for the cost of lean and the JBA [John Black 

and Associates] contract.  

 

What is at the heart of lean is quality improvement, continuous 

improvement, and reducing the defects and the errors within the 

health care system. Mr. Speaker, I know that just in terms of the 

information that we are seeing certainly any time that we do see 

those, whether it be critical incidents or medication errors, what 

we are trying to do is be vigilant as a health system to report 

those accurately, report them when they do happen. We believe 

that that’s under-reported within the health care system, not just 

in Saskatchewan.  

 

But we do have work to do on this front, Mr. Speaker, but I 

think what we’re doing in Saskatchewan is being recognized at 

a national and an international level, Mr. Speaker, and lean is a 

big part of that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: does 

he support government’s own data when it comes to the 

statistics that Dr. Mark Lemstra has used indicating that lean is 

not working? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would just say that we’re early into the lean process, 

Mr. Speaker. Well the members opposite, they think it’s funny, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We take the position that we need to, Mr. Speaker, we take the 

position that we do, we need to do a better job within the health 

care system in Saskatchewan, in Canada, across North America, 

in reducing errors, in reducing defects, in reducing things like 

medication errors. Continuous improvement, quality 

improvement, is a large part of that, Mr. Speaker. To say that 

the information that is being provided through critical incidents 

and other reporting mechanisms through the system indicate 

that lean is not working, I think that that is not the case, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact I think what we’re seeing is that there is more 

reporting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if that was the case, the members opposite then 

would have to explain, under the member from Lakeview, why 

critical incidents went up 66 per cent in one year. Does that 

mean that the NDP [New Democratic Party] health care system 

got that much worse in one single year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, no response from the Premier 

whether or not he actually believes the government’s own data, 

the data that is clearly on display through the Health Quality 

Council. When we read about the infection rate jumping by 86 

per cent, that ought to be a concern for this government because 

it also fits, Mr. Speaker, with what we’re hearing from nurses. 



5138 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

SUN says this: “Efficiencies, found by scaling back high-touch 

surface cleaning in operating and emergency rooms, have 

resulted in rising hospital-acquired infection rates in some 

regions.” 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, we have the Premier dismissing that 

fact and not admitting that the government’s own statistics are 

correct. My specific question to the Premier: will he admit that 

the infection rate is going up, and will he admit it’s because of 

cuts to cleaning in our health care system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to the work that we’re doing within the 

health care system, certainly we understand, we’ve 

acknowledged that we need to do a better job when it comes to 

patient safety and to reducing the amount of error and the 

defects within the health care system. Lean has been a big part 

of identifying the waste within the system, the errors within the 

system, and identifying ways to improve on the record within 

the health care system. 

 

This isn’t just a Saskatchewan issue. This is a North American 

issue. This is a world-wide issue. In fact, Mr. Speaker, here’s 

some of the evidence. What we’ve done in Saskatchewan 

through the work of lean, we have adopted as a pilot project in 

Saskatoon a stop-the-line safety alert system, so that whether 

that be front-line staff or that be patients or family members 

now have one way that they can access the system to say 

something is happening that is potentially unsafe. You know 

who else is looking at that, Mr. Speaker? The United Kingdom. 

The minister of Health for the United Kingdom was at Virginia 

Mason just three weeks ago and says that they will adopt 

stop-the-line, which we’re already doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they talk about listening to health 

care professionals, but then we have a statement from SUN 

yesterday that clearly states this government is unwilling to 

provide protection to registered nurses when they speak up 

about patient safety. Mr. Speaker, when we see that pain is not 

being managed properly, according to the government’s own 

data, this fits with what we’re hearing from front-line health 

care providers. 

 

We’ve heard that two-thirds of nurses are saying that patient 

safety is getting worse in hospitals and care facilities throughout 

Saskatchewan. So the data shows it. And what we hear from 

nurses, Mr. Speaker, it’s also backed up. But the Premier, the 

Premier is continually dismissing this and he won’t even admit 

whether or not the government’s own statistics are correct. He 

doesn’t want nurses to be able to speak about patient safety, Mr. 

Speaker, because his government is more concerned, more 

concerned with promoting their lean pet project. 

 

They have $40 million, Mr. Speaker, $40 million for one US 

[United States] consultant, $3,500 a day per sensei to fly them 

in to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They have $17 million last 

year alone for kaizen promotion offices and untold millions to 

force training on health care workers where they learn Japanese 

words and learn how to fold paper airplanes. 

My question to the Premier, and I hope he gets up and answers 

this: when will he admit that patient safety is being harmed? 

When will he admit that they’ve lost their way with lean? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, so the record of the members opposite, and they will 

know this: in 2004-2005, critical incidences 63, the following 

year, 105 — a 66 per cent increase in critical incidents. What 

did they do to that? Well, Mr. Speaker, we know what they 

didn’t do. They didn’t hire front-line staff. When they had the 

nurses’ union say they needed 600 additional nursing positions, 

they ignored that, Mr. Speaker. We hired the 600. We added 

800. We added two more to bring that up to 800 and brought 

that in fact up to 1,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s some of the work that we’re trying to 

improve within the health care system and where it has real 

benefits. For example, in St. Joseph’s Hospital in Estevan, prior 

to some lean work, 40 per cent of patients did not receive the 

standard of care to prevent blood clots within 12 hours of 

admission. Today 100 per cent of patients receive that. Mr. 

Speaker, an example like that, there are more than 33,000 extra 

in-patient days that could be avoided if we do better work like 

this, Mr. Speaker. We think we’re on the right path. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Ministry of Education Sector Plan 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s lean project 

isn’t just confined to health care. We’ve learned that it’s taking 

over education as well. Educators, parents, and students are 

concerned about that because they’ve heard and witnessed 

about the impact of lean in its deployment on our health care 

system. The deputy minister of Education, who’s also the 

deputy minister of lean, says the education sector strategic plan, 

which we understand will be released tomorrow, is a kaizen, 

lean-based plan.  

 

To the Education minister: what guarantees can he give 

educators, teachers, students that the lean project will not hurt 

our already strained education system? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, what’s being rolled out 

will be the first time ever that we’ve had an education system 

with a sector plan that was actually developed by the sector. 

Our partners in education are excited about the direction that 

it’s going. We chose, Mr. Speaker, to put things on pause. We 

engaged the services of Russ Mirasty and Patricia Prowse 

before we went ahead with things. And, Mr. Speaker, the things 

that we’re going ahead with are things that we are genuinely 

excited about.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d urge the member to stay tuned and see 

what’s going to happen tomorrow. It will be a good day for 

education in Saskatchewan. 

 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5139 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The strategic 

plan presentations given to school boards were riddled with 

Japanese terminology and even titled hoshin kanri. School 

board documents show that the government said the sector plan 

was supposed to be released on budget day, but it wasn’t. In 

committee the deputy minister for lean and Education said this, 

quote: This government took the time to remove Japanese 

terminology from the plan. I quote: 

 

That feedback has been received. So we do refer to it as 

our sector plan. This hoshin kanri title is really a 

description of a methodology that’s lean, but wherever 

possible we’re going to be anglicizing that language and 

providing it in plain English. 

 

To the minister: is that why the sector plan has been delayed, 

the release, that they simply wanted to wash the Japanese 

language and put it in plain English? And did that delay also 

require a second printing of that plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a quote 

from Janet Foord, president of the Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association: “We are proud of the fact that the 28 locally 

elected and autonomous public, separate, and Francophone 

school boards in this province have chosen to unanimously 

endorse this collaborative and historic undertaking.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to read a letter from Gwen Dueck, 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation: 

“Teachers see the need for strategic and long-term sector 

planning and applaud the ministry for leadership in this 

initiative.” She also said, “It is with great appreciation that we 

write today on behalf of the 13,000 members of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation to acknowledge the 

Ministry of Education’s recent education and sector planning.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll make no apologies for taking some 

additional time to make sure everything is exactly as it should 

be and to make sure that everything is the best it possibly can 

be. This is a plan that was developed by and for the sector. 

Those people that participated in it are excited about it, and it 

will serve the students of our province well because in our 

province it is students first, unlike . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — No answer from the minister on two 

very straightforward questions.  

 

What we do know is that government has spent already 

$250,000 on lean consultants in education and that this 

government has already given $180,000 to school divisions for 

lean work and that the new budget shows that the government 

plans to spend about $370,000 more this year for lean 

consultants in school divisions. So just on consultants alone 

that’s an $800,000 tab, and we have no idea how much in total 

the Ministry of Education is spending on lean, including the 

training and staff time as well as the divisions’ staff and 

administration time. 

 

Meanwhile this government has no new dollars for the basics in 

education or for implementing its strategic plan. To the 

minister: why is this government pouring so much money into 

the Premier’s lean pet project while ignoring the basics that 

matter in classrooms across Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have given more 

funding to education than anyone else in the history of the 

province. Mr. Speaker, the members over there handled 

education by closing 176 schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had an increase each and every year to the 

overall operating grant for school divisions, 26 per cent since 

November 2007. Pre-K [pre-kindergarten] total funding this 

year, $1.8 billion. We built 40 schools. We announced that 

we’ve already built 20. We’ve got 18 that are joint use plus 

another two. Forty schools that we’ve built in this province, as 

opposed to closing 176. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have spent a record amount of money, $700 

million record capital investment, plus we’ve reduced property 

taxes by $165 million. And we’re going to take lessons from 

those people? Not in my lifetime. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, I guess the minister can say 

whatever he wants, all the rhetoric in the world, pretend what he 

likes, but you know, I think the students that are here and the 

teachers of this province know the reality. 

 

That minister has been forcing reviews of lean across education. 

But it’s apparent he didn’t factor in a few important things like 

the cost of demoralizing the teaching professionals of this 

province or the cost of under-resourcing the classrooms, the 

cost of not providing the needed supports for learning — 

essentially, the cost of shortchanging the students of today. You 

know, and that seems like a whole lot of muda to me, Mr. 

Speaker. You know, wasted opportunity. 

 

The apparent lean kaizen model might be a good fit for some 

businesses, but we’re talking about education and that certainly 

brings some different challenges. And this project seems to 

distract from what matters. And unlike cars off a production 

line, we can’t recall students 5 or 10 years down the road. We 

have one chance to get it right. To the minister: when will he 

get it right for the students today and stop ignoring the basics 

that matter in our classrooms? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve engaged with 

teachers. We’ve engaged with students. We’ve engaged with 

parents. And we’re going to continue to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk a lot about standardized 

testing. I’ll tell you what their position was on standardized 

testing. I’m quoting from a note from the transition binder, and 

I’m going to read about it: 



5140 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

Since 2000, the Department has increased its large-scale 

assessment activity in Grades 4 through to 11 in response 

to increased emphases on accountability within public 

administration, and to Saskatchewan’s standing on 

international . . . [tests]. The Assessment For Learning 

Program has grown from . . . 11,000 students’ abilities 

annually to over 70,000 students in multiple grade 

levels . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say to the students and teachers in this 

province: you want to talk about standardized testing, you want 

to talk a bad record, talk about the people over there. 

 

You want to talk about somebody that listens, that cares, that’s 

going to do right for them, talk to the people on this side of the 

House because we’ve built 40 schools. We’ve increased 

funding to record levels. Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of work left 

to do but none that we’re taking lessons from the people over 

there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Provision of Home Care 

 

Ms. Chartier: — We learned three weeks ago that the home 

care program in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is 

stretched so thin it is not able to meet the needs of new clients 

and it’s cutting services for existing clients. At that time, the 

Premier, the Health minister, and the Rural Health minister 

were all caught off guard, and they were unaware of the major 

capacity challenges in the home care program here in our 

capital city. Hopefully that was a wake-up call for them and 

they are now paying more attention to this vital service. 

 

To the minister: what is the current status of the home care 

program here in Regina? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, what the region had identified back several weeks ago 

is that no new people would be turned away from home care, 

that they would have to ensure that all those individuals that 

were in home care still needed the level of care that they did 

need to be provided, and they’d also be prioritizing those that 

would be of an urgent nature. 

 

Within the first week of that issue being raised and that plan 

being put forward by the region, I can say that within the first 

couple of days, 17 new people had been already enrolled into 

home care, 10 within the first three days. Ten of those people 

had already had service accessed to them. 

 

They are still working through whether or not this is just a 

temporary issue or whether or not they are going to have to 

expand some of the services or perhaps bring on some 

additional staff, but they are working through that. They 

currently are working through that process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — We keep hearing from people who require 

home care services but are being negatively affected by the 

capacity challenges. We hear about people having their existing 

services cut back significantly, and we hear about people 

having to wait far too long to access services. 

 

To the minister: how many people have had their vital home 

care services cut back, and how many people are waiting to 

access home care services now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 

will be able to provide that information to the member later this 

afternoon at committee. I think that’s probably a good 

opportunity for us to discuss this issue and provide an 

up-to-date report from the regional health authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are certainly working with the regional health 

authority. The region’s working with their home care staff to 

alleviate the situation, making a determination of whether or not 

this is a new norm that is being set for the region or whether or 

not this is just a temporary situation that they can work though. 

 

As well what we are doing in this budget is providing dollars 

for the Home First/Quick Response program, annualizing it for 

$4.5 million, as the Finance minister has indicated, to annualize 

it in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. We think that that 

will be a benefit in the long term for those individuals that do 

need it. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 129, The Executive Government 

Administration Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee on the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 129, The Executive Government 

Administration Act and that the bill now be read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5141 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government 

Administration Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 129, The Executive 

Government Administration Act be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 130, The Executive Government 

Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013, a 

bilingual bill without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 130, and that 

the bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested to waive leave of 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 130, The 

Executive Government Administration Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013 and that the bill now be read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 130 — The Executive Government Administration 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 

Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 

The Executive Government Administration Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 130, The Executive 

Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 331 to 339. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 331 through 339. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Improving the Lives of People With Disabilities 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud and 

honoured to rise and speak today. And at the end of my 

comments, I will be moving that this Assembly commend the 

government’s initiatives to make Saskatchewan the best place 

in Canada for someone with a disability to live, work, and raise 

a family. I’m honoured for a number of reasons and I’m happy 

to discuss these initiatives because they are a genuine 

commitment of this government to improve the lives of people 

with disabilities. 

 

I would be remiss if I didn’t highlight the excellent work of the 

present Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] in her past role as the minister of Social 

Services. While she was minister of Social Services, she helped 

lay the groundwork for the elimination of the 440-person 

wait-list and the Saskatchewan assured income for disability 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to look back to October 28, 2008, and 

reference or quote the following, this from the past minister of 

Social Services: 



5142 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

This is the largest investment in the history of the province 

to support people with intellectual disabilities. Over four 

years, we will be able to help more than 400 people who 

are currently on a waiting list for new or expanded 

services. Support for people with disabilities is a priority 

for this government, and we are committed to ensuring 

that everyone in Saskatchewan benefits from the 

province’s prosperity. 

 

She went on to announce: 

 

. . . that the government is committed to developing a new 

income assistance plan specifically for people with 

disabilities, separate from the Saskatchewan Assistance 

Plan. The first phase of the new plan will be initiated in 

2009-10 [she said]. 

 

In response to requests from the disability community, we 

will implement a separate assistance plan for people with 

disabilities beginning in the next budget year . . . We will 

be consulting with stakeholders in the design and rollout 

of this program. 

 

That’s a quote, Mr. Speaker, from 2008. We all know how that 

ended up. And especially, as the Premier has said on many 

occasions, the best predictor of future behaviour is past 

behaviour. 

 

[11:00] 

 

I will speak further on engaging the disability community, but 

for now I just wanted to highlight the premise of a promise 

made and a promise kept. 

 

Where else has the government reached a target? So I wondered 

what happened to the 440 wait-list and the SAID 

[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. I hate 

pretending to be prophetic; they should all hang out their 

shingles as fortune tellers. Well how amazing, or maybe this is 

not so amazing. It is simple as keeping a promise. 

 

Let’s talk further about the 440 wait-list. In the NDP’s last 10 

years in government, well that was a dark and cold period, 

almost glacial, but regardless, Mr. Speaker, the NDP in their 

last 10 years served 99 new clients. That’s right, 99 in 10 years. 

As a comparison, our government eliminated the so-called 440 

wait-list and they went further by providing services to another 

300 clients. Now if my math is correct, that’s 740. So that’s 7.4 

times better in three less years. 

 

I don’t want to call this a wait-list now, so what do you call it 

when no one is on it? I guess we could hire more 

paleontologists tasked with a job of digging up more NDP 

programmatic inefficiencies. Oh, the bones of NDP programs 

past. So we bury wait-lists and the members opposite talk about 

the environmental record and the carbon footprints. Sorry, we 

won’t apologize for burying wait-lists. No, when these NDP 

programmatic graveyards turned into oil, now that would at 

least be useful — a big, orange, viscous blob. 

 

We will not create another wait-list like the one we inherited in 

2007. We’ll identify the client’s needs as they come forward 

and plan with the client, family, and community to meet those 

needs. There will always be work to do as we work with 

families and individuals with disabilities to plan their future 

needs. 

 

But here are some highlights, Mr. Speaker. Here are some 

highlights in terms of the 440 wait-list. We have achieved a 

significant milestone in the development of new services for 

Saskatchewan people with intellectual disabilities. We worked 

with families, communities, and agencies to identify funding to 

support 440 people with intellectual disabilities and developed 

specialized residential and day programs. Through collaboration 

with people with disabilities, their families, CBOs 

[community-based organization], and approved homes, services 

are in place or in development for 440 people who are waiting 

for specialized residential and day programs to meet their needs. 

There will always be work to do as we work with families and 

individuals with disabilities to plan for future needs and forecast 

those needs, and to budgeting for future years. Over 300 people 

on top of the 440 already served, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve already 

said that. 

 

Here is some history, Mr. Speaker. From 2007 and 2008 to 

today, funding has increased by over 100 per cent — that’s 105 

per cent — $34.7 million to $71.2 million for group homes for 

people with intellectual disabilities. Total group home spaces 

for people with intellectual disabilities in Saskatchewan has 

increased by 19 per cent. Funding has increased by 78 per cent 

for day programs for people with intellectual disabilities, and 

funding for supported independent living for people with 

intellectual disabilities has increased by 65 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now talk about the torch being passed seamlessly from minister 

to minister of Social Services. The current minister ensured that 

the promise at the end of the 440 wait-list was complete, and 

didn’t stop there. Her ministry went further. As I said earlier, if 

there was a service delivery wait-list, and there isn’t, it would 

have been at least 740. So what is it? 

 

Clients are being served. Their needs are being addressed. The 

services are flexible and timely. That is thanks to the current 

Minister of Social Services and the officials of the ministry. She 

needs to be commended for the commitment and integrity to do 

the right thing for people with disabilities and their families. So 

the needs are being addressed on an ongoing basis. I guess zero 

translates to zero in other languages as well, including Japanese. 

As Brooks would say from The Shawshank Redemption, easy 

peasy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about a couple of other 

things, particularly the issue of paratransit as well as the 

disability strategy. I’d like to begin by providing an overview of 

paratransit services. Our government has maintained that we 

want to be the best place in Canada to live for people with 

disabilities. We’ve increased funding to paratransit services by 

34 per cent since 2008. Paratransit funding for 2014-15 is 

$3.537 million. That’s $2.987 million for operating, $550,000 

for capital. The amount budgeted for capital and operational 

funding will remain the same this year as last year. 

 

In terms of operational funding, participating communities are 

reimbursed for their operations that occur in the year prior, and 

those grants are calculated using a formula that distributes 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5143 

operating funding based on paratransit usage in their 

communities. 

 

In terms of capital funding, 10 $55,000 grants are being 

distributed this year to nine communities across the province. 

These grants have been finalized, and municipalities received 

notification on this April 8, 2014, by both email and hard copy. 

Those municipalities receiving funding this year, Mr. Speaker, 

and I’ll list some of them. Well actually I’ll list them all: 

Estevan, Maple Creek, Moose Jaw, Nipawin, Prince Albert, 

Regina, two to Saskatoon, Shellbrook, and Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca likes to grumble on a 

daily basis about two things, highways and then mocking when 

we say there’s more work to be done. And I thank him for 

giving me something to talk about. Apparently he thinks there is 

such a thing as a permanent solution to things that experience 

wear and tear like highways and infrastructures. 

 

I think we would all be interested in the member providing us 

with answers to the socialist utopia where nothing wears out 

and nothing requires maintenance. Wow, we’re all ears. Please 

let us know where the static state exists. Oh I’m sorry. That’s a 

vacuum. I apologize. Apparently he thinks we live in vacuums, 

and there’s no maintenance required and things don’t age and 

wear out. 

 

How does this tie into the motion? Well because he also 

mumbles and grumbles about programmatic changes. Yes, 

there’s more work to be done because the only constant in this 

world is change. I encourage the member to understand the 

world is not static; it is constantly changing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about the initiative I’ve been 

involved with as Legislative Secretary for disability issues. It is 

to assist the development of a comprehensive disability 

strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the disability strategy was put forward in order to 

help make Saskatchewan the best province for people with 

disabilities to live. It was to provide support for children and 

adults with physical, sensory, psychiatric, cognitive, and 

intellectual disabilities. We will also recognize the role of 

family and caregivers when identifying needed changes in 

support and priority areas as identified in the Saskatchewan 

plan for growth. Those areas are housing, transportation, 

employment, education, support for caregivers, and a 

community inclusion. 

 

The citizen consultation team, consisting of members of the 

disability community, has been appointed to consult with 

Saskatchewan people about disability issues. Our government is 

committed to making Saskatchewan the best place in Canada 

for persons with disabilities to live. Together with the disability 

community and all Saskatchewan citizens, the province is 

developing a comprehensive disability strategy to make that a 

reality. 

 

Led by the Ministry of Social Services, the development of the 

strategy will be broad-based and will seek input from: the 

public, members of the disability community, government 

ministries, as well as community-based organizations, 

employers, municipalities, school divisions, post-secondary 

institutions, and health authorities. 

 

A citizen consultation team consisting of members of the 

disability community has been appointed to consult with 

Saskatchewan people about disability issues. The team will 

begin engagement consultations in the spring of 2014. So 

they’re actually beginning April 28th in Swift Current, and 

they’re going for the whole month of May. And that can be 

found, those disability strategy consultations can be found on 

the Facebook page right now, Sask Disability. 

 

The citizen consultation team is a 15-member team. It was 

announced in October of 2013, and it’s meeting monthly to 

develop a plan for public consultation taking place, as I said, 

this spring. Information collected through this process will be 

used to inform the development of the disabilities strategy . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, we did just meet yesterday. 

 

To date the group has focused on the framework for the 

engagement consultation, which includes the definition of 

disability as well as the draft vision, principles, and values to be 

considered by the public during the public engagement 

consultations. Following the public consultations, the citizen 

consultation team will work with government to develop 

recommendations that will form the basis for the provincial 

disability strategy. In terms of engagement and consultation, the 

citizen consultation team is actively working on the public 

consultation plan which will include 15 public forums across 

the province. It has been determined that the forums will take 

place, as I said, in late April and early May 2014, with the first 

forum to be held April 28th, 2014, in Swift Current. 

 

I’d like to take an opportunity to highlight some of the members 

of the citizen consultation team because they are an absolutely 

amazing group. Amy Alsop is the citizen consultation 

Co-Chair. Amy is a Regina woman with a vision disability, and 

she’s got experience advocating to persons with disabilities in 

the workplace and very involved in SaskTel’s internal advocacy 

group, SaskTel Employee Network on Disability. She’s also a 

Paralympian, two-time Paralympian in Sydney and in Athens. 

 

Merv Bender, executive director of Prince Albert and District 

Community Service Centre. He’s also instrumental in the 

development of SAID. 

 

Larry Carlson is a Regina man with an acquired brain injury, a 

retired provincial civil servant working in the field of 

disabilities his entire life in terms of special education. Roger 

Carver, a Saskatoon man who is deaf, provided leadership and 

advocacy training to deaf communities across Canada. Dawn 

Desautels, Dawn is a mother of an adult son with a 

developmental disability, lives in Shaunavon where she is a 

board member of the Cypress Hills Ability Centres. 

 

Carole Eaton, retired psychologist living in Regina, spent her 

entire life working with psychiatric disabilities. Lynette Griffin, 

working on the paratransit for the city of Regina. Charmaine 

Landrie, a Lloydminster woman employed as a consultant of 

the cognitive disability strategy. Andrea Lavallee, whose son 

Max has spinal muscular atrophy type II, lives in Meadow 

Lake. Michael Lavis, Regina man, founding member and the 

executive director of Creative Options Regina. 

 



5144 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

Marie Lindenschmidt, a mother of a child with autism. Laurie 

McSymytz, resident worker in Wynyard working with the 

paraplegic association. Eugene Paquin, who has also worked 

with the United Way and disability community. Shaun Soonias, 

who works with FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] on the disability file. And Ian Wilkinson, a Saskatoon 

resident, father of a child with autism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s outstanding examples of the best in the 

province that are deserving of our recognition and support. We 

look forward to the work on the public consultations. I’d like 

acknowledge and thank the Minister of Social Services for her 

help. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government’s initiatives 

to make Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for 

someone with a disability to live, work, and raise a family. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Coronation has 

moved: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government’s initiatives 

to make Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for 

someone with a disability to live, work, and raise a family. 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to enter into this debate on this motion. And of course this 

is like a rerun from a year ago when we had almost exactly the 

same motion with the government congratulating itself yet 

again. It seems to be a habit of this government to want to 

congratulate itself before the work is done. 

 

And we see areas of concern, and we know there are areas of 

concern. In fact the member actually alluded to some of those 

that we’ll talk more about. But just the arrogance and the 

out-of-touch way this government is . . . of what’s really 

happening in this province. And I lost count. I know at least 

four times the member over there has said, there’s more work to 

do. There’s more work to do. You know, it reminds me when I 

used to say that, and my mom gave me this little round thing. 

And I said, so what is it? A round TUIT. When will they get 

around to it? 

 

[11:15] 

 

You know, here you are . . . Here they keep saying, more work 

to do. Whenever something comes up, oh yes, we’ll get to it. 

There’s more work to do. There’s more work to do. And they 

come up with excuses. But at the same time, the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, they want to congratulate themselves and take this 

75-minute debate to congratulate themselves on a job well 

done. 

 

And of course last year when they announced the complete 

elimination of the 440 list, people were amazed. People were 

amazed and actually came to this House and said, hey, what 

about me? And then, you know, then they brought it out they 

had more work to do, more work to do. We’ll touch base with 

you. 

But that’s not good enough. That’s simply not good enough, is 

it? You know, the slick promotion, this catchy phrase of 440, 

we know that’s simply not true. There are people out there who 

need support. And while this government is busy congratulating 

itself, there is absolutely more work to do, more work to do. 

And whether it’s Craig Bayliss and others who’ve come 

forward to this House, concerned that they’re being shoved 

aside, shoved aside, there is work to do. 

 

And so while we look forward to that, and we look forward to 

the disability strategy . . . It was announced a year ago. That 

was part of the discussion. Here we are a year later. They’re 

going to get into the consultations. That will take another year. 

And this will take time that go into the election campaign. 

 

And we know for many of the folks over there, the campaign 

has already started. It’s two years into it. We know that the 

Premier has been nominated. And I understand two or three 

have been nominated, and a couple now are suggesting they’re 

not going to run. So this is part of the campaign that we’re into 

right now. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk about some of the issues that 

are facing people in Saskatchewan. And we know paratransit, 

and the member alluded to the good work that they’ve done. I 

hope he’s not saying that that’s the end of the line, that there’s 

nothing more to be done. We know for example that there is. 

This is an issue that needs attention. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a story from metro 

Saskatoon, “The realities of life if you’re disabled in 

Saskatchewan and depend on Paratransit.” And I quote: 

 

You have to wait hours for a ride to the grocery store and 

you’ve missed several appointments this year. You have 

trouble finding a job because you don’t have regular 

transportation. For the events that you are able to go to, 

you have to leave early and sometimes you are denied a 

ride outright. There’s a reservation option, but that can 

only be booked a week in advance. 

 

So this is a problem. This is a problem. 

 

And he talks about the report that they’ve done about 

paratransit here in Saskatchewan and how it’s really difficult to 

use this. And I quote, and the writer is Hilary Nelson, and she 

writes and I quote: 

 

The system is under stress, and the denial rate is rising. An 

acceptable denial rate is one to two per cent in Canada; 

Regina’s current denial rate is 9.2 per cent. Seeking to 

lower the denial rate by questioning eligibility before one 

is able to request a ride is not fair play. 

 

What this is causing is hundreds if not thousands of people 

being denied the ability to get on paratransit. This is a crisis. 

This is a crisis. So they should be dealing with it right away. 

Right away this needs to be dealt with. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as the Social Services critic, we have raised 

issues and we will continue to raise issues around the concern 

of children in care. And we’ve seen the cut in salaries that we 

see in this budget and we wonder what does that mean. We’ve 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5145 

not seen a plan. There’s been no plan by this government to put 

forward, what do they really mean to help children in care? 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, and this is not a record to be proud 

of, of that side over there, that in just the last four years, 81 

vulnerable children have died, have died — 81 deaths since just 

2010. So while they’re putting this forward, this resolution 

forward, there are issues. There are issues that we need to attend 

to as a legislature, Mr. Speaker, and that’s really something that 

we should be debating. That’s what we should be debating here, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we can go on and on. And you know, I raised this in the 

House last night. And time goes by so quickly in this debate, 

but you know while we’ve been attending to . . . And I want to 

say congratulations to DISC [Disability Income Support 

Coalition] and the advocates who have been working so hard on 

behalf of folks who are living with disabilities, and I think 

that’s important. But we had questions last night about families 

and children who are on social assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you know, but today there are over 

12,000 kids going to school — I hope they’re in school — 

going to school in Saskatchewan whose family are on social 

assistance. And that has been the average, floating around 

12,000 or 12,000-plus for the last five years. Children going to 

school because . . . and they’re living in families with social 

assistance. That is something that we need to focus on. We need 

to focus on, other than congratulating ourselves, on what the 

government really should be doing, really should be doing. It’s 

part of their work. It’s what they should do, and they should just 

step up and do the right thing. 

 

So here we have over 12,000 kids who are in families who are 

being supported by social assistance. That is a travesty. And 

that is something that should be done, and I don’t see any effort. 

I don’t see a plan by this government to really tackle, to tackle 

those issues, to really tackle those issues. And here we have, 

continuing with the families, how many families? Well we 

know it’s been well over 5,000 families for the last five years, 

for the last five years. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that needs to be 

addressed. 

 

And I want to, and I know the other side likes to bring forward 

letters and quotes in support of the good work that they’ve 

done. And fair enough. But you know, really I think at some 

point we really need to talk about what’s really important to 

people in Saskatchewan who are in vulnerable situations. And 

the big picture really would be a poverty elimination or a 

poverty reduction strategy. And I think this government really 

should be taking a look at this. And this is what we really 

should be focusing on. And part of that would be the disability 

strategy, but you’ve got to have the big picture first. 

 

And I want to quote from the editorial from The StarPhoenix, 

March 15th, 2014. And I hope the government’s been paying 

attention to this, but what is said here is: 

 

What at first glance may seem to be a couple of disparate 

news items identify a larger issue of the provincial 

government allowing ideology to impede sound public 

policy that would save taxpayers money over the long 

term. 

The first involves the government’s reaction to the Cost of 

Poverty campaign launched by a coalition of 

Saskatchewan community groups, which notes that 

poverty ends up costing Saskatchewan’s economy $3.8 

billion a year, including $420 million in health care alone. 

 

And then it goes on and talks about how: 

 

Saskatchewan and British Columbia are now the only 

provinces without a poverty reduction strategy after 

Alberta, long the standard bearer for personal 

responsibility, recently adopting a comprehensive policy. 

Yet Social Services Minister June Draude insists that 

Saskatchewan’s growth in average weekly earnings and its 

low unemployment rate somehow point to a superior 

anti-poverty strategy in this province where a tenth of the 

population is impoverished. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is so many issues that need addressing, 

but we need to have a bigger picture. And while DISC and 

many have worked so hard on the SAID program, and that 

deserves a lot of merit, we need a bigger picture answer from 

this government. So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be voting in favour 

of this motion. In fact I will have a lot of questions about it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — I’m very happy to have the opportunity to 

enter into this debate. And it’s really important that we talk 

about the attitude that prevails in this House. We talk a lot and 

we say a lot, there’s more work to be done. And we do that 

because the work is ongoing. There’s a reason that there’s, you 

know, 48 over here and not so much over there, is because we 

know there’s work to be done, and we’re willing to start getting 

that work done and moving forward. 

 

We talk about attitude. So our government says that it is our 

goal to make Saskatchewan the best place to live in Canada for 

people with disabilities, and this is just another step towards 

that goal. We’ll talk about their attitude. So their last minister of 

Social Services, when asked about intellectually disabled 

people being put in jails, he simply noted, he simply noted that 

it doesn’t fall under his portfolio. Attitude. Attitude. 

 

We have a disability strategy. We talk about more work to be 

done. They sit there, they roll their eyes, wave their arms when 

we say there’s more work to be done. Do they really think that 

the work is done or will be done? It is ongoing. There are 

people born that need our help every day. So instead of putting 

them on a list and letting them languish on that list, we put 

forward strategies to get rid of that list. 

 

Now instead of making a list of people we have to help, we go 

ongoing. So let’s go back to ’08: 

 

In response to requests from the disability community, [so 

we consult] we will implement a separate assistance plan 

for people with disabilities beginning in the next budget 

year. 

 

And that was from our former minister of Social Services. “We 

will be consulting with stakeholders in the design and rollout of 



5146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

this program.” So that’s our previous Social Services minister. 

So that’s August ’08. 

 

November ’09, this is part of the strategy. We’re moving 

forward. We talked about the SAID program: 

 

More than 3,000 people who were eligible for the new 

program have been invited to enrol by the Ministry of 

Social Services, as part of the program’s implementation, 

with the first benefits paid for in the month of December. 

So far, more than 2,000 people have already enrolled in 

that new program. 

 

So that’s 2009. So that’s about a year later, a little over a year 

later. So that’s part of the strategy. That’s moving forward. 

 

Are we done? No, we’re not done. There’s more work to be 

done. So by 2012, because there’s more work to be done: 

 

As of June 1st, 2012 the eligibility criteria for the SAID 

program is based on a new disability impact assessment 

administered by the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. This 

assessment process is used to determine if applicants who 

are living independently meet the criteria of having a 

significant and enduring disability. 

 

So does that mean the work is done? No, we’re looking into it 

because we know the work isn’t done. There’s more work to do. 

“On June 1st, 2012 SAID program rules were expanded to 

allow individuals with disabilities who live independently to 

apply for this program.” Why? Because the work wasn’t done. 

As we consult with the stakeholders we have to actually expand 

what the program does. 

 

Now the member, when he stood up before, says we like to 

stand up and congratulate ourselves before the work is done. 

It’s not congratulating ourselves. It’s just pointing out that 

we’re making progress. The work isn’t done; that’s why there’s 

more work to do. It will be a sad day when those guys decide, 

on the other side, that the work is done. It’s not going to be 

done. Why? Because the province is growing. Because every 

day people who need help. There’s more work to do. 

 

So we like to quote other people because it’s not about us. It’s 

about what the people say about us. It’s the people of 

Saskatchewan that we need to listen to. So I’m going to talk 

about some folks from my old hometown down in Estevan. And 

this is when we announced the elimination of the 440-person 

wait-list. That was allowed to grow over 10 years. I just shake 

my head at that, that their attitude goes back to, it doesn’t fall 

under his portfolio. Like that’s just, I can’t believe that 

somebody actually said that. 

 

[11:30] 

 

So in Estevan, Carol Cundall said when we announced the 

elimination: 

 

We were honoured to have . . . a role in this partnership to 

benefit people with intellectual disabilities in our 

community and our province. I’m proud to say we were 

part of a team that helped develop solutions that enabled 

everyone on the waitlist to be supported in their own 

communities. 

 

“When the government announced the 440 wait-list initiative, I 

was given . . .” And this is a new quote. I apologize for those in 

Hansard. So the new quote from Rosemary Fenrich is: 

 

“When the government announced the 440 waitlist 

initiative, I was given hope for my son’s future,” a parent 

of an individual served by the initiative, and a board 

member of Prairie Branches Enterprise Inc. of northwest 

Saskatchewan. “. . . the government built group homes for 

rural CBOs like Prairie Branches, has allowed my son to 

move out into his own home within a short distance from 

our town. This alleviates stress and anxiety not only for 

my son, but for our family as it enables us to visit him and 

be there for him as needed.” 

 

So as opposed to, that it doesn’t fall under his portfolio. And 

when actually confronted, and I want to read the actual, the 

quote here, when confronted about people with intellectual 

disabilities being placed in psychiatric wards or jail, 

then-minister Yates said, and I quote, “There is no mandate 

under the law to provide services for intellectually disabled 

people.” 

 

So there’s no mandate under the law. So there has to be a law to 

do the right thing? It’s the right thing to do to take care of these 

people. You don’t allow a list to grow from zero to 440. And 

you know, it comes up over 300 people more than that 440 were 

served. And since that time — I don’t have the numbers — 

there are more people being served. Why? Because there’s more 

work to be done. 

 

You know, it’s sad. And it’s really sad that they really feel that 

someday the work’s going to be done. It will be . . . I can’t even 

think of that, that they actually think that the work’ll be done. If 

you don’t do the work, I guess it’s done. 

 

So this is not an easy process. Takes a while. Funding has 

increased by over 100 per cent — 105 per cent — 34.7 million 

to 71.2 million for group homes for people with intellectual 

disabilities. Total group homes for people with intellectual 

disabilities in Saskatchewan has increased by 19 per cent, from 

less than 900 to well over 1,000. Funding has increased by 98 

per cent, 14.5 million to 28.7 million. Funding for supported 

independent living people with intellectual disabilities has 

increased by 65 per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always, it’s my 

pleasure to wade into this debate today. It’s interesting, the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow just made the comment 

that this motion isn’t about them, Mr. Speaker. But it very 

clearly is: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government’s initiatives 

to make Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for 

someone with a disability to live, work, and raise a family. 

 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5147 

This is totally about them, Mr. Speaker. This is about some 

serious back-patting going on. I think the members opposite are 

going to be needing to see a physical therapist, a chiropractor, 

acupuncture, something like that, Mr. Speaker, because they are 

spending an inordinate amount of time doing some serious 

self-congratulations and back-patting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it is not the role of government to pat themselves on the 

back. Admittedly, they say there is more work to be done and 

that work will always continue. But it is not the job of 

government to say, aren’t we the best, Mr. Speaker. If you’re 

doing such a bang-up job, let people who are being served sing 

your praise, Mr. Speaker. It is not the job of government to sing 

your own praises, Mr. Speaker, especially when there are so 

many vulnerable people who are still underserved in this 

province. I’ve got a list of many people who would say 

Saskatchewan isn’t the best place in Canada for someone with a 

disability to live, work, and raise a family. 

 

I’d like to draw your attention to some written questions I asked 

this fall, Mr. Speaker, around community living service division 

clients. Mr. Speaker, I asked the Minister of Health how many 

clients of the CLSD or community living service division are 

waiting for a group home placement, are residing in mental 

health in-patient facilities in Saskatoon as of October 1st, 2013. 

Mr. Speaker, five individuals as of October 1st, 2013 had been 

staying in the Dubé Centre in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Dubé Centre is an acute psychiatric hospital. It is a place 

where people go when they are in crisis, Mr. Speaker. It is not a 

home. The reality is the people who visit Dubé, there’s many, 

many different reasons why people are there. But there are 

people who are in psychosis, Mr. Speaker, who are 

experiencing suicidal ideation. It is not a home. A home isn’t a 

place where you get exactly the same meal every Monday, 

every Tuesday, where you don’t get any residential supports, 

Mr. Speaker. The Dubé Centre is an acute psychiatric hospital. 

 

The fact that there were community living service division 

clients staying, long stays, Mr. Speaker. One of the longest 

clients as of October 1st of last year was since March 6th, 2012. 

And from my understanding, he is still there. So he’s just spent 

his second year . . . Anniversary is not the word; it’s nothing to 

celebrate, Mr. Speaker. But this individual has been in the Dubé 

Centre for two years in an acute psychiatric facility, Mr. 

Speaker, not a residential facility. And that gives me some 

concern, Mr. Speaker. These are community living service 

division clients. 

 

The reality is Valley View is closing, and we need to build or 

this government needs to build some really great community 

supports for people who will be moving into the community, 

which is absolutely imperative. And I know there’s been some 

great work done with a committee last year. I haven’t been the 

Social Services critic for some time now, so I haven’t been 

following quite as closely. 

 

But I do have some concerns when we have some individuals 

who have some of those complex needs who are not being 

served right now. So I worry about, I have some very serious 

concerns about people who will be moving from Valley View 

into the community, that they will not get the services that they 

need. We have people who today, right now on this point in 

time, Mr. Speaker, who are not getting the services they need. 

These are people with complex issues who have some kind of 

cognitive impairment but also face some possible, some mental 

health challenges. 

 

But the Dubé Centre is not the place, if you’re living with a 

disability, to call home, Mr. Speaker, and that is the cold, hard 

reality that we have. The latest numbers I have are five 

individuals, but one person has been there for more than two 

years, Mr. Speaker, in a hospital. That is not the place for 

people to call home, Mr. Speaker. So that is one group of 

people who would not be saying Saskatchewan is the best place 

to live and work with a disability. 

 

I think it’s important to talk about FASD, fetal alcohol spectrum 

disorder, here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The reality is the 

numbers, from my understanding in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada, we don’t keep precise numbers particularly because 

there are some stigma around alcohol consumption and 

pregnancy, and those are hard numbers to track. But the number 

that is suggested by experts is that there’s 10 in every 1,000 

people who are living with FASD, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So some of the . . . Last year, actually it was almost two years 

ago I had the opportunity to attend the conference that the 

Ministry of Social Services was a sponsor or supporter of as 

well as community organizations, had the opportunity to listen 

to Myles Himmelreich — my apologies if I’m not pronouncing 

his name correctly. And he was quite an amazing individual, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

He is an adult living with FASD, an incredibly articulate man. 

But the one thing that he really emphasized is that when you’re 

living with FASD as an adult, you really need the supports. You 

can live and you can work and you can lead a full and 

productive life, but you need the supports to ensure that you can 

do that. You need the reminder to pay your rent. You need the 

reminder sometimes to do all those things that we take for 

granted, Mr. Speaker, because of the damage that has happened 

to your brain because of alcohol consumption during 

pregnancy. You need some additional supports, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the reality is here in Saskatchewan there’s been a huge 

focus on prevention which . . . I would not take anything away 

from prevention. Prevention is absolutely critical. But we have 

a whole host of people who are living with FASD, Mr. Speaker. 

We have the cognitive disability strategy here in Saskatchewan 

which does in fact provide support to people with FASD, but 

it’s not without some huge challenges. The cognitive disability 

strategy requires that you have someone manage the resources 

that it provides, and often adults with FASD are left to manage 

these resources on their own. They don’t have other individuals 

to support them or help them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the reality is, the reality is people living with FASD — 

adults, young adults, adults — do not have the supports that 

they need. There is a program at CUMFI [Central Urban Métis 

Federation Inc.] in Saskatoon, which is in my constituency 

coincidentally, but it often has a wait-list. There was funding 

that was targeted to health regions but it’s for women at risk of 

having children with FASD, although many of them have 

FASD themselves. And that was targeted to prevention. So 

again I wouldn’t take anything away from prevention but we 



5148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

have a whole host of people who could be living a much fuller, 

more productive life if they were given the proper supports. 

And so I know that there are many families and many 

individuals who are impacted by FASD and are not getting the 

services that they need, Mr. Speaker, to lead that full and 

productive life. So they wouldn’t think that the back-patting is 

something that would be appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think I would be remiss if I didn’t touch on paratransit. I had 

the opportunity last summer to meet with three individuals in 

particular who really expressed some concerns about 

paratransit. Well they talked about the importance of 

paratransit, how people living with a disability really rely on it, 

that you rely on it to get to work, to get to job interviews, to get 

to doctor appointments. But you have to . . . It’s like planning a 

vacation, booking your trip to your doctor, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

You have to plan very far in advance because there are such 

limited services. That is not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You want people . . . We want to support community inclusion 

and the opportunity for people to live the lives that we all 

deserve to live, Mr. Speaker. And for community inclusion to 

work, you need to have the supports in place. 

 

Paratransit, as I said, is so vital to so many people living with 

disabilities. It provides independence and it is the . . . 

Independence, Mr. Speaker, is the basis for dignity. And I think 

this government . . . I have to point out that here in Regina that 

there are literally more than 1,000 people being turned away, as 

many as . . . pardon me, as many as 1,000 being turned away in 

a month, in a city like Regina. People are not getting the 

services that they need to live the full lives that they need to. 

Inclusion requires support, whether it’s an adult living with 

FASD who needs some daily or weekly support, some 

reminders in life, or it’s the person with a disability who needs 

to get to work and has to book paratransit. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. In the 10 minutes the member from Riversdale . . . I 

didn’t quite catch if she actually supported or didn’t support the 

motion. I wasn’t . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you very 

much. I’m glad to hear that she supports that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I’ve heard from the two members 

over there is, consistently they say, oh you’re patting yourselves 

on the back. Look how good you think you are. Mr. Speaker, I 

stand here as a parent, as an MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], as a father, to say I am extremely proud of our 

record that we have done on the SAID program and working 

with people with disabilities across our province. 

 

They are arrogantly, stubbornly, and dismissively not looking 

back at their record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because their record 

was absolutely pitiful in this area. From 1992 on until 2007, 

they let the so-called 440 list go from zero to 440. I’d like them 

to be able to stand up and answer the questions on how that 

happened. 

 

The member from Lakeview I believe was the minister of 

Health during that time. How did that happen under his record? 

You know why it happened, Mr. Speaker? Again my colleague 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow said this. This is their attitude, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Kevin Yates: “There is no mandate under law 

to provide services for intellectually disabled people.” That is 

absolutely disgusting. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I haven’t seen their 

attitude change at all. They think we’ve done absolutely 

nothing. We’ve put over 11,000 people . . . taken them out of 

the direct Social Services program and put them into the SAID 

program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What is coming out of that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, are different words — dignity, respect, 

equality. That’s what we’re hearing. And this isn’t us saying it, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is the community saying it. I’ll get 

into some quotes from people around the province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but it’s absolutely shameful. 

 

What I want to talk about obviously is very important to me, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is when my daughter was born there were 

some issues. In 1999 when my daughter was born there was 

some problems with her. We had such a difficult process with 

dealing with the government, dealing with the region, the health 

region in Saskatoon. We had so many problems, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, under their watch. 

 

My daughter does have an intellectual disability. And the only 

reason and the only time we found services was talking to other 

parents. I couldn’t get a straight answer from anybody within 

the health region. I couldn’t get a straight answer from the 

minister of Health. Even though I wrote him a letter at that 

time, I got nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it was absolutely 

shameful. I had to take my daughter out of province because 

they wouldn’t even answer my letters on how I could get the 

services provided for my daughter at the time, my two-year-old 

daughter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

They have nothing to say about what we’ve done with people 

with intellectual and physical disabilities. We sit down with the 

stakeholders. We’ve talked to the former minister of Social 

Services, and now the Minister of Social Services sits down and 

talks to people. 

 

I’ve called the Minister of Social Services on a Wednesday and 

said, I have somebody with an intellectual disability who’s 

having some difficulty finding a location. She personally came 

up to Saskatoon with her chief of staff, met the person 48 hours 

later. That’s the kind of service that we’re getting from our 

Minister of Social Services. 

 

I was absolutely proud. The father of this individual was in 

tears because he couldn’t believe, first of all, that he got to me. 

He called me Wednesday morning. I got back to him 

Wednesday afternoon. Friday morning at 10 o’clock, we sat 

down in the Park Town Hotel in Saskatoon, and the Minister of 

Social Services was on top of it. As soon as the gentleman left, 

was on the phone dealing with the case. That is how this 

government reacts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is very quickly. 

 

Over there, they talk about it. They’ve talked about 100 things 

over there in the dark 16 years that they were running this 

province, but they never actually did anything, Mr. Deputy 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5149 

Speaker. They did absolutely nothing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to touch on a couple of quotes and 

these again from the member from Riversdale. These aren’t our 

quotes. We’re not patting ourselves on the back. The difference 

with this government is we’re talking to stakeholders. Then we 

actually do it. We actually listen to them. And then we take 

what our policy is and what their vision of what needs to 

happen. We put it together, and we make it happen. 

 

The difference over there is all they did was listen. They did not 

do anything, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

An. Hon. Member: — Didn’t even listen. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Absolutely. The rare time that they actually 

did listen, it went in one ear and out the other like probably 

talking to a small child, just right through their ears, right over 

their head. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, here’s a quote from Amy McNeil, the 

executive director of SARC [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rehabilitation Centres], in the Leader-Post of March 2014: 

“We are leading the country, if not North America and the 

world, in supports for people with disabilities, and it is 

something that the Saskatchewan Party should be very proud 

of.” 

 

Now these are the people that were working with people with 

disabilities back in the dark days. They saw no support, no 

funding, and couldn’t get in to see the minister. They got run 

around from department to department, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and they would never actually get any action. 

 

The member from Saskatoon city centre, he asked us, what’s 

your plan? Mr. Deputy Speaker, our plan’s right here. I’d like to 

see where their plan is because they have nothing over there. 

They have no plan. I’ve seen no vision on a strategy for people 

with disabilities. I’ve seen no strategy for health care. I’ve seen 

nothing from them. All they’re doing over there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is slinging mud at us. They have nothing. It is very 

depressing.  

 

You know what? Coming into politics I thought, you know 

what? The opposition would actually be challenging the 

government and coming up with some new ideas saying, maybe 

you should try this. Maybe you should look at that. I haven’t 

heard anything from them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, absolutely 

nothing. It’s very, very disconcerting when the opposition 

doesn’t even have something to oppose what the government’s 

ideals are. Here’s our plan. Here’s what we’re doing. What are 

they doing over there? Nothing. That leader’s been over there 

for over a year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, hasn’t done a thing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. All they do is continually cast stones at us. It 

is absolutely depressing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the stats. I 

only have a few minutes. We started out with a goal on the 

SAID program to put 8,000 people on. That quickly went to 

10,000. Now we’re over at 11,000 people that are on the SAID 

program. Why is this happening, is because we keep expanding 

the scope of the SAID program because that’s what the 

stakeholders tell us, is we started off with a great idea. We have 

something that . . . And you know what? There’s this other 

group over here that we need to look at, so we include them in 

there. So our numbers are going up. 

 

And it’s absolutely encouraging to me again as a father that we 

are listening to the stakeholders. We’re not dictating this top 

down, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is what the stakeholders and 

the people in the community are talking to us about, and we are 

reacting. We’re reacting very quickly. We react on our vision 

2020. We also react within our budget every year. We make 

sure that we’re looking at everything, working with people in 

the autistic community to be able to help them to be productive, 

work within the environment that they want to work, and 

become part of the economic engine within Saskatchewan. 

 

We’re tapping into this potential of people with disabilities, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And you know what? I commend the Minister 

of Social Services for absolutely having that come through and 

make sure that we are tapping in, not just the people abroad, but 

we’re tapping into our Aboriginal community. We’re tapping 

into the people with disabilities because we need the labour 

force here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to touch on quickly why we need this, why we are 

able to do these programs. And as the members have said, and 

we will continue to say again, the job never is done. There is 

more work to do. The reason we have the ability to do the SAID 

program and other programs similar to it is because of growth, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. The growth within this province allows us 

the ability to invest in people that are more vulnerable, and that 

includes people within our health care system, people with 

disabilities, certainly foremost our students, our youngest 

Saskatchewan people. This gives us the ability to do that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I am absolutely excited that we, as a government, are 

listening. Because if the point of the government . . . and they 

should know that better than anybody else. They stopped 

listening to the people of Saskatchewan. That’s why they’ve got 

nine members over there and we’ve got 49 over here. Because 

the people of Saskatchewan know that we are listening to them. 

And we will continue to listen to them until our work is getting 

closer to completion. But it’s going to continually evolve, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s going to keep going on and on because we 

don’t stop listening. They stopped listening. That’s why they 

think the work should be done. Oh well, we finished this one 

project and we’ll move on. No. Absolutely not. The next project 

is coming, and the next project. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that I will conclude my remarks. 

But I want to say that absolutely I will be supporting the 

member from Coronation Park’s motion and I’m very, very 

disappointed in the NDP that they’re not supporting this 

motion. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased to enter into the debate today. And I’m always 

amazed, Mr. Speaker, of how some of these first-term MLAs 

give us a history lesson on what happened in the NDP years, 

Mr. Speaker, which proves to me that they’re simply reading 



5150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

from notes that were handed to them. And some of their feigned 

compassion for the disabled people, Mr. Speaker, really goes to 

show the shallowness of the Saskatchewan Party government 

when it comes to dealing with the disability community, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It is obvious that they don’t know the history, Mr. Speaker, of 

what the governments in the past have done and compared to 

what this government’s done. They simply have to simply read 

from their notes, Mr. Speaker, and that’s really a crying shame. 

 

So I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, a couple of things that I 

want to talk about. And first of all, we mentioned briefly about 

the paratransit challenges that the province currently, or the 

people within the disability community have. 

 

At one time the city and the province shared the costs 50/50. It 

now appears that the province is reducing its share to 30 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. And despite the demand for the paratransit 

services, Mr. Speaker, this government has not increased 

funding despite record revenues. We’ve seen that evidenced 

time and time again. We talk about record revenues, Mr. 

Speaker. Not record debt that the former NDP government 

struggled under, but record revenues. And yet you see the 

paratransit system being denied an increase in funding support, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these are the people with disabilities that need the 

paratransit support, Mr. Speaker, because these are people that 

have cognitive challenges; they have diabetes; they have 

physical challenges as well. And they use the paratransit system 

to access health services. They use the paratransit system to 

getting to work, to getting groceries, to paying bills. It really 

provides them with a valuable service for independence, Mr. 

Speaker. And yet we see this government callously cutting 

back. And it appears once again they’re going back to 30 per 

cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk briefly about Valley 

View, Mr. Speaker. We’re obviously hearing that the 

government now has a plan to shut down Valley View. Now 

we’re watching very closely, Mr. Speaker, the transition from 

Valley View to community care for many of these people that 

have some severe challenges, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw was speaking about how, well 

actually glowingly praising his government about the services 

that they’re providing the disability community. Now we’re 

watching very closely what happens in Moose Jaw, the 

transition of those people that were in Valley View for years, 

how the community’s going to adapt, and more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, what services and what support that member’s 

going to ensure on behalf of the Sask Party government — that 

the transition is done with compassion, with care, and the 

proper support, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to watch that very 

carefully, Mr. Speaker, because it’s really important to see what 

kind of influence that they have on their government besides 

reading prepared notes for them and presented to them to read 

in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to watch that very 

carefully. 

 

We’re going to watch, see what they do and the members, both 

members from Moose Jaw, you be very, very aware that we’re 

going to be watching how the transition works. And if there’s 

problems, we’re going to bring forward the issues that the 

people of Moose Jaw and the families affected by their decision 

to close Valley View and the transition process . . . We’re going 

to be keeping a very, very close watch on what happens through 

the entire transition as Valley View starts to close, Mr. Speaker. 

And the member from Moose Jaw is going to be certainly put 

on notice today that we’re going to be seeing whether he puts 

his money where his mouth is when it comes to supports for the 

community transition from Valley View, for the people 

impacted by the Valley View choice that the government has 

made. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to briefly turn my attention to 

northern Saskatchewan. And I want to pay attention to a good 

friend of mine who has many years of advocating for the 

disability community, Mr. Speaker. The gentleman’s name of 

course is Gary Tinker. 

 

Gary Tinker was born and raised in northern Saskatchewan, 

spent a few years out of the North, but Gary is originally from 

Pinehouse. And, Mr. Speaker, Gary has been a champion for 

the disability community in northern Saskatchewan for years. 

And one of the things that’s really important is I want to pay 

tribute to Gary during this disability debate because Gary has 

not allowed his challenges to stop him from providing supports 

and raising awareness for many people in northern 

Saskatchewan that have disabilities. 

 

Now Gary tells me that he wants to share, he wants to share the 

recognition with all the people that helped him. And for your 

information, Mr. Speaker, you look at some of the staff over the 

years, the staff that have assisted Gary in getting the awareness 

campaign going and of course establishing the Gary Tinker 

Federation. 

 

Now there’s well over 600 people in northern Saskatchewan 

that have disabilities, and they have a small but dedicated staff 

that work very hard, people like Randy Stomp, Mr. Speaker, 

that has worked with the Gary Tinker Federation for years. 

Randy has been very vigilant and professional and dedicated to 

providing that kind of support, and I want to recognize Randy 

Stomp for that. They also have a new gentleman that joined 

their team by the name of Mike Taylor. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to also welcome Mike to the fold and to tell him that his 

work has not gone unnoticed. 

 

[12:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at people like Randy Stomp 

who has worked many, many years, Mike Taylor who’s brought 

his skills and his expertise to the federation, and you look at 

Gary Tinker himself, these are some of the individuals that 

work within the disability community in northern 

Saskatchewan. And I want to take the opportunity to recognize 

some of the work that he’s done and his team has done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Gary Tinker started a walk in the northern part of 

Saskatchewan because he wanted to raise the awareness of 

some of the challenges I mentioned, of the disability 

community that really needed the support and really to be 

recognized for their extra challenges of having a disability in 

northern Saskatchewan. Because one of the most startling 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5151 

comments that I ever heard him make is that it’s difficult for 

many people to push a wheelchair down a gravel highway. And 

that’s kind of the contrast that I would use. 

 

We know that the disability community has challenges all day 

long. In northern Saskatchewan there are unique challenges, as I 

mentioned earlier, trying to push a wheelchair down a gravel 

road. So these are some of the things I think in northern 

Saskatchewan that we wanted to recognize, but we don’t want 

to dismiss any of the challenges that the disability community 

faces all throughout the province. 

 

So very quickly, Rachelle who is their administrator at their 

office, Mike Taylor, Randy Stomp, these are the team that Gary 

built and they’ve dedicated their lives to bringing awareness to 

the northern disability community in northern Saskatchewan. I 

know that when he started his walk on August 1st, 1989, Gary 

started this walk at 5 a.m., Mr. Speaker. And it’s an amazing 

thing to watch. A young guy on crutches, you know, walking 

650 kilometres, you know, just to raise awareness. 

 

And if you can imagine walking 5 kilometres, imagine walking, 

with two crutches, 650 kilometres. So he started this walk on 

August 1st, 1989 at 5 a.m. and 79 days later he arrived here. He 

wants to recognize his home community of Pinehouse Lake. He 

wants to recognize the council and the people that helped him, 

people like their mayor, their former mayor Greg Ross; their 

past councillors, Ida Ratt-Natomagan; his brother Dominic 

Tinker; the administrator at the time, Lawrence Yew; Rene 

Rediron; Jim Marsh. These were the council members at the 

time that supported Gary in his endeavour. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, 25 years later . . . Well almost 25. He’s 

going to be celebrating 25 years in the next couple of years. But 

well over 20 years ago, Gary started this walk. He brought 

recognition for the disability community to the North and their 

incredibly unique challenges. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

only fitting that I stand here today as the MLA for Athabasca to 

thank Gary and thank his team for doing the great work to raise 

awareness for disability issues in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 

Questions? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 

question for the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. I was 

listening carefully to his speech and I’m just curious if he could 

give us an update, details on what is the latest on the transition 

for the residents of Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw, for both 

the residents and the employees. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Wakamow . . . or Moose Jaw Wakamow. Sorry. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Yes, Moose Jaw Wakamow. Well you 

know, as we’ve said, there’s more work to be done. Both the 

member from Moose Jaw North and myself, we meet with 

Doug Conn and June Avivi, the Chairs of the transition 

committee probably every two, three months, whenever they sit 

down and have time to actually sit down and give us a call. 

We’re actually still in the process, and I’m sure as you’re going 

over the budget you take a look at what we’re doing, and how 

we’re going forward with this. I do believe right now there’s . . . 

At last count there was 89 individualized plans for the people 

that actually live out there. So it’s continuing. That’s the update. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy 

Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the last 

budget, Mr. Speaker, the government budget, there was 446 

million for people with disabilities, large increases across the 

board to all those important programs, Mr. Speaker. The 

member from Saskatoon Centre at the end of his speech even 

admitted the SAID program is a very good program. But when 

it came time to vote for the budget, he voted against it. So was 

this just a case of old NDP style politics or does he really 

oppose the SAID program? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t the first time I said that. 

It won’t be the last time I said that. And I’ve said it for many 

years now, that there takes a lot of . . . It was a good thing, the 

SAID program. There are still issues that we need to deal with 

and I want to talk about this, Mr. Speaker, because this is why I 

voted against the budget, because I thought we needed a bigger 

strategy. And when I referred to The StarPhoenix, this is what 

they said. And I quote The StarPhoenix: 

 

. . . it’s hard to understand Ms. Draude’s reluctance to 

develop a comprehensive strategy to . . . [eliminate] 

poverty when it could reduce her department’s $720 

million assistance tab while also laying [out] the 

foundation to curb a health . . . budget that’s eating up 

more than 40 per cent of the government’s budget. 

 

That’s why I didn’t vote for the budget. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Does the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow think it’s acceptable that 

people with cognitive disabilities should be calling an acute 

psychiatric facility home? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Let’s talk about what the last NDP minister 

of Social Services actually had to say and what their plan is. 

“When confronted about people with intellectual disabilities 

placed in psychiatric wards or jails, then Minister Yates said, 

‘There’s no mandate under the law to provide services for 

intellectually disabled people.’” That in itself is just so 

dishonourable. We say there’s more work to be done. We say 

we have to work on this. 

 

You know, we talk about our record compared to your record. 

You guys get pretty upset about that. We want to talk about 



5152 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

what other people say as well. The people from the Disability 

Income Support Coalition actually sent us a letter. And just to 

say it quick: “We want to thank you for the commitment you 

have made to improve the quality of life for the people with 

disabilities for a long time.” 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the NDP’s record on providing services for 

people with disabilities, quite frankly, was dismal. Dismal. 

We’ve heard the reason why, and it lies in their attitude, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’ll quote Mr. Yates again. “There is no mandate 

under law to provide services for intellectually disabled 

people.” Mr. Speaker, imagine. Imagine. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Disability Income Support Coalition 

stated that the NDP’s disability framework, and I quote, 

“ignores the deep, pervasive, and lifelong poverty that so many 

people with disabilities face.” 

 

After the election, Mr. Speaker, that same organization in a 

letter to Premier Wall stated, “We want to thank you for the 

commitment you have made to improve the quality of life for 

people with disabilities.” 

 

To the member from Athabasca, based on your last policy 

document, policy 11 — a.k.a. [also known as] the tree book, 

signed off by your former leader, and nowhere to be found — 

and your record in government, can we find your policy? Where 

can we find your policy and your plan for people with 

disabilities . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, one of the most important 

things that we ought to know when we speak about the 

disability community overall is that it’s important to note that as 

we begin to look at the challenges that the disabled community 

has, it’s important that governments come along with a matrix 

of supports at the right time, at the right place — whether it’s a 

housing allowance, whether it’s a training allowance, or 

whether it’s a transition strategy, whether it’s further 

employment opportunities, or whether it’s even the paratransit 

supports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to do all we can through the matrix of 

supports for the disabled community to remove the barriers that 

they have to lead a productive life. We have to exhaust all 

avenues of support towards the disabled community to ensure 

that they’re able to reach their full productive life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I look back at the point. They’re slashing the paratransit 

program; they’re shutting Valley View down with no plan, Mr. 

Speaker, and they’re not recognizing northern disabled issues. 

Shame on them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, I’ve been 

listening to the speeches today and the heckling from the other 

side. And they go on and on about the 440 wait-list be 

completely eliminated; it was completely eliminated. But last 

year we brought forward several people who had a different 

experience. A very different experience. And for example, the 

Birns family still didn’t have day programming. And I want to 

know if the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow agrees with 

Jennifer Birns, who came to the legislature with her brother, 

Devon, that it was disgusting for the government to say the 

family turned down an offer of services when it simply wasn’t 

true. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Yes. We talk about that 440 wait-list. We 

also talk about the extra, the extra 300 people to be done. And 

when . . . And he’s sitting there instead of listening to the 

answer. They ask a question and don’t listen. 

 

We say there’s more work to be done and they get mad. They 

bring people forward and there’s more work to be done. We say 

there’s more work to be done. There’s a reason there’s nine 

over there. It’s because you thought the work was done. The 

work isn’t done. There will be people every year that come 

forward and move through the system and need our help. And 

do you know what? Like the member from Saskatoon said, we 

answer those questions. We work with those people. We do not 

ignore them. We sit there and we actually listen. We work with 

the people. And yes, there’s more work to be done. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government’s 

focus is on ensuring Saskatchewan is the best place in Canada 

for people with disabilities. Funding in all areas of support for 

disabilities has increased since taking power in 2007. The 

results of this effort were applauded by Amy McNeil, executive 

director of SARC, who was quoted saying, “We are leading the 

country, if not North America and the world, in supports for 

people with disabilities, and it’s something the Saskatchewan 

Party should be very proud of.” 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: if you can’t believe 

the majority in this room, when will you and your caucus open 

your hearts to what the majority of the disability community is 

saying about our government’s initiatives on disabilities? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like that 

member to think about the individual who has lived in an acute 

psychiatric hospital for more than two years. The minister is 

laughing, Mr. Speaker. Someone on the community living 

service division responsibility list is living in an acute 

psychiatric facility for more than two years, Mr. Speaker. Don’t 

pat yourselves on the back until those people have a home that 

they can call a real place to live, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5153 

Ms. Campeau: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 

government has worked hard to ensure Saskatchewan is the best 

place to live for people with disabilities. One of the ways our 

government has strived to achieve that status is the creation of 

the SAID program. We’ve added 11,900 people to the SAID 

program and will be putting up to 4,200 more per year in the 

pockets of recipients. Quite . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 606 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Ms. Chartier that Bill No. 606 — The 

Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it’s indeed my pleasure, my honour to be able to rise today 

to speak to this bill. We introduced the bill a while back here in 

the legislature, and I know it’s not the first time a bill of this 

sort has been introduced by Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

And certainly I think it’s something that this government needs 

to take a careful look at, at least before dismissing it outright, 

and I’m going to speak to some of those reasons here today. It’s 

Bill 606 and the name of the bill is An Act respecting the Rights 

of Residents in Special Care Facilities and Personal Care 

Homes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:15] 

 

So in terms of preparing my comments today, I thought first of 

all I’d like to find out what is a bill of rights and why is that 

important. And sometimes we think about the Canadian Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms. One of the most famous bill of rights 

that we would know about is the one in the United States 

Constitution. 

 

But I go to my original source as always which is Wikipedia of 

course. And what we find out in Wikipedia is that a bill of 

rights is sometimes called the declaration of rights, and it’s a 

list of the most important rights of citizens of a country. So 

typically when we see bills of rights, they’re at the nationwide 

level, and the history of these bills comes through long 

struggles for people to get their rights and freedoms established 

in law. I’m going to quote from the Wikipedia page here. 

 

It says: 

 

The purpose of these bills is to protect those rights against 

infringement. The term “bill of rights” originates from 

England, where it refers to the Bill of Rights enacted by 

Parliament in 1689, following the Glorious Revolution, 

asserting the supremacy of Parliament over the monarch, 

and listing a number of fundamental rights and liberties. 

 

So what we see is that when we legislate these rights, Mr. 

Speaker, it gives them a weight and a significance that you 

can’t get through policy statements or what this government has 

chosen to do, which is to describe some of these rights in a 

series of guidelines rather than legislating them. 

 

Another page I went to on the Internet when I was looking for 

why we have bills of rights is I went to a page called Ask.com, 

and I asked, what is the purpose of a bill of rights? And I’ll give 

you a quote there as well. It says: 

 

The bill of rights serves to protect citizens from excess 

government power. It achieves this by ensuring that there 

is a separation of powers between differing government 

organs, increasing independence of the judiciary and 

providing the electorate representatives with more 

authority. The Bill of Rights is embedded in the 

constitution. 

 

So that’s in the American context, Mr. Speaker, but we could 

see a number of countries and throughout the ages we’ve had a 

number of bills of rights. And indeed probably the most famous 

bill of rights that we can cite is the Magna Carta which was 

signed in 1215. That’s going way back, but that’s where we 

start to see the rights of citizens vis-à-vis the monarchy being 

established. 

 

We can go on. There’s one from Hungary from the year 1222. 

The Golden Bull of 1222. We’ve got the Constitution of Greece 

in 1822. We’ve got the Canadian Bill of Rights that was 

established in 1960. The New Zealand Bill of Rights Act, 1990. 

So there’s all kinds of bills of rights that have been established. 

 

What we also see in terms of bills of rights is a trend to specific 

special interest groups. And there are things like a consumer bill 

of rights, a homeless bill of rights, taxpayer bill of rights, 

veterans’ bill of rights — and these bill of rights are ones that 

are legislatively introduced to protect certain interest groups. 

 

So what we’re asking for here is the ability to have that kind of 

bill of rights established for the vulnerable seniors here in 

Saskatchewan. This isn’t anything new. It’s been done in a 

number of other provinces. We know that Ontario has 

introduced such legislation, as has British Columbia. So this 

isn’t a complete stretch, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in fact it’s a 

trend I think that should be honoured and followed rather than 

avoiding it and just relying on guidelines. 

 

I found some other information on the Internet on seniors and 

human rights. And what we’re told on the Canadian Heritage 

home page in an archived document was that seniors make up 

12 per cent of the total population. And ageism, which is 

discrimination against seniors, describes negative attitudes and 

stereotypes towards older people. It also refers to the tendency 

of constructing a society based on the assumption that 

everyone’s young and thus failing to accommodate the needs of 

seniors. 

 

So there’s a number of international initiatives that have taken 

place to deal with the prejudice of aging, and also we know that 



5154 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2014 

there are some legal rights and legal protections for seniors, 

specifically the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and 

of course the Canadian Human Rights Act. 

 

So at a high level, we know that ageism is one of the areas that 

would be protected under the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms. So there is a level of recognition there for seniors. 

 

In Saskatchewan we don’t have any such legislation. And this 

has been addressed recently by the Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan who issued a final report after a long period of 

consultation on civil rights in Saskatchewan long-term care 

facilities. And I’d like to devote much of my comments today, 

Mr. Speaker, to some of the recommendations that were found 

in this report that was issued in May of 2013. 

 

There is a number of recommendations that were made by the 

commission. I think Doug Surtees was the chairman who had 

the responsibility for the report. There are eight specific 

recommendations that the commission has made, and we’re 

really hoping to see this government take that seriously and 

give the seniors the legislative and regulatory backup that they 

need in order to ensure that their rights are protected here in 

Saskatchewan and particularly in the special care facilities. 

 

Just backing up a little bit, Mr. Speaker, the whole maze of care 

as people move towards their senior years is complex and 

perplexing I think, especially for people that are encountering it 

for the first time. 

 

And you know, I have to say that even in my own family, we’re 

experiencing some of that right at the moment. My father had 

serious surgery last Saturday and is recuperating now in the 

hospital. But the questions about care are now starting to 

surface. If he recovers well from the surgery, what next? And 

we know that he has a number of needs that now exist that 

didn’t exist two weeks ago. So for our own family, it’s wading 

through this maze of sort of what next and all the possibilities. 

 

And we don’t even know if he will be able to return home at 

this point. So all of a sudden we as a family are faced with this. 

He’s 87 years old. He’s been in good health right up till now. 

He’s worried about his strawberries, to make sure that they get 

uncovered for the spring, you know, and he’s worried about all 

these things. But he can’t really even walk at this point, and 

there’s a number of health issues that arise from the serious 

surgery that he had. 

 

So I think when you’re in that kind of situation as a family, 

especially for the first time, there’s a lot of vulnerability and a 

whole bunch of mystery, especially to us, in terms of how do 

the doctors come into the hospital? When do they visit? When 

do you talk to the nurse? Are you allowed to, you know, bother 

them because we know how busy they are. And yet even last 

night when I was there and he was having trouble keeping 

things down, I didn’t know if I should be calling the nurse or 

just deal with it myself. I was very glad to be there, but it’s 

difficult. So I think as families face these kinds of crises in their 

own stories, and I know my story is not unique by any stretch of 

the imagination, how do we ensure that my old dad, his rights 

are being respected? 

 

Often when you are in long-term care, you know, the dignities 

of life are often removed for necessary reasons. And in terms of 

our bodily functions and all the things that happen as our bodies 

age, it’s not pretty sometimes. And I think it’s very difficult for 

people who are private to have to have that kind of treatment. 

So where are their rights? And we know that elder abuse is a 

serious issue and one that often falls between the cracks because 

again of the vulnerability of the people that are experiencing the 

abuse. 

 

So back to the recommendations that the Law Reform 

Commission of Saskatchewan has made, the first 

recommendation they make is that a residents’ bill of rights 

should be required for all long-term care homes. And they cite a 

number of reasons for that in their paper. They looked at what’s 

going on in other provinces. 

 

And one of the quotes I think I want to share with you is found 

on page 6, about the need for reform. And they talk . . . 

Professor Surtees talks about the lack of communication and 

how patients and their families, like our family, don’t always 

understand what questions should be asked and how to 

communicate with the staff. And often the staff aren’t able to 

effectively communicate with the family. An enshrined bill of 

rights would give families sort of a better focus on how they 

can ensure that their loved ones’ rights are being met. 

 

One of the things they said at page 6: 

 

There is wide agreement that improved education for staff 

and administrators is an indispensable step toward 

improving the living conditions of residents in long-term 

care. At present, the training in abuse awareness provided 

to staff of long-term care facilities is uneven. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think part of the concern here is 

that we’re spending too much time looking at the efficiencies 

that are claimed within the lean process. We’re not doing the 

type of training that is most important for patient care in 

long-term care facilities, and that’s training in abuse awareness. 

We know, according to this report, that that training is uneven, 

and yet we see the focus completely skewed. And the focus is 

on efficiencies as the number one priority rather than the care 

and rights of the seniors. 

 

There’s a number of other recommendations that are in place. 

The second one is that there should be legislation that should set 

out a minimum standard for a residents’ bill of rights, with each 

long-term care home drafting its own document. 

 

We’ve often commented as the official opposition on our 

concerns about the removal of minimum standards of care. I 

know the Health minister often refers to the new manual that 

came out in 2013, the special care home program guidelines. 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I did a Google search to see if 

the word . . . how would these guidelines deal with complaints, 

the word complaint does not show up once in that entire 

200-and-some page document. So we have no idea under the 

new policy manual how complaints of abuse are to be 

instigated. And to me, Mr. Speaker, this is a serious omission 

and a very glaring omission on the part of these guidelines. 

 

And I think if you look at our proposed bill, you will see that 

the right of complaint is built into the legislation so that the 



April 10, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5155 

families of these seniors and the seniors themselves who still 

require and have some form of autonomy . . . I mean we always 

have to keep the autonomy at utmost prominence, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because as some writers have pointed out, we have 

children’s bills of rights. Children are vulnerable. We have 

seniors’ bills of rights.  

 

Seniors are vulnerable. The seniors are adults and, in many 

cases, even if they have lost some of their capacity, they still . . . 

we have to ultimately protect their right to autonomy. And I 

think that’s one of the things that may be overlooked when we 

have guidelines such as those that were presented by the 

government recently without the legislative protection that a bill 

of rights would afford these individuals. 

 

The legislation should provide a default residents’ bill of rights 

to apply in the event that a long-term care home does not draft 

its own. We know that care homes are busy and that the 

necessity to draft their own bill of rights or the requirement 

could be an onerous one, particularly if they are overwhelmed 

with other duties. So what the recommendation — and certainly 

you’ll find that in our draft bill — is that the legislation should 

have a backup bill of rights if the particular care home isn’t able 

to draft its own. So there’d be a default. 

 

The next recommendation is that this bill of rights must be 

posted. We know that bills of rights are being drafted in varying 

shapes and forms in certain care homes, but not consistently. So 

we need to ensure that they’re posted, and that more 

importantly there be — this is the fifth recommendation — that 

there be an enforcement mechanism for the residents’ bill of 

rights. 

 

And it’s unfortunate at this point that under the guidelines we 

don’t even have the word complaint showing up once, which 

was quite shocking and alarming from my perspective. We 

know that, like in my family when we’re dealing with all the 

emotional requirements and the confusion of the health 

requirements, we’re not even sure what our rights are right now. 

And this is in the hospital context. 

 

For some reason, Mr. Speaker, the private care homes in the 

regulations, there are actually legislated requirements. And for 

some reason it doesn’t exist in Saskatchewan for the special 

care homes that are operated by the government. So I’m not 

exactly clear why the government has chosen to not make those 

kinds of things required in the special care homes when they 

actually are regulated. And I’m just trying to find that particular 

piece of regulation. So I’m not sure why they’re included there 

and not included in the . . . Oh, here it is. No, I still haven’t 

found it. I guess I’ll have to refer to it later. But the private care 

regulations do have certain requirements in them that we’re not 

seeing in the special care regulations. 

 

I did find it, Mr. Speaker, and it’s section 34 under The 

Personal Care Homes Regulations from 1996. And it states in 

there, in section 34, a number of rights and privileges of 

residents. And in fact, in the Law Reform Commission’s report, 

they suggested that this particular set of regulations even goes 

further than many of the generalized regulations. And they’ve 

cited, for example, section (g) of 34(1) which says: 

 

In addition to any of the rights and privileges that the 

residents may have at law, each resident has the following 

right and privileges . . . 

 

(g) to receive visitors privately at the home between the 

hours of 9 a.m. and 9 p.m. without giving prior notice to 

the licencee. 

 

So we see this kind of very specific provision in the regulations 

for personal care homes but we see nothing in legislation for 

seniors’ care home. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, realistically our concern, and we’ve raised it a 

number of times here, is what we’ve seen from this government 

is a lessening of the standards of care and actually removing 

them from regulations. We’ve seen them create a new document 

called special care guidelines — it’s a long name — but not 

once in those guidelines do we see the word complaint, which is 

critical to the enforcement of rights is the ability to ensure that 

you can make a complaint. And we feel, as other jurisdictions 

have done like in Ontario and BC [British Columbia] that to 

enshrine seniors’ bill of rights in legislation is a necessary and 

important step to moving forward for seniors in Saskatchewan. 

And I think that’s echoed by the Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan in their report from last year. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I feel that I’m hoping the 

individuals in the House here that are listening today are 

convinced that this type of bill is something that has value and 

should be incorporated into our legislative suite of protections 

for vulnerable people in our society like seniors. And I hope 

that all the members will do the right thing when the vote 

comes and to vote in favour of this bill. Thank you very much. 

And I’d like to now adjourn the debate on this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion by the member was that this bill 

be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:32.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5131 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5131, 5132 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5131 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5132 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5132 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5132 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5132 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5132 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5132 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5133 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5133 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5133 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5133 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5133 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Volunteer Week 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5134 

 Parkinson’s Awareness Month 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5134 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5134 

 Remembering Ed Lysyk 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5134 

 Saskatchewan Athlete Competes in Masters Golf Tournament 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5135 

 Northlands College Gala 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5135 

 Dental Hygienists Week 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5135 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Patient Safety and Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5136 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5136 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5137 

 Ministry of Education Sector Plan 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5138 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5138 

 Provision of Home Care 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5140 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5140 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5140 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5141 

 Bill No. 130 — The Executive Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government Administration Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5141 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5141 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Improving the Lives of People With Disabilities 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5141 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5144, 5151 

  Lawrence ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5145, 5151 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5146, 5151 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5148 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5149, 5152 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5151 



 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5152 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5152 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5153 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 606 — The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5153 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


