
























































Hansard: October 28, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 4B  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 28, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5567 
 October 28, 2014 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’ll call the House back to order. 
Business before the House is debate in reply to the Throne 
Speech. I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote Health. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 
Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 
only got slightly into my speech right before the supper break, 
so I’ll just hit a couple of high points that I was touching on 
prior to the break, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again recognizing our Armed Forces, our protective services 
and the recognition that we’ve been giving them over the last 
week, especially in light of the tragic events in Montreal and 
Ottawa, again our thoughts and prayers going out to the families 
of Warrant Office Patrice Vincent and of course the family and 
friends of Corporal Nathan Cirillo. And I would just wish them 
God’s peace and blessing at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Also I was able to touch on a few thank yous. I’ll make sure I 
do them again so they are on record. Of course my family, my 
wife, Leone, my daughters Katelin and Rayanne I spoke about 
prior to the break, I believe. Katelin finishing up her nursing 
training in Regina here and soon going into the workforce, and 
our daughter Rayanne who’s just recently moved back from 
Ottawa with her husband. And as I said — I’m going to say it 
again — going to be a grandpa in April. And we’re really 
looking forward to that as well. 
 
Again the staff I have both in Regina and in Yorkton. Lauretta 
Ritchie-McInnes has been with me in Yorkton since I was 
elected in 2007. Served with the member from Melville for 
about 12 years prior to that, so she’s been at this game about 19 
years and very, very good at her job. And I’m very blessed to 
have her in my office back at home as well as two part-time 
ladies. Ingrid’s been with me for a number of years, Ingrid 
Stumph. And a new addition to our team after we had Sarah 
Stumph leave, we have Rachelle Sawatsky that has moved to 
Yorkton from Lanigan. And we’re really lucky to have her 
working with us as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the staff at home, I’ve very appreciative of, especially in 
light of my recent appointment to cabinet and being away from 
home quite a bit more. So really relying on their work at home 
to make sure the office is running in an efficient manner, which 
I know it is, and serving the constituents of Yorkton. 
 
As well as the staff here, I want to name them again. Michael, 
my chief of staff, has been just a real help, a real right hand the 

last month that I’ve been in this position. Really relying on him 
quite a bit, as well as Selena in the front office and Chaelah and 
Ashley, our MA [ministerial assistant] and Brittany, a new 
addition to our team just about a week or so ago, MA and 
communications. Really enjoying her in the office as well. Sad 
to say goodbye to Dale Richardson, but we actually traded up, I 
think. Dale was a great guy. I really enjoyed him for the few 
weeks he was with me, a few road trips up north — Onion 
Lake, and I think La Ronge he was with us — but I think we 
traded up with Brittany. So we’re really happy to have them in 
the office. 
 
My colleagues I touched on. Really thankful for the colleagues I 
have. We really are a family over here. Sometimes there might 
be a bit of friction, but not unlike any family. We have a really 
good relationship with everybody over here, and it’s really a 
great bunch of people to work with, alongside. 
 
And I would never want to leave out the Premier. The Premier, 
the member for Swift Current, is just I think one of the most 
recognized leaders, political leaders, not only in our country but 
a lot of areas around the world. I am very thankful that he is the 
leader. I can call him friend, and I’m very blessed to be given 
this opportunity to serve in cabinet as the Minister Responsible 
for Rural and Remote Health. 
 
And with that as well, the Minister of Health, from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, I just really appreciate his youthfulness, 
his energy. Being a new father, he’s got a really good 
perspective on health and some of the priorities in health as 
well. His leadership, his mentorship, his knowledge, and just 
the dedication he has for this portfolio is somebody that, 
although I’m about 100 years older than him, I really look to 
him as a mentor and to learn from him, the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, the Minister of Health. 
 
So I’m just really appreciative of the opportunity that I do have 
here to serve the people of Saskatchewan and also the people of 
my constituency. 
 
Getting on to the Throne Speech, we look at the basis of the 
Throne Speech. Again I think, pointed out by members across 
as well, it is sort of an overarching plan, a plan for the coming 
year of our government. And I have said many times when I 
have spoken to people, it should be no real surprise, a lot of the 
things that are in our throne speeches and in our budgets, 
because they are laid out very well in our plan for growth: 
vision 2020 and beyond, a plan we came up with a couple of 
years ago to give the government and our party direction as to 
where we needed to go, not unlike some of the work I think a 
lot of us have done in the past as legislative secretaries, as 
ministers, talking to the people around the province and seeing 
the direction they would like us to go. 
 
Some of the first portfolios I served in after being elected was 
Legislative Secretary to Social Services, community-based, 
which gave us a lot of those interactions and consultations we 
did back in ’07, ’08, into ’09, gave us a social policy direction 
which is very reflective, I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in not 
only our plan for growth but also our Throne Speech and our 
subsequent budgets — balanced budgets, I might add. Every 
one of our budgets have been balanced and tied very closely to 



5568 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

our throne speeches, and the last few throne speeches and 
budgets again tied to our plan for growth: vision 2020 and 
beyond. 
 
Then very shortly afterwards I served under the minister of 
Environment, two different ministers of Environment, with the 
MMRP [multi-material recycling program] plan that I know is 
in the works of being rolled out fairly soon. In fact we just 
enjoyed a reception with the electronics recycling group, and I 
got the chance to just talk to them about a lot about our old 
work under the minister of Environment and working on an 
MMRP. 
 
Post that, working under the Premier for vulnerable youth, and 
giving some direction for support of those I hesitate to call 
vulnerable youth. But I came to know them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when I was serving in that portfolio, was youth with 
promise and potential. Because I think what we speak into 
people is what they become, and if we consistently refer to 
these youth as vulnerable, I think they kind of stay in that place. 
But we speak life into them, we refer to them as having promise 
and potential.  
 
And we’re seeing some of the initiatives not only from the 
government, through partners in the community-based 
organization sector, but also the general public starting to see 
the value of these young people and seeing some of them climb 
out of the situations they’re in — whether it’s addictions, 
whether it’s poverty, whether it’s unemployment and creating 
— looking at the opportunities that are created by our business 
sector, by our government, and being able to find jobs and 
really become a very productive member of society and 
contributing in a lot of ways. 
 
A lot of that again is reflective . . . Many of the members on this 
side have spoken about our record high unemployment. I think 
it speaks to some of those youth as well as others in the 
province, looking at the opportunities that have come around 
over the last seven years I think under the leadership of our 
government and our Premier and our cabinet, you know, 
bringing some of those numbers into a more reasonable 
alignment, but also I think a record that the whole province can 
be proud of — 577,000 people working as of last count. Record 
unemployment, virtually lowest unemployment in a race to the 
bottom for unemployment in our country — 3.2 per cent. 
 
And again looking at the success of our province, recognized 
outside of our borders by independent agencies such as 
Moody’s who has recently given us a AAA plus credit rating, 
virtually the highest credit rating you can achieve, which does a 
number of things. It gives us a very good rate on money that we 
still do owe, after paying down the amount of debt that we have 
over the last seven years, but also recognizing the power of the 
economy, the potential of the province, and recognizing us with 
that very, very promising credit rating. 
 
You know, talking about the strength of the province and 
priorities of our government, the one thing I will reflect on, I 
think it was pre budget speech, there was a document put out by 
the members opposite. And the one thing I will refer to in here, 
they refer to the government already spending $14 billion this 
year compared to less than $8 billion in 2007. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, judging by that comment you would think that 

money’s being spent recklessly. I would challenge the members 
across, in their throne replies as they stand, to start specifying in 
those numbers what they would argue with as for our spending. 
 
Would they argue with spending on infrastructure in health, 
education, highways? Would they argue supports for people 
with disabilities, Saskatchewan assured income disability plan, 
the increases to the seniors’ income plan, increases to 
community-based organizations, increase virtually doubling the 
health budget in the last seven years, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I’m 
wondering which one of those things they would cut, what they 
would, what they would question the spending on, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s something that’s to be heard of as of yet. 
 
We look at the Throne Speech and the one title, “A Province 
Ascending.” The province is doing well; we’re growing. Not to 
say we aren’t susceptible to pressures throughout the world, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We know we’re an export-based economy. 
We’re tied to the world economy so we’re bound to take some 
of the hits, so to speak, when the world economy has a bit of a 
struggle. But I like our positioning when you look at our 
diversified economy, where we get the income for the province, 
where our companies that do business in the province export to 
and the products that they can provide and the markets that they 
have. And I really like how we’re positioned in that respect 
where we’re virtually been riding the top of the wave. Any time 
there’s been a dip, the province and the people of our province 
are riding the top of that wave. So that’s a really exciting, 
exciting place to be in. 
 
And you know, when thinking about an export-based economy, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I reflect back on my hometown of 
Yorkton. I’ll try and reflect home to Yorkton as much as I can 
until I get to some of the health initiatives and I’ll talk more of a 
broader sense then. But I had this conversation a few nights ago 
with someone at a reception and it was at the international 
delegates reception. As you know, we had 53 ambassadors, 
international ambassadors from Ottawa in Regina the week 
before and the night of the Throne Speech. And talking to some 
of those people, they were just astounded as to the diversity of 
our economy, the size of our province, our population, our 
innovation, our resources. All these different things that are part 
of our economy. 
 
And I said, you know, the best thing I can describe, the only 
way I can really think about explaining that is it comes back to 
our agriculture-based. We’re a strongly agriculturally based 
province. And you look back 40, 50, 60, 70, 80 years, 90 years, 
the agriculture industry was self-supported. They were 
self-driven. They virtually built their own equipment and a lot 
of that has never changed. You know a lot of farmers still do 
build a lot of their own equipment, modify their own 
equipment, come up with patents, come up with ideas. 
 
And we see companies like Seed Hawk and Morris and Ram 
and Leon and Parkland Welding in Yorkton supplying 
hydraulic cylinders to the oilfield; supplying all kinds of loaders 
and material-handling equipment and farm equipment to 
countries around the world, when we’re looking at Leons; or 
some of the advanced machining and advanced technology and 
the development of products that we see out of Ram Industries 
in Yorkton, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5569 

And we are a small province. We are, population-wise we’re 
still like 1.125 million. We’re growing at a rate faster than we 
even expected. We are growing, but we still have to export. We 
still need that export-driven economy. And when you look at 
the diverse amount of products and the market that these 
companies are tapping into around the world, it is truly 
astounding. And I know the Premier has referred to us as 
punching much above our weight, and we continue to do that. 
And it’s not the government, it’s business — their dexterity, 
their responsiveness, their flexibility, their innovativeness that 
has been able to, they’ve able to do that and I think to a large 
extent rubs off on the government. We have to meet their 
expectations, and we just really appreciate that work ethic. And 
that’s something that we on this side of the House really try and 
take to heart and try to adapt to and try to use, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We’re talking about, you know, the increase of more than 
123,000 people in the last seven years and agreed, that’s partly 
immigration. But we look at what some of those numbers 
represent, they represent people that have come back, 
expatriates that have moved back to Saskatchewan. That 
represents people that have been born here and not left. I think 
the member from Walsh Acres was talking about his luggage 
story. Our kids aren’t getting luggage anymore. Our kids are 
staying here or they’re coming home. And my daughters are 
true examples of that: staying here, taking a nursing career 
which, you know, was questionable years back under the New 
Democrats. 
 
We had nurses leaving. We had doctors leaving. We had a 
shortage of training seats. There wasn’t a need because we were 
declining. 
 
Now we’re growing. We need more nurses and, granted, we’ve 
immigrated nurses, but now some of those nurses tied to those 
training seats that we’ve created are staying here and they have 
jobs here along with our medical professionals as well. We’re 
starting to graduate a lot of those doctors that formerly had no 
place here — no residency positions, half the training seats — 
and now we’re seeing opportunities for them here, not only 
through our major hospitals but also through some of the 
initiatives that we’re doing in rural Saskatchewan and giving 
opportunities in rural Saskatchewan to start building back up 
that rural health care, those rural services that quite frankly 
were decimated under the years of the members opposite when 
we had a lot of those professionals leaving or being fired. 
 
I want to talk a bit about our strong economy as well, continue 
to talk about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I don’t think we 
can say it enough, that the strong economy isn’t the end result. 
It’s simply the tool, that pathway to a better quality of life for 
all Saskatchewan people. And we know some of the costs of 
living have increased and, you know, there’s some added 
pressures in that regard. But we also look at the supports that 
have been put in place for our seniors, for our students. 
 
We look at things in post-secondary education like the graduate 
retention program. We look at the scholarship programs. We 
look at the bursary programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where, 
granted, some of the costs of some tuition and things like that 
have slightly increased, but when tied to some of these 
programs through education, they far outpace the cost of 

education. In fact some students I’ve talked to, if they’re living 
in a major city, going to school in a major city, they’re actually, 
with the programs in place, once they’ve been working in the 
province with all those programs in place, they’re actually 
coming out without any student loans and getting a big tax 
break, a big income back from their investment in education but 
also through the graduate retention program, staying in the 
province and recovering some of that money as well. So those 
programs are definitely working. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Our economy is very diverse. And I know the members 
opposite, specifically the Leader of the Opposition, and I’m not 
poking fun at him, but he likes to use or formerly used the term 
eggs in baskets. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we’ve got 
lots of eggs in lots of baskets. We’ve got hard-boiled. We’ve 
got coloured Easter eggs. We’ve got standard eggs. We’ve got 
brown and white eggs. There are so many diversified parts of 
our economy right now, and again pointed out by some of my 
colleagues on this side of the House, so I won’t delve too deep 
into those. 
 
But we look at the increase in jobs, and it’s not all just in 
resource. It’s not all just in health. It’s not all just in innovation. 
It’s in all of it. We’re looking at resource jobs are up 10 per 
cent. We’re looking at manufacturing jobs are up. Agriculture 
jobs are up. Technological jobs are up. Innovation jobs are up. 
Health care jobs are up. 
 
And I would point a lot of that in regard to our medical 
professionals, whether it’s diagnostic imaging, whether it’s 
2,600 nurses of all different designations that are working in the 
province when under the members opposite I think we lost 
400-and-some nurses. I can’t remember the timeline, but the 
number that sticks in my mind is over 400 nurses, 150 to 200 
doctors that left the province. We now have 423 doctors and 
climbing under the last four years or under the last seven years, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, under our government. 
 
You know, I won’t get too much into the trade. I’ve talked 
about our export markets but, as spoken about earlier in this 
Assembly, the Premier will be going to India to tell the 
Saskatchewan story and develop some more trade partnerships 
there. And that’s what it takes, Mr. Deputy Speaker — a little 
bit of travel, build a relationship, recognition of what our 
province has to offer, not only our innovation and our 
manufacturing and our resources and our food and all the rest of 
it but everything that we have to offer. 
 
And now we’re seeing that our exports are climbing because 
simply of some of those transoceanic trips that some of our 
ministers and our Premier has taken to develop those 
relationships and tell our story and increase our markets. And 
it’s reflecting back in our province’s added exports, added 
production, added income for the people of the province, and 
more economy, more jobs for our people here. And as our 
Premier said, it’s pretty good for a province that doesn’t have a 
seaside port. 
 
So we’ve had a number of initiatives when it comes to building 
our skilled workforce. We know with a growing economy, 
growing jobs, we have to fill those jobs with skilled people. So 



5570 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

I look at some of the initiatives that we’ve taken on, whether 
it’s through the recognized post-secondary education, the 
flagships I would say like the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan], U of R [University of Regina], SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 
and some of those, but also the college, the regional college 
structure in this province. We’re seeing more and more and 
more affordable and accessible classes through those 
organizations. And I’ll point to Parkland College in Yorkton. 
We have the new Trades and Technology Centre that’s coming 
up, you know. Thanks to the former ministers and the current 
minister, that project is coming very well, Trades and 
Technology Centre. 
 
So the recognized trades, with power engineering and a lot of 
the construction type trades, electrical, and those type of things 
but also initiatives that have been started recently in health care. 
I think the number I heard was 1967 or 1969 was the last 
graduating classes of nurses out of Yorkton. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m proud to point out that through the college and 
through partnerships with the universities and initiatives of the 
government, we were just celebrating about four weeks ago the 
first intake of RN [registered nurse] students in Yorkton. I think 
there was 10 of them, if I’m not mistaken, that will be 
graduating anywhere from two to four years, depending on 
what part of the program they’re in at this time. So we’re seeing 
all those opportunities that are now accessible in rural 
Saskatchewan. And years back under the NDP [New 
Democratic Party], we saw those downsized, pulled back into 
the major centres, and our rural areas were left to languish. 
 
We’re looking at, you know, we’ve had the advanced education 
and skills but we also have to get a lot of our people to that 
point. We have a lot of people that need grade 12 equivalency. 
We have the adult basic education programs, and then the 
classes that come post that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m proud to 
report as well that our colleges are very engaged in those 
processes. In fact I think I’ll be attending another graduation 
ceremony at Parkland College in the coming months, and it is 
just astounding to see the family members that are celebrating, 
the students that are celebrating. 
 
I think specifically, Parkland College, I could probably point a 
number in the area of 75 per cent that would be Métis and First 
Nations descent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s just great to 
see the opportunities that they have and the jobs that they are 
filling and really engaging in the workforce and just an amazing 
job that they are doing. I am just so proud of them. 
 
More apprenticeship sheets . . . seats, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That 
could have been bad. Three hundred more apprenticeship seats, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because again we need to fill those 
positions. We need to fill those skilled trades for our growing 
economy, for our construction and all the rest. So I’m really 
excited about the growing number of those seats as well. 
 
Looking into the infrastructure, that’s been a focus of ours since 
we’ve been elected. It was recognized prior to us being elected, 
the infrastructure shortfall, the deficit that we have in the 
province, whether it’s municipal, whether it’s provincial, 
whether it’s health, whether it’s education. I know my colleague 
from Saskatoon, the Minister of Education, spoke a lot about 
his infrastructure needs and the deficits we have there. 

This year alone, nearly $3 billion has been committed to renew 
and expand the province’s infrastructure. That’s astounding, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we recognize that we will never 
address the infrastructure shortage in this province in a shortfall 
if we keep doing things the same way as we always have 
because we know that’s a definition of insanity: do the same 
thing over and over and expect a different result. 
 
We’re doing things differently. We’re engaging with flexible P3 
[public-private partnership] partnerships. We are engaging with 
a huge amount of different initiatives to try and address that 
challenge because, if we look back in history, whether it’s 
buildings or infrastructure, any type of infrastructure 20, 30, 40, 
50, 60 . . . We look at a lot of our major infrastructure is 60 
years old, 50, 60 years old. Products were a lot cheaper back 
then. The design standards were a little bit different. Labour 
was a lot cheaper. We could pound these projects out at an 
alarming rate, but now we are seeing a lot of those projects 
come to their time life. 
 
So how do you address those shortfalls? How do you address 
those challenges? So we have to think outside the box, and that 
is exactly what we are doing. And because of that, we’re 
looking at a new psychiatric hospital in North Battleford. We’re 
looking at other new facilities around the province. We’re 
looking at infrastructure projects like the Regina bypass that 
quite frankly could be 10 years out and double the cost at that 
point if we didn’t look at different ways of doing these different 
projects. 
 
As well, when it comes to infrastructure we know that our 
municipalities feel the pressure as well. We’ve done record 
revenue sharing. One point of our PST [provincial sales tax] has 
been going to the municipalities for a number of years. I know 
they appreciate that because now they can plan. It’s all based on 
the previous year’s taxation, so they know exactly what they’re 
in for, what their income for the transfer payments will be the 
following year. They can plan, whereas previously they had no 
idea. It was mud on the wall; see what sticks, and then whatever 
money we get we’ll pick our priorities. Now they can better 
plan to what projects they’re going to attack. 
 
We had a program out a number of years back called SIGI. That 
was the Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative. That was 
so successful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re bringing it back to 
help the municipalities address some of their challenges as well, 
and looking to partner that even further into some of the First 
Nations to help with some of their infrastructure deficits as 
well. 
 
I touched on some of the highways, a lot of different highways 
work. I’m happy to report the twinning project that has just 
been finished out west I believe is fully open right now. I travel 
the one between Fort Qu’Appelle and Regina quite regularly. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talk about an efficient use of 
taxpayers’ money. If we were to four-lane that part of highway 
would be probably triple the cost. But we see a lot safer 
movement of traffic, a lot more efficient and effective 
movement of traffic. Some people still have a bit of an issue 
knowing exactly how to use it but, you know, that’s few and far 
between. And I can tell you that the traffic moves seamlessly 
between Fort Qu’Appelle and Regina where the majority of the 
traffic is with commuters and also people travelling to our 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5571 

valley down there as well. 
 
I’m going to start touching on some of our health care 
initiatives. I don’t want to take up too much time. I have some 
colleagues that really want to chime in here as well. But you 
know, when it comes to health care, my new position alongside 
the Minister of Health is an exciting one. It’s challenging but 
it’s exciting. It is the biggest part of our budget and I believe it 
is one of the most challenging. There is a huge deficit in the 
health infrastructure. 
 
One of my first duties as Rural Health minister was to attend 
the, I’ll call it the sand-turning or the gravel-turning in 
Saskatoon for the children’s hospital. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it was, I’ll be quite honest, quite a surreal moment for 
me that day because as I stood on that site and we were looking 
at all these young kids that have actually accessed services for 
pediatrics, and children and some expectant mothers that were 
there doing the sod-turning, standing on that site and I’m taking 
part in all this, and I just kind of looked up to my right and up 
there, the third floor of the RUH [Royal University Hospital], I 
affectionately refer to it as peds 3000. For a time from 1998 to 
the year 2000, my family spent the better part of two years on 
that floor. And as we’d sit up on the floor and we’d look out 
those rooms, we looked down exactly on the site of where that 
children’s hospital is going to be. And it used to be an old part 
of a parkade, what my son would affectionately call the car 
collection because he would look out at that and he had this 
vision of his Hot Wheels toys and his little fold-up box — it 
looked like a parkade — and lining them up. And if you 
actually looked out of that room, you would see what he was 
referring to as a car collection. 
 
And you know, fast forward a number of years. Fifteen years 
passed. I’m looking down where my son referred to his car 
collection, and we’re building a hospital there now that will be 
open in three years, will have a helipad for STARS [Shock 
Trauma Air Rescue Society] service on top of it that he would 
have just . . . We were blessed by the service we had but just a 
blessing to those people going through the same struggle that 
we had to go through at that point with the great care we 
received there but bringing that standard of care up even 
further, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And delivering that service to the 
people of the province and the children, specifically the children 
of the province, is something I can tell you I was just so proud 
of that day. 
 
And to me that’s why I got into this. I never imagined myself 
being a politician but, you know, it’s hard to see what’s coming 
ahead of you. But in hindsight I look at some of what I’ve 
personally been through and what some of my friends have 
been through, and to see what I’m able to be involved with 
now, it is just utterly amazing. 
 
And you know, in that time as well I can refer to a lot of the 
different doctors. But you know, I think some people, even 
some of the media will question, like do we need a children’s 
hospital? You know, I think it came to light for me that day. I’m 
going to refer to . . . His name is doctor Jerry Yager, was 
Brayden — Brayden was my son — was his neurologist. He’s 
the fellow that diagnosed Brayden, that he pretty much held our 
hand right through that whole process. And you know, lo and 
behold, we’re there for this announcement and Dr. Jerry Yager 

was one of the people that was specifically named as behind 
this children’s hospital from the beginning and one of the major 
people that was behind the fundraising effort for this hospital. 
 
So I’m not so worried about maybe what I feel. Our 
government, I think we feel it’s the right decision. I’m not so 
worried about what the media feels or what the opposition has 
to say about it. But when I look to somebody like that, a 
medical professional that’s been in it his whole life and dealt 
with these children and either held their hand through to success 
or some of them through to the next life, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s the guy who I’m looking at for leadership on this project, 
and that’s why I know we’re doing the right thing. And I’m 
very happy again to have taken part, taken part in that. 
 
When we start looking at health care we talk about that Patient 
First Review quite a bit, and now we’re looking at the update. 
The review came out in ’08 I believe it was, I think, the first 
draft. A lot of those initiatives we’ve looked at, we’ve moved 
on. Now what’s the next step? So really excited to be a part of 
the tail end of that, look at some of the work of the former two 
ministers, and continue on with that work to see what our next 
steps are. 
 
Now some of the initiatives we put in place, we recognize that 
there were some issues with seniors’ care. There had to be an 
Urgent Action Fund, $10 million put in two years ago I believe 
and then $3.7 million for ongoing programs, support for our 
seniors. 
 
The Saskatchewan surgical initiative, the success rate on that 
has been astounding. Some areas have had trouble, have had 
issues, but the successes that we’re seeing in the surgical 
initiative is really, really great to see. And again it’s not about 
the government patting themselves on the back. It’s about as the 
review says, patient first and putting the patient first ahead of 
everything else, patient-centred care, and that’s where we’re 
focusing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’ll skip over some of these other initiatives. I can talk about 
The Human Tissue Gift Act which is going to modernize our 
legislation and minimize that wait-list, specifically people with 
corneas, cornea transplants. But it’s going to give us access to 
more corneas and to help people regain their vision quicker, and 
maybe some of them wouldn’t even have got their vision back 
at all, so improving the quality of life. Again, patients first. 
 
The Pharmacy Act expanding the purview, the accessibility of 
services at a pharmacy, again flu shots, things like that. Let’s 
keep people out of the emergency rooms, out of the hospitals, 
out of the clinics and get them serviced efficiently and 
effectively as possible, as quickly as possible and not bog down 
our system. 
 
[19:30] 
 
We know, I talked about the numbers of doctors and nurses so I 
won’t dwell on that. That’s a pretty well-known fact. We know 
that mental health and addictions is an issue, mental health in 
general. I had just the pleasure of meeting up with somebody I 
met a couple of weeks ago at the Alzheimer’s gala here in town 
and Roxanne, she came to visit. I know the Minister of Health 
came by for a visit with me today and just what a great woman, 



5572 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

early onset Alzheimer’s, 51 years old, very open about the fact 
that she’s given about 10 years possibly to live but she’s 
making the best of those years being an advocate, a 
spokesperson for Alzheimer’s. Again it ties into the mental 
health part of things. And you know, somewhat invisible, 
especially when it comes to mental health or Alzheimer’s can 
be invisible for quite some time. 
 
And I’m proud to say that our government is really paying 
attention to these initiatives and doing our best to address some 
of the challenges and some of the needs of those patients as 
well. And we did name a commissioner for a mental health 
review, and again happy to report in the coming month or two 
we’re going to see the mental health and addictions review 
action plan come out to give our province sort of a 10-year plan 
on where we need to get. 
 
I know I talked a bit about, referred to emergency rooms, and 
that’s a big thing that we’ve committed to is reducing those 
emergency room wait times. And that comes in a number of 
different ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I know the minister spoke extensively about hot-spotting, 
identifying some of these really high users that, not that they 
don’t need the medical treatment, but they’re maybe not 
accessing the proper medical treatment at the emergency room 
if they’re back over and over again and bogging down the 
system and frankly costing the system a lot of money. 
 
Hot-spotting is about identifying those patients and directing 
them, getting them the best quality of care for the situation that 
they’re in, whatever they’re suffering with, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And you know, there’s a couple of pilot projects on 
the go right now, some success that we’ve seen, quite a bit of 
success, and looking forward to how that project rolls out to 
minimize the pressure on our emergency departments and 
improve the quality of health care in those regards. 
 
A couple of other initiatives. The collaborative emergency 
centres, we have two open right now, three more to be opening 
soon, one very close to home in Canora. Again, talking about 
some of those health services stripped out of the rural areas, you 
know, pulled into the major centres. And what that does, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, then we start seeing areas like Canora loading 
onto Yorkton and Yorkton loading onto Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
That’s the one thing I really want to focus on, is do my best to 
try and not only retain but increase the quality of care and 
increase that care in our rural areas, because we well know that 
if the Yorktons are strong we can pull pressure off Regina and 
Saskatoon. And if Canora and Esterhazy and Preeceville are 
stronger, then we can pull the pressure off of Yorkton. It serves 
people in the rural areas better. It serves people in the whole 
province better because we’re more effectively using the dollars 
that are allocated towards health care and providing a better 
quality of service for the patient. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s patient first. 
 
Innovation sites. We’re opening a new innovation site in 
Yorkton very soon. It’s actually up and running right now. The 
official opening will be towards the end of November. But 
again, a primary health clinic where people that would normally 
maybe run to the emergency room but they’re able to access 

specific services, directed by a person right at the front of the 
clinic to where they might be best suited. They might not need 
to see the doctor. They might need to see a nurse practitioner, 
maybe a physiotherapist, maybe a pediatrician. And directing 
those services specifically to where they need to go and again 
not bogging down the emergency room with things that could 
be dealt with in a clinic more effectively. And again, making 
sure the emergency room is there to handle the emergent cases 
that do come in. 
 
Primary health centres, we’ve seen a few announcements. In 
fact, the Minister of Health and I were just up in Kelvington, to 
the member from Kelvington, the former minister of Social 
Services’ home constituency, expansion of a long-term care 
facility with an integrated primary health centre in it. And you 
know, that’s the neat thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now we’re 
seeing sod-turnings, turning sod project, actually not starting — 
when we got there, there was such a huge hole in the ground 
that they’re just off and running. This project will be . . . It is up 
and running. The money’s behind it. It’s not a nine-year 
announcement before another government has to come in and 
actually put the boots to the ground and get the project off the 
ground, but it’s actually being built. 
 
And just the appreciation of those people was heartwarming, 
and not so much for the government but appreciation for the 
hard work of the member from Kelvington-Wadena, who we 
know publicly isn’t running again, but she is going to be missed 
so very much in these benches on this side of the House, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I won’t talk too much more about that. 
 
The one thing I do want to touch on, I know the minister’s 
answering questions about lean, day after day after day. And I 
just want to recall a few experiences I’ve had. I mean you kind 
of get in this place, and you hear all these for-and-against 
arguments, but again I like to listen to the front line. Well the 
minister and I were on a trip up north to a northern hospital, and 
we encountered a young lady there, actually a lean leader. 
Admittedly she said, I got into it apprehensively. You hear all 
this lean. You hear what’s going on, and I don’t know about 
this stuff. She said once she was finally engaged, sort of, you 
know, dragging her heels slightly, she could not believe the 
difference it made. 
 
And two specific things I want to point out that she said, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was talking about patient care in the long-term 
care facility. By simple lean measures they put in — sort of an 
aha moment for them — but by simple lean measures they put 
in, one specific client that she talked about, one specific 
resident of the long-term care facility was falling virtually daily 
out of a chair, out of a wheelchair or, you know, trying to get 
around because of inefficiencies in the system. Once they put 
lean in place, they put lean processes in place for patient care, 
that gentleman has not fallen once, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 
coming from a front-line worker, not from some tweet quotes 
that the Leader of the Opposition will use in the House here. 
 
Another thing she pointed to . . . And I know the Leader of the 
Opposition, and I mean he can only go with the research and the 
information he has, so I’m not, again, not faulting him. But 
what I heard from her — and we’re hearing about the 
translators and terminology and all the rest, and I’m not going 
to get too deep into that — but what she’s told me was the 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5573 

phraseology, the actual Japanese phraseology has a specific 
purpose. At this point she said to me, I don’t know how I 
communicate with my staff. To communicate what I want to 
communicate instead of using one word, I’d have to use phrases 
that might mix the message. I can communicate the one phrase 
and they understand exactly what I’m talking about. 
 
I know there was some joking about the RPIWs [rapid process 
improvement workshop] that these people go through. We 
walked through. They had two ongoing RPIWs up at that 
facility. And the excitement of the family representatives, the 
health care representatives, the management representatives, it 
wasn’t top-down. It was everybody in one room talking about 
an issue and really coming to an agreement, coming to a 
specific, efficient, and effective way to improve the health 
career of these people. 
 
And I know members across were heckling a little bit when the 
minister was up on his feet today about, I think it was treasury 
board last night when we had some of the CEOs [chief 
executive officers]. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I challenge them. I 
think there’s been invites and they haven’t been taken up on. 
Members of the media, members of the opposition, go out. Talk 
to the CEOs. Talk to some of the people — not only against, but 
talk to the people directly dealing with some of these processes 
in the front lines, and hear not just the negative. Listen to the 
positives. 
 
Like you know, some of the references today in the House was, 
yes, like some of these comments were in what the member or 
the Leader of the Opposition is quoting. But read the whole 
document. There is a lot of specific points saying, regardless of 
all of this, don’t go back. Don’t stop. This is working. 
Transformative change. I’ve been in health care for decades. 
I’ve never seen anything like this happen. Don’t stop. 
 
And that’s not somebody that’s trying to save a job, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s somebody that’s been in the system for 
decades. They’re seeing the change and they don’t want it to 
quit. Even if they might be only a couple years from retirement, 
they’re seeing the success. They’re seeing the patient being put 
first and a lot more targeted service there. 
 
One final word about health. My last speech in the House — I 
think lengthy speech in the House — was my budget reply, and 
I took that as an opportunity admittedly to sort of put a lot of 
my dad’s life on record. He served a lot of time in the navy and 
it kind of touched base, touched home with me today as well. 
He wasn’t wartime. He was postwar, cold war actually, 
minesweeper duty, and I think some of that duty might have 
had a lot to do with his untimely death. A lot of asbestos in the 
old engine rooms and on the old minesweepers and ships. 
 
But you know, the one thing that really struck home with me, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spent pretty much the last three months, 
you know, two months running him around Saskatoon, 
Yorkton, wherever for different testing to get him diagnosed, to 
get him the best treatment possible. I virtually spent the last 
month in palliative care in Yorkton with him, which thankfully 
for technology I could actually work from the hospital room. If 
I had to take a call, I could leave palliative care and call from 
the front of the hospital. But you know, the one thing that, you 
know, you sit back in the ER or the emergency department, you 

sit back in palliative care, you sit back in a ward, and a lot of 
people knew who I was, the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly]. But you know, they know me for me. I’m just Greg 
from Yorkton so . . . I’m quoting. But they know me. 
 
So there was no apprehension, nothing other than just speaking 
to the son of a palliative patient and watching the service he got, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s the one thing I’ll remember 
about dad is over and over again — I won’t use some of his 
expletives, because he’s kind of a colourful navy guy — but 
saying, you know, yes, the building needs some work, but you 
know, he pointed out it’s still a pretty strong building that 
maybe needs some work and eventually get a new hospital 
there. The staff, the treatment, the services, everything that was 
available, he said, second to none. He said, if anybody wants to 
come in here and argue with me about the quality of health care, 
where it is today in this province, bring them on because I’ll 
argue with them. The guy’s palliative, laying in a bed, but he’s 
still an old, tough German. He’s ready to fight with people. 
 
Watching things happen from behind the scenes and being 
involved in it from sort of a fly-on-the-wall perspective gave 
me a really good view of what’s going on, watching some of the 
lean practices, watching where lean wasn’t in place, some of the 
inefficiencies, but still gaining a whole new higher appreciation 
for not only our health care system, what we truly do have in 
this province, but for the professionals that are serving our 
patients’ greatest needs and the love and care that they have. 
And that was just excellent. 
 
I better move on here pretty quick. There’s so much to talk 
about. You know, post-secondary education is something I 
touched on with our college. But again Sask Advantage 
Scholarship, the grant for education savings partnering with the 
RESP [registered education savings plan] program through the 
federal government, graduate retention program — all great 
initiatives that are really starting to pay dividends. And actually, 
we’re putting more money into those programs than we 
expected because the uptake is so great, but again, it’s serving a 
specific purpose. It’s money well invested. We’re keeping our 
kids here and helping with our labour shortage in the province. 
 
I’ll just go through some of the headlines, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Our innovation, again, diversifying our economy, we look at the 
innovation available through the U of R with the petroleum 
institute. We look at Saskatoon with the synchrotron with . . . I 
better get the names right. The cyclotron radioscope facility at 
the University of Saskatchewan is in its final stages, a $25.5 
million laboratory that is a partnership between us and the 
federal government and the university that’s going to provide 
Saskatchewan researchers with resources they require to 
develop radiopharmaceuticals, drugs containing radioactive 
materials — which I know very well about, going through, 
again, the issues with my son many years ago and with my dad 
— able to access the PET/CT [positron emission 
tomography/computerized tomography] scan in Saskatoon, and 
just the amazing work they are doing there with that diagnostic 
imaging equipment. 
 
But again these drugs, outside of cancer treatment and 
diagnostic imaging, diseases like cancer, but Alzheimer’s, 
Parkinson’s, and MS [multiple sclerosis], you know, it’s 
something that we really want to focus on. And again, 



5574 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

investment in some of these things for the innovation side, 
diversifying our economy, but also twofold is creating a better 
quality of life for Saskatchewan people because of our 
investment in health care. 
 
I talked a bit about our support for communities, again our 
revenue sharing, $265 million this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I know Yorkton, the percentage 150-some per cent, the 
amount Yorkton, that it’s getting now compared to before, our 
government is virtually doubled, more than doubled. So I know 
they’re very appreciative of that, although they have the same 
challenge as us. They have huge infrastructure projects, limited 
resources, so you kind have got to pick and choose and find the 
projects you want to do. 
 
But the thing I like about this program is, formerly I think a lot 
of the funding that went to municipalities was targeted, you 
know, maybe sexy, pretty projects you could cut a ribbon on 
and pat yourself on the back. What we’re seeing now — I can 
point specifically to Yorkton — is because of their revenue 
sharing, they have their funds. They can designate the funding 
where they want. They might have something fairly exciting, 
so-called exciting to put the money towards, but then again we 
see a flood in Yorkton and the area of southern Saskatchewan 
this year. So what they did, they took funds that they would 
have maybe allocated to a different project towards the 
extended improvement of their sewer system. So now, although 
we were very well positioned in respect to the last flood in 
2010, this year we came out of it way better than we did in 
2010. There is still more work to do allocating those funds not 
to a project designated by the provincial government or federal 
government. They designated funds to projects that they deem 
fit. They’re leading the city; let them make the decisions, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program]. 
Improvements under our government to PDAP was very 
lacking, I know, prior to 2010, recognized through the flooding 
specifically, Maple Creek, Yorkton, and around the province in 
2010. And now we see — although many would still want to 
see more — a very advanced program to what we saw under the 
previous administration. 
 
[19:45] 
 
I’m not going to get too much into the agriculture. It’s a big part 
of our economy, especially around home, but we’re looking at 
the partnership to look at the western grain transportation. 
We’re looking at, you know, the expansion of supports for 
agriculture, expanding of SaskTel’s service into the rural areas 
again to support those agricultural economies. 
 
I’m going to try and get through some of this really quick here, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Couple things I want to focus on is the 
Hub. Yorkton was the second Hub in the province. Hub 
program, basically a silo-breaking-down initiative involving all 
the different organizations, human services organizations for 
the most part in a city, and targeting those that are at risk. So 
you’ll have different organizations bringing cases to the Hub. 
They discuss the best way and the best organizations to deal 
with that situation, and we’re seeing a lot better results. It 
started in Scotland, adapted in P.A. [Prince Albert], and now 
rolling out around the province. And that’s one initiative that 

isn’t really health oriented but we’re seeing and we will see, I 
believe, that initiative helping to keep people out of hospitals 
and emergency rooms in the future. 
 
So my time is pretty much to a close, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll 
sit, I’ll take my seat here quite quickly. You know, housing, we 
see housing was a critical rate a few years ago. Through a lot of 
the initiatives of the government, we see now a vacancy rate of 
3.3 per cent. Rent stabilizing. Housing availability is here, 
programs like Habitat and social housing has been recognized. 
We’ll be seeing an announcement in Yorkton very soon on 
social housing for disabilities and the first ever faith build 
through Habitat for Humanity will be in Yorkton very soon. 
The funds are pretty much in place. 
 
You know, we have a great poverty rate, second lowest poverty 
rate in the country, but still we’ve announced that poverty 
strategy rolling out and, you know, coming highly applauded by 
Dr. Ryan Meili and Dr. Cory Neudorf and Alison Robertson, 
people that are recognized when it comes to anti-poverty 
strategies. 
 
Parks, Culture, Sport improvements to our parks. I know Good 
Spirit Lake, the lake that I attend in the summertime, great 
improvements there with the boat launch, updated paving, 
campsite improvement, and the like. It’s really starting to get 
the attention it deserves as just the jewel in the Parkland that 
was virtually neglected under the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, I mean the other members will be talking more about 
environment, carbon sequestration with the Boundary dam 
project, and all the rest of that, Mr. Speaker. So, just in closing I 
want to I guess end kind of where I started out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. An initiative I’m very proud of, our scholarship of 
honour really means something, even more so now we have the 
returning vets from Afghanistan and the Middle East, and now 
we see vets that are falling on our very land, our own country, 
and servicemen falling here. So you know, looking at the 
support that . . . and I know the members of the opposition as 
well, they support our armed forces, but looking at the 
initiatives that we’ve actually put in place to support them, their 
families, and education is something I’m very pleased with. 
 
One of the last quotes I know in the Throne Speech was, “We 
are forever indebted to those who have paid the ultimate price 
for our freedom.” Mr. Speaker, as many have said, many gave 
something, but these individuals, Mr. Speaker, they gave all. 
John 15:13 says, “Greater love has no man then he lay down his 
life for his friends,” Mr. Speaker. And that’s my favourite 
scripture this time of year, when we’re coming up to 
Remembrance Day, and looking at the sacrifices of World War 
II vets up in our galleries today and seeing some of their stories 
on the video series that’s coming out very, very soon. 
 
And I encourage people to look that up and recognize the 
sacrifices of our vets, all the way through our history: World 
War I, World War II, the Korean conflict, and some of our vets 
that fought in even Vietnam and other conflicts around the 
world, Mr. Speaker. So I’m very, very appreciative of that. 
Because of them, we can stand in this Assembly and we can do 
what we do here virtually every day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So in closing, I want to remind people of . . . I always love this 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5575 

licence plate at Remembrance Day. I’ve seen this very often 
and it’s a licence plate that says, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it says, 
“If you won’t stand behind our military, try standing out in 
front of them,” Mr. Speaker. And I challenge anybody out there 
that doesn’t stand behind our emergency services, behind our 
protective services, our RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police], and specifically our Armed Forces that have been 
targets on our own shores here, our own land the last couple of 
weeks. Stand behind our military. And God bless them, Mr. 
Speaker, and God bless the families of Corporal Cirillo and 
Warrant Officer Vincent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So with that I will be supporting the Throne Speech and not 
even considering the amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and it’s a pleasure for me to join in on the response to 
the Speech from the Throne that was delivered in this Chamber 
last Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, by Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to join with colleagues on both sides of the aisle in 
offering my deepest sympathy to the families of Corporal 
Cirillo and Warrant Officer Vincent. I know that Corporal 
Cirillo was laid to rest today, Mr. Speaker, in his hometown, I 
believe, of Hamilton, Ontario, and the church was full. I saw 
some of the clips on the supper news, and the Prime Minister I 
thought spoke eloquently on behalf of all Canadians in thanking 
Corporal Cirillo and particularly his son, his young 
five-year-old son, I believe. The Prime Minister in the clips that 
I saw talked about how at some point in time later on in this 
young man’s life he can come to appreciate what a hero his 
father is and was and how Canadians from coast to coast to 
coast appreciate the bravery and the sacrifice made by Corporal 
Cirillo. And then of course the same thing holds true for 
Warrant Officer Vincent and his family. He was tragically taken 
from us, I believe, last Monday in Quebec, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So last Wednesday was a bit of a surreal day here at the 
legislature. And I’m fairly new here. I’m just coming up on 
three years of being elected in November, but I seem to, you 
know, recall previous throne speeches and the activities around 
the legislature and the pomp and circumstance associated with 
the Throne Speech. And it’s an exciting day. It starts off a new 
legislative session and we have lots of different activities going 
on, but that particular day with the events that unfolded in 
Ottawa earlier that day brought a different type of atmosphere 
to this legislature.  
 
And it felt a little bit, I felt a little bit uneasy, as I’m sure all 
colleagues did, until we knew that the security staff at this 
building and the work that our Sergeant-at-Arms does in 
conjunction with his security staff, and the Regina Police 
Service, and the RCMP. And walking down the hallway outside 
my office here, Mr. Speaker, and literally seeing police officers 
and the SWAT [special weapons and tactics] team and others 
patrolling the grounds and patrolling inside the legislature and 
ensuring the safety of not only elected members, but the people 
that work in this building, the staff, the people that work for 
Legislative Assembly services and of course our visitors to the 

building, and I thought that I’ve never felt more safe in my life, 
Mr. Speaker, than I did last Wednesday when the activities in 
Ottawa were unfolding. 
 
I just want to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff for the 
tremendous job that they did, not only that day, Mr. Speaker, 
but continue to do in serving the people of Saskatchewan and 
those that visit and operate in this building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, it is a pleasure on behalf of the 
constituents of Regina Northeast to join in on this Throne 
Speech debate and talk a little bit about the constituents of 
Regina Northeast. It is a growing constituency, Mr. Speaker, as 
are many constituencies in Saskatchewan these days. And I’ve 
had some boundaries redrawn within the constituency and had 
the opportunity to get out earlier this summer and knock some 
doors in some new areas that have been added to my 
constituency and had great conversations at the doorstep. 
 
And as I think my colleague from Walsh Acres said earlier 
today, not everybody agrees with what the government is doing, 
and you have that opportunity to talk about those kinds of 
things. But I think it’s safe to say, Mr. Speaker, that the vast 
majority of people that I spoke with certainly are in agreement 
with the direction that the government is taking with respect to 
how we are operating and, most importantly, the direction that 
the province is going in. And that was articulated to me on a 
number of occasions in speaking to the moms and dads on their 
doorsteps earlier this summer. And so I really appreciate that 
kind of feedback. 
 
We obviously get that as well when constituents come into our 
constituency offices and offer up advice, and they perhaps need 
some help with some issues. And we get the opportunity to sit 
down with them over a cup of coffee and talk about issues that 
are important and pertain to their lives and where we can help 
out. And so it is a pleasure always to go and meet with the 
constituents of Regina Northeast. And I look forward to 
continuing to do that, not only now but as we move along into 
the next election cycle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Earlier this year in June the Premier asked me to take on some 
new responsibilities within cabinet, and I appreciate the 
Premier’s confidence in me in taking on the portfolio of 
Advanced Education and as well as Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel and continue to serve on the treasury board and the 
Crown Investments Corporation board and some other 
committees. It’s a bit of a heavy workload, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
not complaining, but I’m learning an awful lot about 
government from all aspects of the operations of government, 
from the executive side to the Crown side, and it is a 
tremendous opportunity. And I thank the Premier for that 
opportunity, and I want to continue to serve in whatever 
capacity the Premier deems necessary. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I have a very worthy staff that assists 
me in the Ministry of Advanced Education’s office, and I just 
want to thank Amiee, and Michelle, Kris, Amanda, and Tyler. 
And I also want to thank my constituency assistant, Mr. Ron 
Naidu who continues to serve with me and does a tremendous 
job in running my constituency office here in Regina Northeast. 
We have a joint office that’s shared with the member from 
Regina Douglas Park and Regina Dewdney, and Brittany and 



5576 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

Becky along with Ron do a tremendous job in helping me out in 
serving in that particular constituency office, Mr. Speaker. And 
a thank you to them for all the hard work that they do in 
particular my CA [constituency assistant]. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the tremendous 
work that officials in the Ministry of Advanced Education and 
officials, employees of SaskTel do to not only help me in my 
role and responsibilities but the tremendous work that they do 
on behalf of the people of this province. And we are very 
capably led by very professional, very competent public 
servants, Mr. Speaker. I am very ably served by my deputy 
minister, Dr. Louise Greenberg, and all of the senior 
administration staff that I get the opportunity to interact with on 
a fairly regular basis, and the dozens and dozens of other 
employees that work in the Ministry of Advanced Education 
that I perhaps don’t get an opportunity to interact with all that 
often, although I’ve been over there on a couple of occasions 
and had the chance to meet some of them. And they do 
tremendous work on behalf of the people of this province. 
 
On the SaskTel side, Mr. Speaker, it is led by the CEO, present 
CEO Mr. Ron Styles, a long-serving public servant in the 
province of Saskatchewan, his senior executive team and the 
literally thousands of employees that work in SaskTel through 
the entire province and work to serve the people of this 
province. And I just want to acknowledge the work that they do 
every single day on behalf of all of us, Mr. Speaker, if you’ll 
indulge me on that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to touch on a couple of 
different aspects of the Throne Speech itself that relate to my 
responsibilities as Minister of Advanced Education. But before 
I get into the specifics of what was outlined in the Throne 
Speech last Wednesday, I found it interesting that earlier that 
day — and we live in a political environment here; on a 
day-to-day basis when the legislature is sitting we have 
opportunity to debate, and we have question period and 
questions and answers and we engage in the political thrust if 
you will, the cut and thrust — and I found it interesting that the 
Leader of the Opposition and the official opposition, the NDP 
issued, I think it was a 25-point plan or something of that nature 
earlier in the day on the Throne Speech date. And what they 
were outlining was what they wanted to see in a Throne Speech, 
and I believe it was 25 points that they insisted had to be in the 
Throne Speech that they wanted to see. 
 
And what I found most interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
nowhere in those 25 points that the Leader of the Opposition 
outlined was any mention of post-secondary education. There 
was no mention whatsoever of advanced education either at the 
universities, no mention of our regional college system in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no mention of formerly SIAST, 
now Saskatchewan Polytechnic; no mention of student support 
services in this province for those who are attending 
post-secondary education. It didn’t even make the top 25 list of 
what the Leader of the Opposition insisted had to be in a 
Throne Speech of issues that need to be addressed in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t know if that means that my 
ministry is doing a terrific job in the area of advanced 
education, or it just doesn’t rank very high; it just doesn’t rank 
very high on the list of priorities with respect to the NDP, the 
official opposition, Mr. Speaker. I’ll leave that for them to 

decide. I’ll leave that for them to defend in completely ignoring 
post-secondary education in the province. And I want to talk 
about what we are doing in post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very proud of the record of this 
government with respect to investments we’ve made into 
advanced education in this province since 2007. Ministers 
before me have done a tremendous job in outlining how much 
of a priority advanced education needs to be at the treasury 
board table and at the cabinet table. And I think it speaks 
volumes. If you look at where this government is spending its 
money, it speaks volumes as to where our priorities lie. 
 
And I know we can get into all kinds of debate whether we’re 
spending enough or should be spending more in a particular 
area versus one area, or whether there’s other ways to provide 
student support services. But the fact of the matter remains, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we can have that debate. We can have that 
debate if the opposition would put forward a plan as to what 
they would like to see with respect to advanced education. 
 
[20:00] 
 
And when I look at our support for our universities, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I look at the amount of funding that is going into 
the universities themselves, and I find it interesting that I hear 
quite often from members opposite that the government is 
cutting back funding to our universities, the government cuts 
back funding in their operating grants to the universities. And 
yet when I look at the facts, when I look at the numbers, and I 
see since 2007 when government, this government took over in 
November of 2007, that for the University of Saskatchewan, 
funding is up 65 per cent from 2007 till today. At the University 
of Regina, funding is up some 40 per cent from 2007 to today. 
 
Enrolments at those two respective universities, Mr. Speaker, 
are around 10 per cent. I think they’re about 12 per cent for 
University of Regina and about 9 per cent for University of 
Saskatchewan, numbers in there. And then I look at the CPI, the 
consumer price index, or the rate of inflation over those last 
seven years, and on a compounded rate of return with respect to 
the inflation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s about 14 per cent. So 
now if you look at how we have enrolments going up around 10 
to 12 per cent — we’ll say 12 at the high end — inflation’s 
running compounded over those seven years at about 14 per 
cent, and yet the level of funding on average is up almost 58 per 
cent in total for those two universities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
don’t think even the member from Regina Lakeview could pull 
out that big old calculator they used in the 2011 campaign, put 
in all those numbers, and come up with a cut to the 
post-secondary system with respect to our universities, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And we will continue to do that. We will 
continue to support our universities in this particular province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In the Throne Speech itself, there were a couple of issues that 
we dealt with that laid out specifics with respect to things we 
want to accomplish here in the fall session and as we move into 
the ’15-16 budget. When I was first appointed Minister of 
Advanced Education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the 
opportunity to go out and visit a number of our post-secondary 
educational institutions. And I took the opportunity to go 
around the province and visit different campus sites of our 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5577 

regional college system. 
 
We have Northlands College up in La Ronge in northern 
Saskatchewan; Cumberland College, I visited the campus site in 
Nipawin; Carlton Trail. We have Great Plains down in the Swift 
Current area. The seven different regional colleges throughout 
the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the opportunity to visit 
every single one of them, meet with their presidents and meet 
with their board Chairs. 
 
And one of the things that was made clear to me was that they 
had some difficulty, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with their Internet 
bandwidth, attaching all these different campus sites they had 
within their respective regional college region. And so some of 
their techie people sat down with me and asked if there was 
some possibility that the government could look at increasing 
the bandwidth that we would have go into these different 
campus sites so it would enable them to do things like video 
conferencing capabilities between campuses, where they could 
live stream classes much easier. For example, from La Ronge to 
Buffalo Narrows, Creighton, and Ile-a-la-Crosse they could 
have these different live streams feeding into these different 
campus sites from a central location in Northlands College in 
La Ronge. You could increase the number of students who 
could receive individualized online adult basic education 
instruction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You could also increase the mining and trades education with 
easier access to online information. In other words the 
information that came into these colleges would be more easily 
accessed and could be more sped up, is what I’m trying to say 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to the amount of time it 
takes to download various different types of programs. 
 
So I thought it was a fairly reasonable request and I came back 
and had discussions with my officials and had discussions with 
SaskTel officials to see if there was some way that we could do 
what we did on a similar basis with our K to 12 schools across 
the province. And I’m told for, you know, there’s some dollars 
involved that we were able to find here in my budget during the 
course of this particular fiscal year, and then ongoing years 
further out, where we could take any of those colleges, those 
campus sites that had less than 100 megabits per second and 
upgrade that to 100. And any of those who were over 100 
megabits per second, upgrade that to 1 gigabyte per second or 
1000 megabits per second. 
 
We said that we were going to look at doing that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that’s exactly what we did. We announced that in 
the Throne Speech. Now this isn’t some big, splashy program 
that governments, you know, we always like to announce and 
those kinds of things, but it’s the small incremental steps that 
helps our education, our post-secondary education system 
deliver the programs that they’re mandated to do. It provides 
more accessibility for the students out in those areas that are not 
downtown Regina or downtown Saskatoon to access programs, 
to perhaps complete their grade 12 education, adult basic 
education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that might take them out of a 
cycle of poverty or a cycle of unemployment and put them into 
the workforce, put them into a situation contributing to the 
economy of Saskatchewan or perhaps allows them to go on to 
another program in post-secondary education and obtain a 
degree. And I think that’s the kind of thing, these are the kind of 

small steps we can do very easily, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’d 
be surprised if the opposition didn’t recognize the value in that, 
and I’d be surprised why they wouldn’t want to vote in favour 
of this kind of program within the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
One of the other things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m quite 
proud of is our support for having Aboriginal students get into 
post-secondary education. And there are a variety of means of 
that happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m told at the University 
of Regina they released some figures here not that long ago, 
that since 2009, the last five years, Aboriginal — these are 
self-declared Aboriginal individuals, self-declared — enrolment 
is up some 50 per cent in the last five years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m also told at the University of Saskatchewan that 
Aboriginal enrolment year over year is around 10 or 11 per cent 
increased over last year. I think these are terrific numbers. 
 
I had the opportunity also to go out and visit with the president 
of the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, Mr. Riel 
Bellegarde. And he tells me that enrolment is up considerably at 
that institution as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I had the chance when I was first put in this position, I think the 
very first event I attended after the swearing-in at cabinet in this 
role, was the graduation ceremony in June at the Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies. And I know that the Minister 
of Education was there, and the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone was there, along with some federal representatives. 
And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it was a very 
moving ceremony. There’s quite a bit of pomp and 
circumstance associated with that graduation ceremony too, 
with a smudge ceremony, and they drum you in. To see some of 
the cultural outfits or costumes or dress, I should say, that some 
of the students wear representing their First Nation and to have 
their families in the audience so proud, taking pictures and 
whooping and hollering and enjoying the afternoon with respect 
to that graduation, it was a very worthwhile event to attend and 
I quite enjoyed it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think it speaks to 
how this government is focusing in on increasing enrolment in 
post-secondary education for the Aboriginal students. 
 
We know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that since 2008 there’s been a 
25 per cent increase in the number of First Nations and Métis 
people in Saskatchewan who have attained a post-secondary 
certificate, diploma, or degree. And the number earning a 
university degree has jumped some 40 per cent since 2008. 
 
We know that there’s still much work to do to close the 
education and employment gaps between First Nations and 
Métis people and non-Aboriginal population, but we are seeing 
steady progress, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we also know that 
when First Nations and Métis students, families, workers, 
employers, and communities succeed by obtaining 
post-secondary educational credit, we all succeed, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s going to be something that we will continue to 
focus on in finding opportunities, whether it’s at First Nations 
University of Canada, whether it’s through SIIT, through DTI 
[Dumont Technical Institute], Gabriel Dumont Institute, or at 
our two universities, we will continue to look for opportunities 
to provide accessibility for our Aboriginal population in 
obtaining post-secondary education, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



5578 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

The last one I just want to talk on is the Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology, SIAST, or what was 
formerly known as SIAST. It is now known as Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic. I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is a 
transformational change for this particular training institution. 
This puts it on level with other polytechnics across Canada. I 
think it’s one of 11 now polytechnics in Canada. It will be an 
employer-driven, student-focused institution. And Dr. Larry 
Rosia there, the president and CEO of Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic, has a grand vision for where he wants to take that 
institution, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think it elevates the level of post-secondary education in 
this province. It takes us to a new level. It allows us to compete 
with not only other provinces, but indeed other countries in 
attracting students and faculty to the province of Saskatchewan 
for skilled trades and technology type training, as well as 
offering now degrees, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s something else 
we talked about in the Throne Speech, that we want to see more 
opportunities for degrees being awarded in this province 
through our degree authorization process. 
 
Ministers previous to me have established the Saskatchewan 
Higher Education Quality Assurance Board, which for the first 
time in the history of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, allows 
an arm’s-length body outside of government that has 
academically qualified individuals take a look at programs that 
different institutions want to offer with respect to degrees here 
in the province of Saskatchewan, outside of our universities. 
And I think that’s good. I think that’s a good opportunity, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for these institutions in the province, other 
than universities, to take a look at opportunities to offer 
degrees. Why? Because it provides more accessibility for our 
students, not only students from Saskatchewan, but students 
indeed who come from outside the province of Saskatchewan 
and indeed international students. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to finish off by talking a little 
bit on the SaskTel side and what we’re doing with respect to 
increase support into rural Saskatchewan. If I could just find my 
notes here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the SaskTel increases. Here 
we are, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Colleague from Indian Head-Wolseley was thinking I would 
never find the documents, but I just . . . Because I want to get 
the numbers straight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and just some of the 
things that our government has been doing since 2007 in 
expanding not only cell coverage but Internet coverage 
throughout the entire province. And is there more work to be 
done? There absolutely is more work to be done, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We acknowledge that. I certainly acknowledge that as 
Minister Responsible for SaskTel. But what I can tell you is that 
we have made a commitment, not only to our urban centres in 
the province but certainly to the rural locations in the province 
of Saskatchewan with our SaskTel rural strategy. 
 
Some 54 communities that previously could not access 
high-speed Internet will receive that in this coming year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We have expanded or improved high-speed 
service to 318 communities in the province of Saskatchewan 
since 2007 and SaskTel is also improving existing service by 
doubling the available Internet speed in 220 rural communities, 
and that will be complete by the end of 2014. 
 

So as I spoke earlier today on the CommunityNet service with 
respect to the schools in the province, some 500 schools. It 
allows for doubling download speeds for primary schools and 
increasing by up to 10 times for secondary schools. And it’s 
being rolled out to First Nations schools as we talked about 
earlier today. And as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reference I 
made earlier about the upgrade of Internet access to our regional 
college system I think is incredibly important for taking those 
college campuses to the next level with respect to 
interconnectedness. And improving cellphone capacity in 111 
different rural communities by adding more spectrum to their 
wireless 4G towers, resulting in an increase of 100 per cent in 
voice and data capacity. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that it’s not perfect 
throughout the entire province, but SaskTel is in a very 
competitive environment with respect to competing with the big 
three, Rogers, Bell, and Telus. We are the only company in the 
province of Saskatchewan that’s adding infrastructure to rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I would just point that 
out to the citizens of this province that when you are a SaskTel 
customer, you are investing back into your telco 
[telecommunications company] that is providing infrastructure 
into rural Saskatchewan, both on the cell side and Internet side. 
And I think that’s incredibly important, and we will continue to 
do that as we outlined in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So those are a couple of areas I just wanted to touch on in my 
response to the Speech from the Throne. Again I want to thank 
the good citizens, the good constituents of Regina Northeast for 
allowing me this privilege and this opportunity to have 
experience standing up in this Chamber and representing their 
interests here. And I look forward to continue doing that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. With that, I’m going to close by saying I will 
be supporting the Throne Speech and not the amendment from 
the opposition. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a pleasure 
for me to rise in this Assembly this evening and respond to the 
Throne Speech delivered by Her Honour last Wednesday. 
Before I do get to my comments on the Throne Speech, there 
are comments that I, like many of my colleagues, would like to 
make. 
 
And first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to offer my 
condolences to the families of the two soldiers, Corporal Cirillo 
and Warrant Officer Vincent, who lost their lives in such a 
cowardly act of violence last week. I, like many others I’m sure, 
that when I thought something like this could never happen in 
our Canada, something so senseless as this. But I want to thank 
all those who put themselves in harm’s way to protect the 
citizens of this great country. 
 
I would like to thank those who were at the legislature last 
Wednesday and since: the RCMP; the Regina Police Service; 
the military; our Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw; and of course 
the entire security unit here at the legislature. It was comforting 
to witness the degree of protection this building provided for 
those who work here and those who are visiting here.  



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5579 

Last Wednesday’s events are proof that freedom is not free. As 
we approach Remembrance Day, I want to thank those who 
have served and continue to serve our country. And we should 
not remember them just on November 11th, but every day of 
the year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just this morning I attended the ceremony for 
the military heritage project that was held in the rotunda. And it 
included a video of a World War II veteran from Saskatchewan 
who, along with others, was introduced during routine 
proceedings today. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this veteran, Mr. 
Harrison, 93 years old, and he spoke to those gathered and said 
that this was his first time in this Legislative Building, 
something that just truly amazed me. And as he was saying that, 
I was just so touched to think that I come in here every day and 
take, just take the security, the safety, the freedom for granted. 
And this gentleman who fought for the freedom I enjoy, that 
was his first time in this building. 
 
[20:15] 
 
I just encourage everyone . . . It showed a short clip of a video 
that he had made, and these videos are Stories of Courage. And 
it was very interesting. I could have sat there all afternoon and 
watched it. But I would encourage anyone who has the 
opportunity to take advantage of them and watch them as you 
hear their recollections of the war. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a few thank yous that I must make. I 
must thank my family for all they do for me. My son Terry, he 
farms my land and farms his own land as well as holds down a 
full-time job. My daughter Trish, she helps keep checking my 
home, and in the summertime, she’ll be out there to help me cut 
my grass. My yard is 5 acres, so it keeps me going. The older I 
get it seems like the longer it takes. And she also holds down a 
full-time job. And they are great kids.  
 
My grandkids, they’ve grown up on me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Beau is going to be 20, and he’s in the process of enlisting in 
the air force. And I would like to take a moment just to thank 
the member from Wood River for the guidance that he’s given 
to Beau. Shelby, the next oldest, he is sixteen and a half, in 
grade 11 at the Estevan Comprehensive School. Bailee is 
almost 16 and she’s in grade 10 at Midale high school, and 
Tristan is 14 and he is in grade 9 also at the Estevan 
Comprehensive School. 
 
Of course my mom, she lives in Estevan in Trinity Tower, and 
she’s now in her late 80s. She’s in great health and she’s . . . I 
have a lot to thank her for, Mr. Speaker, and if I ever step out of 
line and say something that is untoward, it certainly isn’t 
because I was raised that way. Mom and dad did a good job. 
They had . . . I have seven siblings and, you know, they worked 
hard, spent a lot of time with us kids, and I’m forever indebted 
to my mom and my dad. Of course my dad is no longer with us. 
And of course my siblings, they are all very supportive of me. 
And I know I shouldn’t single out any one of them, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’m going to mention my sister Edna who visits 
this legislature many, many times, and I would just like to let 
her and her husband, Lawrence, know that my thoughts and 
prayers are with her and her family as they are dealing with 
some serious health issues in their family right now. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my constituency assistants. 
Rosalie Story, who has been my constituency assistant for, 
gosh, I think it must be close to seven years now, and Rosalie is 
away on maternity leave. Her and her husband, Jared Story, had 
a little baby girl in August. Little Ava was born, and she’s just 
the sweetest little thing. But I’m also very lucky to have Wilma 
Bjorndalen and Susan Colbow who are handling the office, and 
very capably I must add. And last but certainly not least, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the people of the Estevan constituency whom I 
have had the honour of serving since 1999. 
 
And speaking of my constituency, Mr. Speaker, earlier this 
month the Premier, Minister of SaskPower, Minister of 
Environment, several of my colleagues and I attended the grand 
opening of the carbon capture and sequestration unit at the 
Boundary dam power station. And I will go into that, more 
detail on that a little later on in my comments, but what a 
historic day that was in my constituency. 
 
Estevan is also home to the Energy Training Institute and I’m 
proud to say that the Minister of Advanced Education visited 
that facility just a short while ago, and what a state-of-the-art 
training facility it is, Mr. Speaker. Offers training to many 
avenues of the oil industry and as well as other industries in our 
province, and this facility operates under the umbrella of the 
Southeast Regional College. 
 
Estevan is home to another state-of-the-art facility as well and 
that’s the Spectra Place events centre which serves as a home 
for the Estevan Bruins hockey team, many well-known 
entertainers that perform there, as well as trade shows are 
hosted there. 
 
Estevan has also been approved to house a CT [computerized 
tomography] scan at St. Joseph’s Hospital. Fundraising is well 
on its way and I think about three-quarters of the required $2 
million have been raised at this point. Fundraising is also under 
way for a new nursing home in Estevan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And of course with the province funding 80 per cent of the 
capital cost rather than only 65 per cent as was funded in the 
days of the NDP government, it makes it much easier for 
communities to fundraise for important projects such as these. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Estevan has been chosen to host the 2016 
Saskatchewan Summer Games. The committee is working very 
hard on that, and just recently, office space has been donated for 
the duration of the time needed to organize these games and for 
everything that has to be done regarding the games. Dr. Doug 
Blue, a retired dentist, donated the use of the building that 
housed his dental office pre-retirement, generously donated this. 
So on behalf of many of the people of the Estevan constituency, 
I thank him. And Dr. Blue is a prime example of the generous 
people of the Estevan community. And these are people who 
step up to the plate and do what needs to be done. They 
volunteer, and I’m just so proud of every one of them. 
 
And a prime example of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the 
United Way Telethon that took place in Estevan about 10 days 
ago, and this is a 35-hour telethon that takes place every year. 
And they had a goal this year of $340,000. They exceeded it, 
raising $347,000, making them the first in Canada to reach their 
goal. And the Estevan United Way has been the first to reach its 
goal 38 out of the last 40 years. So that is really something that 



5580 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

I am proud of and they should be very proud of, and I thank all 
the volunteers that made that organization a success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of the Throne Speech. I am proud 
of our government and I am very proud of our province — a 
province that has a balanced budget. A province that recently 
received a credit upgrading by Moody’s to AAA, their highest 
rating possible. A province that hit a record high employment in 
June with 577,000 people working here. A province that in July 
hit a record low unemployment level of 3.2 per cent, the lowest 
unemployment rate ever recorded, and in September the lowest 
unemployment rate and the fastest rate of job creation in the 
nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a province that now has a population of 
1.125 million people. And this, every time I hear this figure or a 
figure over the million people, it always reminds me of the 
former member from Regina Wascana Plains, Doreen 
Hamilton, who said it was statistically impossible to increase 
our population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve only been here for a short time but, you 
know, it’s the doom and gloom on the other side. It never ends. 
The NDP are never happy, and I just cannot imagine living with 
such pessimism. I know their job is to oppose, but their job is 
also to propose. They are so caught up in the old NDP socialist 
ideology that if anyone other than the negative nine over there 
has an idea, they automatically reject it. It’s only a good plan if 
they come up with it. But here’s the problem — they don’t have 
any new, reasonable ideas, no reasonable proposals. They think 
they should be government. The last time they came up with 
any ideas was the tree book, which was authored by the present 
Leader of the Opposition, and it was so over the top that the 
people of this province soundly rejected it. $5 billion of 
additional spending. That’s on top of the budgets that ministries 
now have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was listening to the member from Athabasca 
deliver his response. His speech has had the same content since 
we formed government in ’07, so I guess he has a pretty good 
memory. Perhaps a bit selective. And this may surprise you a 
little bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I’m going to agree with his 
colleague, the member from Regina Rosemont, on this one 
occasion only, and that’s when that member says that the 
member from Athabasca isn’t very good at math. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca keeps 
saying how we inherited a $2 billion surplus from them. Then 
when asked why they didn’t implement programs or build 
infrastructure, he says they didn’t have the money. Well either 
they had it or they didn’t. You can’t have it both ways, but the 
member from Athabasca just can’t get that through his head. 
 
This government, under the very capable leadership of the 
member from Swift Current, has invested and continues to 
invest record amounts in capital projects. When I was first 
elected in 1999, the city of Estevan approached me in regards to 
a truck route around the city. That request was ignored by the 
government of the day, the NDP. Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud 
to say that the truck route is under construction, completion 
expected in the summer of 2015. 
 
The twinning of Highway 6 and 39 was also talked about back 

then. Under this government, it has been announced and is in 
the pre-planning stages. 
 
The Marian Health Centre in Radville was another long-needed 
facility. The NDP ignored this need. In fact they were closing 
long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker. Under the Sask Party 
government, the new Marian Health Centre and long-term care 
centre is open and the residents moved in during the summer. 
And the hospital is serving that community under the very 
capable leadership of Dr. O. and Dr. Helms. And I am sure that 
they are very, very happy with their new facility. A grand 
opening is scheduled sometime in the very near future. 
 
The carbon capture and storage unit at Boundary dam power 
station, first in the world. Mr. Speaker, again I remember just 
months before the ’07 election, the government of the day, the 
NDP, in fact it was when the member from Regina Lakeview 
was minister of SaskPower, announced a $3.5 billion power 
station, Shand 2. They announced it. People were all very 
excited. Then in the dying days of their government, they 
cancelled it. They got everyone’s hopes up and then crashed 
them, which was pretty typical. Officially I don’t know why 
they cancelled it. I do have some ideas of my own though. 
 
The Sask Party government invested in the carbon capture and 
storage, making it the first commercial power plant in the world 
with a fully integrated post-combustion carbon capture system. 
The captured carbon dioxide is stored for use in oil recovery, 
and it’s equivalent to taking more than 250,000 vehicles off 
Saskatchewan roads each year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I must add that at the peak of the 
construction of that carbon capture and storage facility there 
was 1,700 workers there and there was no time lost to accidents. 
So that’s something that the employees out there can be very, 
very proud of. 
 
This government also invested in the construction of the 
Saskatchewan cyclotron and radioisotope facility at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this lab provides 
researchers with the resources needed to develop 
radiopharmaceuticals. These drugs can be used to detect, 
diagnose, and treat diseases such as cancer, Alzheimer’s, 
Parkinson’s, and multiple sclerosis. And this is imperative, Mr. 
Speaker, as I don’t think there is one person in this Chamber 
who hasn’t been touched or had a family member or friend, 
someone close to them that’s been touched by at least one of 
these diseases. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also invested in schools in our seven 
years as a government, more than $700 million. That’s a 268 
per cent increase. Forty new schools have been built or are in 
the planning stages — a far cry from the NDP’s record of 
closing 176 schools. 
 
[20:30] 
 
This government has significantly increased the benefits under 
the seniors’ income plan and personal care home benefits 
program. In 2014-15 we will nearly triple the benefits our 
seniors receive under the seniors’ income program, or SIP 
[seniors’ income plan]. In their 16 years as government, the 
NDP never once increased the benefits. And that’s shameful, 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5581 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, absolutely shameful. Not only has our 
government nearly tripled the benefits of SIP, we’ve nearly 
doubled the number of seniors eligible for that program. We’ve 
also created the personal care home benefit, with benefits of up 
to $4,400 per year for those that qualify. And with our historical 
tax changes, low-income seniors have $700 more in their 
pocket than they did under the NDP. We have also invested $34 
million for 420 new seniors’ housing units across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also find it very interesting that the NDP 
opposition has developed an interest in agriculture. Boy, their 
16-year reign in this province, I don’t think the farmers will 
ever forget the ag policies of the NDP. We had tax revolts. We 
had sit-ins at the legislature. And I can also remember, I think it 
was at the same time we had the sit-in at the legislature that 
they had the doors chained where the members were barricaded 
inside this building. They were chained from the outside, Mr. 
Speaker. And it was people that were so fed up with the NDP’s 
ag policies. And of course, that was under the leadership I guess 
of Dwain Lingenfelter. The only ag policy they had in the ’70s 
was the land bank, and thank goodness that that all changed in 
the ’80s or we’d have state-run farms in this province and that 
would be very, very sad. Today we have a strong agriculture 
sector, contributing $4.5 billion to Saskatchewan’s gross 
domestic product and sustaining 50,000 direct and indirect jobs. 
 
In the coming weeks, Saskatchewan will host a New West 
Partnership transportation and market access summit to discuss 
long-term improvements to Western Canada’s transportation 
system. 
 
Because producers are reliant on technology, SaskTel’s rural 
strategy will see the expansion of high-speed Internet into 
another 54 communities by the end of the year. As well, 
SaskTel is doubling the available Internet speed into 120 rural 
communities and improving cellphone service in 111 rural 
communities by adding more capacity to its 4G network. And 
this is in addition to the 318 rural communities that have 
already received improved Internet service and upgrades to 
cellular service in more than 500 locations since we formed 
government in 2007. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on. There’s things that I would 
like to say regarding advanced education, regarding social 
services, housing. And I guess I will just add that in housing, 
when I read about the need for housing, I remember the debate 
during the last election. It was the televised debate that the 
chamber of commerce sponsors every election in Estevan. And 
when we were asked questions up there, and one of them was 
regarding housing: what is the Sask Party government, if we 
form government, what are we going to do regarding housing? 
How are we going to deal with the challenges by all these 
people moving in here and needing housing? So I answered it 
and what our policy was. And a gentleman got up on the floor, 
and he said, I know one way to solve housing in Saskatchewan. 
And everybody kind of looked and we thought we were going 
to really hear something. He says, elect an NDP government 
because there’ll be lots of houses because everybody will leave 
this province in droves again. And I think he was bang on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are others that would like to speak. 
And I’m very thankful to have this opportunity to speak in this 
honourable Assembly this evening. I was sick with the flu 

yesterday, and just thankful that my voice held up today. And I 
guess it was the Buckley’s Mixture I took that did it, and I 
understand you all had a taste of that mixture yesterday here in 
the Chamber.  
 
But I will close by saying how honoured I am to serve under the 
leadership of this Premier and alongside the group of men and 
women that I serve with, very capable men and women in this 
caucus. And I thank them for being such great colleagues, such 
hard-working people that truly, truly care about the people of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will support the 
main motion. I will not support the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a real pleasure to 
follow the member from sunny Estevan, the member with a 
sunny disposition, although she seems to have been under a rain 
cloud or something tonight because there weren’t a lot of 
positive things that we heard. But, Mr. Speaker, this particular 
Throne Speech presents a whole number of challenges for 
Saskatchewan people. And I will speak to some of those in a 
minute or two, but first off I’m going to say thank you to all of 
the people of Regina Lakeview who have provided me with the 
opportunity to be here in this legislature over five elections. It’s 
been an honour to serve them and I look forward to doing that 
in the future as well. 
 
I also want to thank my wife, Linda, and my daughters Solveig 
and Ingrid for their support over the years, and also my parents 
who live in Regina who are in their 88th year this year and have 
been supportive all the years that I’ve been in the legislature, 
and my wife Linda’s parents who are 90 and 95 and have from 
a distance provided support from out on the West Coast. It’s 
these family people and my extended family across 
Saskatchewan which give me strength to do this job. I also want 
to thank Conni Yakimchuk who works in my constituency 
office, and also Cory Oxelgren, as well as all the staff here at 
the legislature who provide support for much of the work that 
we do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech this time is, as my 
colleague from Saskatoon mentioned earlier today, much of a 
recycled speech. It includes many almost exact phrases from the 
last year and the previous year and others years as to some of 
the initiatives of the government. A Throne Speech is 
something where, a place for the Premier and for the 
government and the government members to set out their vision 
for where we’re going. 
 
But I have had the pleasure — I guess, if I can put that in quotes 
— of listening to virtually all of the speeches that have been 
made by government members. And it’s amazing how much of 
their speech goes back, back, back, some even this afternoon, 
back to the ’40s and ’50s, but many times back over the last 20 
or 30 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what the people of Saskatchewan want is a 
Throne Speech and members who are looking forward to tell us 
where and what is going to happen with this province. What we 
know is, we’ve had 10 years of absolutely amazing economic 
activity in the province of Saskatchewan. And the question 



5582 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

becomes how have we used these gifts, these talents — if we 
use the Biblical terms — and are we accountable to the people 
of Saskatchewan for how we’ve used these gifts. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think there are a number of challenges 
because this Throne Speech ignores many of the needs of 
ordinary people. It doesn’t really talk about health care, which 
is always the number one issue for the people of Saskatchewan. 
It doesn’t really talk about education. It doesn’t deal with the 
fact that the economy seems to be going well, business people 
talk about things going well on sort of an upper level, but a lot 
of people are having a hard time paying their day-to-day 
expenses. And they’re starting to worry, when they look at 
broader world indications, whether it’s the value of the 
Canadian dollar or whether it’s the price of a barrel of oil — 
which we know affects our economy — or the price of potash, 
or the price of wheat. 
 
We know that last year we had just an absolutely amazing year 
in agriculture, which hasn’t been matched this year. And we 
don’t yet know what the consequences of that is going to be for 
our economy and for our day-to-day living. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s that sense of uneasiness that I think we all need to talk about 
when we’re here in this legislature. We need to connect with 
those people who are concerned about what’s going to happen 
for them in their families, what’s going to happen with them in 
their small businesses, and how are we going to make their life 
better. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that the government and the 
Premier like big ideas, big plans, doing things. We know where 
some of these things get them in trouble. We’ve heard about the 
$40 million spent on a big idea around the use of a Japanese 
motor company’s method of management in a people business, 
in health care. And we know how that has disconnected. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m a person who reads widely, but one of 
the magazines I look at monthly is the Harvard Business 
Review. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite often that there are lessons 
in the Harvard Business Review that are important for us in 
Saskatchewan. And in May this year they had an article which 
was called “Beware the Next Big Thing.” And then it says, 
before you adopt a new management idea, figure out if it’s right 
for you. And, Mr. Speaker, it goes then to examine where do 
new management practices come from, and it basically says that 
they come from companies or institutions or organizations 
trying out new ideas to see how they’ll work in their 
organizations. And as we all know, there are fads that develop 
and things that are used. Now unfortunately, it seems as if the 
Premier and the government have basically gone whole hog into 
a whole scheme around our health care system which has not 
connected. They haven’t figured out if it’s right for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And every day now, and we’ve heard about it last spring, but 
also over the last number of months, we hear both the Premier 
and the Minister of Health say one time, well we’re going to 
adapt it for Saskatchewan; next time, no, we’re going to stick 
with this big idea, this big plan. And, Mr. Speaker, I think one 
thing that Saskatchewan people generally have as a 
characteristic is that they are skeptical of that big plan or that 
next big thing because they’ve seen too many of them crash. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we think from this side of the House that the 
government is stuck in thinking, without really listening to 
people, on this whole issue of the use of the Japanese 
management model. And what we know is that there doesn’t 
appear to be listening to, clearly, the opposition. They don’t 
listen to the front-line workers. We’ve now had some pretty 
clear confirmation they don’t listen to the senior management. 
And now we see some of those senior management are being 
slowly but surely pushed out of the system. 
 
We saw the deputy minister of Health, Mr. Florizone, be moved 
out of Health. We’ve now seen the president of the Saskatoon 
Health Region, Maura Davies, be pushed out. I think today I 
heard that the head of the Health Quality Council, which was 
the main sort of lean person in many ways, has moved out of 
government completely. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what’s 
happening, but I think that this top-down, driven ideological 
plan is starting to shatter a lot of the management at the top 
level. 
 
[20:45] 
 
What we all know and what I have heard on a regular basis is 
that the front-line people are wondering what the message is. 
Where are we going? What are we going to do? And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that that whole plan, that whole way of 
organizing the system has lost its centre and has lost any 
strength that came from a new idea. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time for the Premier to say this was 
a mistake, and let’s try and get out of it with the least amount of 
cost to the people of Saskatchewan. I think if he had the 
courage to do that, rather than the blustering that we saw today 
in question period, I think we might end up actually maybe 
retrieving some value out of some of the ideas. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s when people proceed without listening that real 
problems arise. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, going on my quest, looking at Harvard 
Business Review last fall, there was an article that was written 
by a CEO of many companies. He’d been 35 years advising 
various boards. The guy’s name who had written this article, or 
basically it’s an interview, was named Ram Charan. And the 
head of the article is “You Can’t Be a Wimp — Make the 
Tough Calls.” Mr. Speaker, in that interview and in that 
question, based on his advising companies over many, many 
decades, he said, “Listening isn’t just hearing; it requires the 
willingness to entertain other viewpoints — especially opposing 
ones.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the listening part of managing 
our province has suffered in the last while because the Premier 
and the government have been so convinced of how correct they 
are in what they’re doing that they’ve lost sight of the fact that 
it’s how it affects people on a local basis. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have the words. We have talk about 
patient first. We have talk about some of these things, but we 
don’t have the connection. And it’s some of the interviewing of 
staff that has taken place across the health regions of the 
province that indicates how disconnected the overall strategy 
from the minister and from the Premier is to how the services 
are being provided to people in the province. And so, Mr. 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5583 

Speaker, when you forget how or maybe you don’t know how 
to listen, you can’t then manage what’s going on in your 
operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when people’s needs are being ignored, when 
people are feeling like they’re not part of it, of the whole 
society, when they feel like they’re disconnected from the 
economy because so much of what seems to happen in the 
public sphere doesn’t affect them at home, there are all kinds of 
consequences for what happens in elections and in other 
decisions that are made. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s also an article this last summer in the 
summer edition of the Harvard Business Review where it has an 
article on “Becoming a First-Class Noticer.” This is kind of a 
more sophisticated version of listening, but it’s basically an 
article by a professor at Harvard who says you need to have an 
organization that’s operating where they notice and listen to 
what people say. And it’s when you have that type of an 
organization you end up picking up the signals when things go 
wrong. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a number of examples, whether 
it’s the smart meter issue or whether it’s some of the lean issues 
or whether it’s some of the other issues around some of the 
activities of the government where warnings are given. There’s 
issues that come up, but the senior people don’t notice. They 
don’t listen. They don’t observe. And what happens? Well 
people are hurt. I mean houses are burned. People end up 
having trouble. And then you end up with a situation where 
somebody has to be the scapegoat, somebody has to take some 
of the blame. So yesterday we have the president of SaskPower 
step down kind of as a scapegoat. 
 
But I noticed tonight over the dinner hour that one of the online 
polls from one of the media stations asked whether the Minister 
of SaskPower should resign. I think the number was pushing 70 
per cent of the people who responded saying, it’s not enough 
just to have the bureaucrat, the president of SaskPower leave. 
There also has to be some consequences for those people who 
have the power in the government. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that’s the kind of noticing or that’s the kind of listening that 
needs to take place in this government as it moves forward. 
When it doesn’t do that, then it becomes more and more distant 
from the people and from what’s good for the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another area where there is some quite 
interesting media, what happened in the summer, in July, there 
was an article in The StarPhoenix about the Parkridge Centre in 
Saskatoon. And I took a special notice of this article because its 
headline, “Decrepit Parkridge was public-private partnership.” 
And this article on July 12 in The StarPhoenix then talks about 
the Parkridge long-term care home. Leading sentences quote: 
“A leaking, mouldy Saskatoon long-term care home built in the 
1980s using a public-private partnership model now needs up to 
$19 million in critical repairs.” I noticed this because when I 
was the Minister of Health, we had to deal with a similar 
mouldy operation out in Wolseley that ended up costing a lot of 
money in the process of getting fixed. And eventually, I think, it 
was purchased by the province. 
 
And what’s happened in this case in Saskatoon, Parkridge has 
kind of reached the end of its life in a lot of ways but the 

government is stuck buying it and then fixing it. And what’s 
particularly telling in the article is that: 
 

Engineers and architects warned the Grant Devine 
government in the 1980s that the arrangement used to 
build Parkridge Centre could lead to piecemeal, unsafe 
construction of the long-term facility. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, almost the same day down in Swift Current 
— actually it was July 20th so a week later in Swift — on July 
20th, 2014, this summer, there’s an announcement of a 
public-private partnership specialist, Plenary Group, has been 
selected to partner with the Cypress Health Authority to build a 
long-term care facility. And the article goes on to say: 
 

The contract’s financial details and the final value for 
money analysis will be disclosed once contract 
negotiations and signing are complete. 
 
Signatures are expected to hit paper in September. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the government is entering into a similar kind 
of arrangement, probably about 30 years later, as to the kinds of 
things that were going on in the 1980s. And that particular 
article has a big picture of the Premier right beside it. 
 
When you go and ask, well who’s the Plenary Group, well it’s a 
group based in Melbourne, Australia. They operate public 
infrastructure projects in Australia, southeast Asia, and North 
America. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, once again it’s an operation or a plan that 
kind of takes the ownership and the management of an 
important facility for the people of Swift Current. It’s 
something that’s been in the planning for a long time and it’s 
something that’s needed down there, but it’s done in a way that 
takes it out of the local control and ends up using a model that 
had some longer term problems from a previous generation. 
 
Now I think that the Premier acknowledges that he learned 
quite a few things during the ’80s when he worked in the 
government, both good and bad. But I would say that this whole 
emphasis that the government has had on using public-private 
partnerships to build things which are important for 
Saskatchewan people has missed the point. Once again they’re 
not listening to the contractors. They’re not listening to the 
people who are our construction specialists. They’re not 
listening to our architects. They’re not listening to our engineers 
who say, we can build those things; we know how to build 
projects in Saskatchewan, and we’re quite willing to do that. 
Why is it that you lump nine schools together so you . . . 
There’s very few organizations on this Earth that actually can 
build some of these big kinds of operations, and it cuts out some 
of the local people. Mr. Speaker, once again, it’s that tin ear. 
It’s a lack of listening that affects what the government is 
doing. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re in an interesting time. I know that 
after you’ve been through a number of different elections 
through different provinces, looked and observed, you have 
concerns about how the public makes up their minds about who 
are the right kinds of people to be the leaders in their 
community. And, Mr. Speaker, the historiography that’s 



5584 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

provided by members opposite, which is a constantly changing 
number of stories about how this province was built, has 
provided some I think very difficult perspectives for people to 
make some choices. But what we do know is if the government 
doesn’t listen to what people are saying, if it doesn’t listen to 
the leaders in the local community, that there’s going to be 
problems in the longer term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this whole area of basically pushing the 
financing of our schools onto our children and our 
grandchildren, pushing the financing of many of our highways 
and other roads farther down the road without directly 
acknowledging that these are debts that we’re all incurring is 
going to have drastic consequences for all of us but especially 
for our children and grandchildren, who will be working to try 
to make our province a better place. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am frustrated by the Throne Speech, which 
doesn’t seem to have a lot of life to it. I think it’s pretty 
obvious, when we heard it the other day, that it was a kind of a 
dud almost. I mean it was very quiet in this place. People 
weren’t reacting to it because there wasn’t really anything there 
to get too excited about. And, Mr. Speaker, maybe that was the 
plan. But on the other hand, I think people want a lot more than 
that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m in a position where I can’t vote for this 
Throne Speech. I would like to be excited about a vision for the 
province. I don’t see that it’s here. I would like to know that the 
government and the ministers and the Premier are actually 
listening to the people of Saskatchewan, and I don’t see that as 
well. I think that we’re in for some very difficult times in the 
next five years, and I know that all of us need to be ready to 
respond to that. I’m not sure that the Premier and the 
government are. With that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be voting for the 
amendment but not for the main motion. Thank you. 
 
[21:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s a true pleasure for me to rise and enter some comments on 
the Speech from the Throne the other day, at this hour, and I 
should be done here in about 45 minutes to an hour. 
 
But more serious, Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to rise on behalf 
of the constituents of Rosthern-Shellbrook, to enter these 
comments, and to serve in this Assembly. And I, as is 
customary with a few thank yous at the outset, I think first and 
foremost I’d like to thank the constituents of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook for giving not only me the opportunity to 
serve here on their behalf but for the interaction that I have each 
and every day that I get to spend in the constituency and in the 
communities there. 
 
I’d also like to thank my constituency assistant Sally Fitch for 
being the eyes and ears and, as I always say, thankfully the face 
of Rosthern-Shellbrook in our office there. And she is gracious 
as people call in, and caring. And I know I appreciate it, and 
I’m sure each of the constituents that she deals with each day 
appreciate it as well. 

My children, Mr. Speaker, I thank them for the sacrifices they 
make to allow me to serve down here. I may think they’re larger 
than they do, but I do thank them for what they do so that I can 
be here for parts of the year. And my wife of course, Mr. 
Speaker, my best friend obviously and someone that has had the 
ability to tolerate me for 21 years, I’m, you know, just 
absolutely thankful and I’m the luckiest guy around to spend 
that much time with such a great lady. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with this Speech from the Throne . . . And the 
theme of the speech is keeping Saskatchewan strong. And you 
know, now with I think there is 5,000 people that moved to 
Saskatchewan in the last recorded quarter here earlier this year, 
brings us up to about 1.12 million people in the province now, 
Mr. Speaker. And I believe Statistics Canada has projected that 
we’d be at 1.5 by the year 2038. 
 
And the Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency is contributing to 
that, Mr. Speaker, with the last census. All of our towns, the 
towns in Rosthern-Shellbrook all experienced growth, Mr. 
Speaker, and a number of years ago that wasn’t just the case. So 
our constituency is absolutely doing its part in the growth of our 
province with regards to population. 
 
There’s a record number of jobs, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan 
of 577,000 people working in the province now. We have the 
lowest unemployment rate in the country at 3.2 per cent, and 
our credit rating has been upgraded to AAA by Moody’s, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And on the note of jobs in Saskatchewan, with a son that’s 
getting close to finishing university and looking to work in the 
community where he grew up, I think he’s going to be 
successful in finding work in his field, Mr. Speaker. And again 
I say just a short number of years ago that might not have been 
possible but it looks hopeful now. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that’s in part due to the bustling economy that we have here in 
the province. 
 
There is growth in our province of Saskatchewan, and many 
people have experienced that benefit of that, the benefits from 
that growth. We always know that there’s more work to do 
when it comes to ensuring that all residents of Saskatchewan 
have a high quality of life, and we do not want growth just 
strictly for the sake of growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we have . . . release our Throne Speech or 
our budget speech or all of the decisions we make in 
government really are rungs in the ladder, Mr. Speaker, if you 
will, for the growth plan that we released a couple years ago. 
The growth plan was announced in the fall of 2012. It’s had 
some progress reports since then, Mr. Speaker, but it was a 
vision for the province of Saskatchewan, and it continues to be 
our government’s guiding document. The growth plan I might 
add was not just a bunch of targets and goals for Saskatchewan 
that was put together for the year 2020, but it was one that was 
consulted on with Saskatchewan people and put together by the 
opinions and by the views of Saskatchewan people on where 
they saw their province in the year 2020. 
 
One growth target that I always like to talk about was the target 
to double exports in the province by the year 2020. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the Speech from the Throne the other day has some 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5585 

tidbits in there to address that in the way of new-growth tax 
incentives to expand export sales, Mr. Speaker, and new-growth 
tax incentives to create new corporate and head office jobs here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is that an incentive and a revenue-neutral 
incentive to spur added exports from the province of 
Saskatchewan but to add value to the exports that we already 
have, Mr. Speaker. Nowhere can this be more evident than in 
the industry of agriculture, Mr. Speaker. When we value-add 
our agricultural products, really what we end up doing is adding 
a tremendous amount of value to an already raw product that 
we’re exporting. And so not only does it add exports, Mr. 
Speaker, when you do new-growth tax incentives like this, but 
it adds value to the exports that we already have. And it adds 
jobs. It adds jobs and careers, Mr. Speaker, to our province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I remember last legislative session, the signing of the 
comprehensive European free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker, 
CETA [Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and 
Trade Agreement], and I believe we had a debate on that in this 
House. And again, Mr. Speaker, as that deal progresses, we 
look forward to that deal being beneficial for the exports of 
Saskatchewan and, combined with value-added products in 
agriculture and other industries, we look forward to it adding 
dollar value to the exports of our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of words on infrastructure in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And we’ve heard about a lot of the 
infrastructure projects around the province, including the nine 
joint-use elementary schools, the Regina bypass, for instance. 
The Saskatchewan Hospital in my colleague’s riding from 
North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, is a hospital for all of 
Saskatchewan, just a couple of miles out of the riding of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook — a significant investment, one that’s 
been asked for for a number of years, Mr. Speaker, and it’s this 
government that’s getting that done. As well, a partnership with 
bridges in the city of Saskatoon, and that committed partnership 
in the city of Prince Albert, if we should go there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what we’re doing as a government is using the tools that are 
available to the Saskatchewan people to move these very much 
needed and very much asked for infrastructure projects ahead, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s what Saskatchewan people want 
their government to do is to find and utilize the tools that are 
available to them so that we can get some of these 
infrastructures on the record and get them going, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A few words with regards to my home constituency, 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, and as I mentioned, we continue to grow. 
And the optimism is very high in our constituency. We’ve 
benefited directly from the growth of our province in both 
private and public sectors, Mr. Speaker. We have more 
tradespeople than we ever have, and they’re all busy and we 
could use some more. But we have more plumbers, more 
electricians, more tradespeople than I can ever remember in my 
40-odd years of life. 
 
We have welding shops opening up, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 
welding shop opening up in a small community that hasn’t seen 
that many buildings built over the last few decades, and they’ve 
had all of a sudden a number of houses and now a business 

setting up in town. The lumberyards are busy, Mr. Speaker. The 
contractors are busy. One of the lumberyards built a new 
building, a significant-sized building. One of the car dealerships 
built a new building, Mr. Speaker, again a significant 
investment. One of the agriculture dealerships built a new 
building, Mr. Speaker. The ag service centres are expanding. 
And primary agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is doing very well, 
whether they’re in the cattle industry, the grain industry, 
whether they’re in the honey industry with apiaries, Mr. 
Speaker, or whether they’re in the pig industry, Mr. Speaker. 
All of agriculture seems to be very strong and doing very well 
and thus the spinoff businesses are doing well. 
 
So Rosthern-Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker, the businesses in 
Rosthern-Shellbrook are doing well. There’s expanding careers, 
expanding opportunities for youth. And as a result of that 
growth in our constituency and across the province, the 
government, our government has been able to make a number 
of investments that directly benefit the constituents of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. And I would like to point to municipal 
revenue sharing. We have the community of Rosthern in 2015 
is up 140 per cent, Mr. Speaker, over ’07; Spiritwood, up 119 
per cent; and the community where I live, Shellbrook, up 158 
per cent, money transferred to our municipalities. 
 
The community rink affordability grant, Mr. Speaker, not a lot 
of money to each ice surface in the community — I think it’s 
$2,500 — but it’s greatly appreciated. And in particular, Mr. 
Speaker, some of those facilities are running tight on their 
budget, and any money that is donated or given to them, you 
know, comes directly off the costs of the kids that are playing 
hockey and playing sports there, and it’s greatly appreciated by 
the boards that are there. And like I said, it doesn’t seem like a 
lot of money at the outset, the $2,500, but in our constituency 
there’s 16 communities that have applied for the community 
rink affordability grant for a total of 24 ice surfaces, bringing us 
up to about $60,000, Mr. Speaker, just in that grant. And it’s 
one that is greatly appreciated by families, by boards, and by 
volunteers, and by the communities in general, I know. And 
I’ve been approached a number of times on that grant in 
particular. 
 
The Community Initiatives Fund, Mr. Speaker, goes for pride 
events or some construction purposes, and I think no more of 
the Krydor centennial that I attended this summer, a small 
community, Mr. Speaker, that used to be a little larger. They 
used to have three elevators and a number of stores there. And 
through funding from the community initiative grant, they were 
able to put on just a fantastic centennial celebration and a whole 
host of people came back to celebrate there, Mr. Speaker. And I 
can’t think that that may not have been possible without that 
funding through the Community Initiatives Fund. 
 
We’ve had investment in our roads, in our bridges, in our 
culverts, Mr. Speaker. And this last spring in the area of Mont 
Nebo, we had a significant size pothole show up, about 50-foot 
banks, Mr. Speaker. And the culvert gave way, and it washed 
the highway away, and the highway needed to be closed down. 
And I can’t say . . . I cannot commend the Ministry of 
Highways and the contractor enough for the effort that they 
made to get in there and get that fixed in as expedient a time as 
they possibly could, Mr. Speaker. 
 



5586 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2014 

It was a creek that came through. It had backed up a significant 
amount of water, and they were able to get the water through 
and install not only that culvert but where it crossed half a mile 
down the road. And there was a 10-foot by a 100-metre culvert. 
It was a tremendously large job with about 40 feet of overfill. 
And they did not one, not two, but three of those culverts within 
about a 1-mile span, Mr. Speaker, and did it in an expedient job. 
And the people had mentioned they were very thankful for the 
effort that the contractor made and the Ministry of Highways 
made to get them out there in as quick as fashion as they could. 
 
I’d like to speak a little bit about the maintenance on our 
Petrofka bridge, south of Blaine Lake on Highway 12, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a bridge that’s a similar vintage to the one in 
Prince Albert. And they were out this summer and did the 
maintenance that was required on it. It’s a bridge that most of 
the constituency travels through, in Rosthern-Shellbrook, to get 
to Saskatoon. And the maintenance is done, Mr. Speaker. It was 
down to one lane for some time this summer, but people 
appreciated that the maintenance was done and that the bridge is 
in good shape as we go forward. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard good compliments with 
regards to the Ministry of Highways and the maintenance that 
they’re doing on our major infrastructure out in the country. It’s 
a main grain-haul route. It’s a main export route, Mr. Speaker, 
for the products that we produce in Rosthern-Shellbrook, and 
it’s appreciated. 
 
We did a Laird access road in the area, Mr. Speaker. As well as 
I mention again, the commitment for the provincial share of the 
bridge in Prince Albert. 
 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t make a couple of comments with 
regards to health care in the constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. Mr. Speaker, there’s been tremendous 
efforts in health care. In Rosthern we’re operating with a full 
complement of doctors serving that community and the 
surrounding area. In Shellbrook they’re operating with a full 
complement of doctors serving that community and the 
surrounding area with a new facility that’s paid for, one of the 
13 facilities that this government had committed to and has 
built, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in Spiritwood, I was at an event the other day where they 
have a full complement of medical professionals including three 
nurse practitioners, and a third doctor is showing up. And 
they’re working towards opening their collaborative emergency 
centre, again a new initiative by this government, Mr. Speaker, 
and they look forward to opening that very shortly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one more point on health care that affects the 
region is the planning dollars for the Victoria Hospital in Prince 
Albert, which is significant as that’s the hospital that many of 
us on the east side of the constituency visit with the west side 
heading to North Battleford. 
 
A quick note on the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society] air ambulance, Mr. Speaker, and I know my colleague 
from P.A. Northcote had made a comment on a new long-range 
AW139 chopper that’s servicing the North out of Saskatoon. 
And the appreciated investment of all of the sponsors — 
SARM, the PotashCorp, and all of the individuals that sponsor 

STARS, Mr. Speaker, and the initiative of the government to 
have STARS operating. STARS has landed in the constituency 
of Rosthern-Shellbrook about 35 times in the last year, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s significant. It’s not something that you ever want 
to see, that helicopter coming, but when somebody that you 
know or somebody that you care about requires it, let me tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, are you thankful that it’s there — a true 
benefit to Saskatchewan and in particular rural Saskatchewan. 
 
[21:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, earlier this spring or summer I was 
so fortunate to be appointed as Minister of Environment, and 
I’d like to make just a few comments with regards to that file 
and more specifically with the Throne Speech that was 
delivered here the other day. And first of all I had the 
opportunity as Minister of Environment to attend the grand 
opening of the Boundary dam 3 carbon capture and 
sequestration project. And it was truly an honour to be there, 
and it was truly an honour to see how many people from 
different countries of the world that came to see that project 
come online. Mr. Speaker, that project is removing 90 per cent 
of the carbon dioxide that’s emitted from Boundary dam 3 and 
putting that into enhanced oil recovery operations. And just to 
ensure that it’s on the record, that everybody has a perspective 
of what that means, that’s equivalent to taking 250,000 vehicles 
off the road annually. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to enter on the record what 
a couple experts are saying about that project that had a look at 
it there that day, Mr. Speaker. And the first person I’d like to 
quote is Dr. Graeme Sweeney from Scotland, representing the 
European Technology Platform for Zero Emission Fossil Fuel 
Power Plants. And he had this to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

This is globally significant. 
 
We dispel the myth that it can’t be done. Saskatchewan 
has one and that’s an enormously important step forward. 
 
I would like to see Europe take inspiration from the fact 
that that can be done here to advance our set of projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the second quote that I would like to enter on the 
record was from Dr. Julio Friedmann from the US [United 
States] Department of Energy, and they had this to say: 
 

Projects like this show the world that this is not only a 
viable technology but a required technology. 
 
All the projects around the world will face similar 
challenges and the more we can share that information, the 
faster and cheaper it will be to develop and deploy this 
technology. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our government is going to continue to balance 
economic growth with Saskatchewan’s environmental 
protection. Our province has seen unprecedented population 
and economic growth, and we have an increasingly diverse 
economy that provides jobs and opportunities to many, in 
particular our youth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now with regards to The Wildlife Act, and I won’t get into the 



October 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5587 

details of the Throne Speech with the individual changes that 
will be introduced here in some time. But, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to say this: that we’re going to increase penalties for those 
that choose to hunt illegally in Saskatchewan. And what we 
have and what we enjoy in Saskatchewan in our great outdoors, 
whether it be skiing, whether it be snowmobiling, whether it be 
hiking, whether it be boating, whether it be fishing, whether it 
be hunting, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to protect that for 
Saskatchewan people. And that’s what this Act is about, and 
we’ll get into more of that as we get into this session here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a couple notes on the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Code that was referred to in the Speech from the 
Throne. This has been a long process, but we are looking 
forward to the implementation of this policy. The results-based 
regulatory model, it will be the first of its kind in Canada, and 
it’s been only undertaken after significant consultation with 
industry experts as well as stakeholders. This develops 
innovative solutions to meet environmental objectives while 
allowing the Ministry of Environment to dedicate more 
resources and more activities to those activities that pose greater 
risk. Like I said, Mr. Speaker, it’s taken some time to get here, 
but we’ve done the appropriate consultation to get it right. And 
I did appreciate that the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
mentioned that she wanted to see some action on this issue, and 
she may get that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a couple notes on some of the weather events 
that we had here this last summer. I’ll just maybe back up to the 
summer previous in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
We had a number of rainfall events, rainfall years, and high 
snowfall years that culminated I guess about 18 months ago in 
an extreme snowmelt that caused a lot of flooding in the area 
where I live, and more particular in Blaine Lake area and Leask 
area. 
 
I think of one RM [rural municipality] there, thinking back, Mr. 
Speaker, that at one point in the spring had 130 roads washed 
out, 130 RM roads. It was significant and really made me 
appreciate the depth of what happened on the eastern side of 
Saskatchewan here this past summer and into the southeast and 
into the Carnduff area, Mr. Speaker, again where we’ve had a 
number of years of wet summers and higher than average 
snowfall and culminated with a July 1st event of just an 
unprecedented amount of rainfall that particular weekend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has been there in every way that 
is possible, with programs like the emergency flood and disaster 
relief program. I believe right now we’re up over 600 claims in 
that program this summer, with another eleven and a half 
million dollars that has been applied to mitigation efforts in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have other programs that I’m sure will get spoken to by 
colleagues, such as the provincial disaster assistance program. 
And there was multi-ministerial visits to communities, Mr. 
Speaker, after the fact, with not-for-profit groups such as the 
Red Cross would spend days in the communities and set up 
shops there to ensure that the people in communities could have 
access to the resources that they needed in the days and weeks 
after the event that they had to deal with in their communities, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

And I would say this. With regards to the communities that 
were affected and the programs that were available to them, 
those programs pale in comparison of the effort and the coming 
together that those communities did. And each and every one 
has their own story, Mr. Speaker, and we will hear them. We’ve 
heard a few. I heard a few. I know there was a Minister of 
Government Relations and Highways and the Premier and 
member from Indian Head visited a number of communities and 
heard these stories. It is absolutely amazing what communities 
and people in those communities are capable of when they’re 
faced with challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One conversation that has come out of the amount of rainfall 
and the flooding events that we had this summer, Mr. Speaker, 
was the conversation around drainage and agricultural drainage. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what we have in Saskatchewan right now 
are some drainage regulations that are brought in in the 
mid-1980s. They’re approaching 30 years old, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve been around for a number of different administrations, 
and a couple of years ago the Water Security Agency, after this 
government formed the Water Security Agency, released a 
25-year water security plan. In that plan, Mr. Speaker, is a 
commitment to look at agricultural drainage and update those 
regulations. And this started almost, about a year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, with online consultations where we had close to 500 
submissions, and we’re utilizing that information, Mr. Speaker, 
as we move forward to meet with stakeholders and look at 
updating those regulations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, just in closing, I again would like to thank my 
colleagues for, you know, consulting with me and working with 
me, and I’d like to thank the constituents of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook for allowing me the opportunity to be 
down here and represent them. And I’d just like to add that I 
will not be supporting the amendment and I will be supporting 
the Throne Speech, and with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
accept the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. I recognize the 
Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — I would move a motion that this Assembly 
now stands adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Deputy House 
Leader has moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:24.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5567 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5575 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5578 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5581 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5584 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


