
























































Hansard: May 05, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 58A  MONDAY, MAY 5, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5289 
 May 5, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, given . . . Oh, I should 
request leave for an extended introduction. I do so now. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as someone charged with 
responsibility for this Legislative Building and the precinct, you 
will know as well as anyone in this Chamber today, that every 
day at the legislature is a special day, but some days are just a 
little bit more special than others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the Leader of the Opposition, members of 
the Assembly joined by members of the Executive Council, 
former premiers, the Chief Justice, a number of special guests 
had the opportunity to go to a public hanging, as they say, Mr. 
Speaker. And the subject of the hanging, of course, made that 
original joke earlier this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is Gordon Barnhart, Dr. Gordon 
Barnhart, the 20th Lieutenant Governor of the province of 
Saskatchewan. He served in that capacity for six years. And we 
had the opportunity to unveil the portrait that will now be hung 
here at the legislature in perpetuity in the Qu’Appelle Gallery. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was an opportunity to also say some 
well-deserved words about a great leader in the life of a 
province. 
 
I will also note that Cyril Leeper, the portrait artist of 
considerable renown, has joined Dr. Barnhart today in your 
gallery, and we introduce him as well. Just by way of 
background, Mr. Leeper’s work is not at all a stranger to this 
particular Assembly. He’s a portrait artist originally from the 
great city of Saskatoon, now living in Ontario. And he has 
painted other Saskatchewan lieutenant governors, his subjects 
such as McIntosh, Johnson, Fedoruk. And he also painted the 
portrait of former premier, Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker. So we 
want to welcome Mr. Leeper as well, back to the Legislative 
Assembly here. 
 
Dr. Barnhart’s portrait will hang in the Qu’Appelle Gallery here 
at the Legislative Building, and we’re proud that it will do so. 
The new portrait will be part of the Legislative Building art 
collection, which now has more than 200 pieces that also 
includes busts, sculptures, murals, and photographs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Barnhart is very well known to all of us here, 
not just for his great work as Lieutenant Governor for six years, 

but for his time as Clerk of this particular Assembly, for his 
time as Clerk of the Senate of Canada, for his time at the 
University of Saskatchewan — almost 45 years of public 
service to the people of our province, and indeed for that time in 
the Senate, to the people of Canada as well. 
 
He was born and raised in Saltcoats, Saskatchewan. I think he 
might frequent the same barber as the member for Saltcoats, 
Mr. Speaker, on our side of the House. He is an historian and a 
recognized expert on the Canadian parliamentary process. His 
extensive experience in government not only includes his work 
in this Chamber but also, as I’ve mentioned before, as a Clerk 
of the Senate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all have gotten to know him personally. We’re 
aware of his passion for public service. We’re aware of the 
example that he has set for all of us. We’re aware of his courage 
in office when he was able to let young children — when he 
was discussing the importance of literacy — in on the fact that, 
as a young person growing up in Saskatchewan, he struggled 
with reading, Mr. Speaker. That is the kind of courage and 
leadership that has benefited this province greatly, especially 
for his time as Lieutenant Governor. 
 
We want to thank him. Though his wife Naomi’s not here and 
we want to, through him, thank her as well for their great 
service to the province of Saskatchewan, to the people of 
Saskatchewan. It continues today. He has been a great assist to 
the government in historical matters in terms of this precinct, in 
terms of that Walter Scott statue that now stands in front of the 
Legislative Building. He has also provided good advice to the 
government on other historical matters, and he does so again in 
the spirit of public service. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, once again it is a great privilege to, on behalf 
of members in this House, welcome Dr. Barnhart to his 
Legislative Assembly, and in so doing on the day that his 
portrait was indeed hung here for the permanent collection, to 
thank him for his public service and to offer him every good 
wish for the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to join in and offer a word 
of thanks to Dr. Gordon Barnhart. As we had the very fitting 
tribute this morning to the work that Dr. Barnhart has done over 
many decades, Mr. Speaker, we’re reminded of his solid, very 
solid track record of public service in a variety of roles. And 
while the portrait is mostly about his work as a Lieutenant 
Governor and serving here in the province, we know Dr. 
Barnhart’s activities with the youth in the province and in other 
jurisdictions as well is long standing and is making a 
long-lasting influence on our province. 
 
And I too, Mr. Speaker, would like to join in offering a word of 
thanks to the artist, Dr. Cyril Leeper, for once again doing a fine 
job and adding to the beauty of this building. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
all member to join me in welcoming these two guests to the 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 



5290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2014 

Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce a delegation from Borden, 
Saskatchewan: Mayor David Buckingham, Deputy Mayor 
Jamie Brandrick, Councillor Tom Redhead, and Chief 
Administration Officer Barry Hvidston. And please join me in 
welcoming them to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed 
my privilege to introduce to the Assembly, or to you and to 
everyone in the Assembly, a great group of students from the 
Humboldt Collegiate Institute. And they are accompanied by 
their teacher, Mr. David Millette, who comes each and every 
year with a delegation to this Assembly. So I’m not sure how 
many years now that Mr. Millette has brought his students to 
this Assembly. I’m looking forward to meeting with them, and I 
would welcome everyone to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the legislature, it’s my privilege to 
welcome another special delegation here today, some folks who 
are here with the consumer advocacy group, Where’s My 
Midwife? Saskatchewan. We have with us today Kim and 
Chloe Smith, Julian Wotherspoon and Sullivan. And Sullivan 
may want to participate in the proceedings, Mr. Speaker, so you 
might have to give him a word or two. And as well, Rhonda 
Young-Pilon. So with that I would like to ask my colleagues to 
welcome these folks to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d 
like to introduce 35 grade 12 and grade 8 students from 
Langenburg School. They’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Fallon Prince and Kristine Neaustaeter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might add, too, that the grade 12s won’t be able 
to take advantage of this, but I know the grade 8s will, that 
there’s a new school in the works in Langenburg, 
Saskatchewan. And I know all of us are going to be looking 
forward to that opening. So I ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming these students and their teachers from Langenburg. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to members of the Assembly, individuals seated in 
your gallery. I’m speaking about some royalty. There they are 
up there looking regal, Mr. Speaker. I’m speaking of Walter 
Ostanek, Canada’s polka king, with 21 Grammy nominations 
and three Grammy wins to his credit, along with 98 record 
albums and a star on Canada’s Walk of Fame. 
 
He’s joined by Sal Garcia, one of the world’s premier tenor sax 

players and percussionists, Mr. Speaker, a record and television 
producer, a CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] recording 
artist, first-call session player, along with his brother played 51 
years in Las Vegas, Mr. Speaker, and I should also point out, a 
martial arts expert who provided martial arts training to Elvis 
Presley and many other headliners in Las Vegas. And they of 
course are joined by Brian Sklar, Saskatchewan’s polka king. 
They’re here, Mr. Speaker, to shoot season eight of PolkaRama. 
And if you could join me in giving them a big e-i-e-i-o to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of education. And we know that education 
is one of the most vital services that government provides to its 
citizens, and that this government has failed to deliver a 
long-term plan and vision and the necessary resources to 
prioritize the delivery of educational excellence. And we know 
that we must build the best education system for today and for 
Saskatchewan’s future. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best practices, 
that is developed through consultation with the education 
sector, and that builds strong educational infrastructure to 
serve students and communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from Melfort, 
Carrot River, and La Ronge. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 
were very proud homeowners in their communities. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 
ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 
the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 
destroyed for many families in the North. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 
government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 



May 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5291 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand once again to present a petition on highways. 
This particular petition is Highway 908, the only road to and 
from the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse from the main highway, 
155. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take immediately the following action, to 
cause the provincial government to commit to repairing 
and upgrading of 908. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m presenting five pages of petitions here, 
and all, most of the petitioners that have signed these pages are 
primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to rise 
to present a petition for real action on climate change. And the 
folks who have signed this petition wish to bring to the attention 
of the Assembly the following: that Saskatchewan produces the 
highest greenhouse gas emissions per capita in all of Canada; 
and Saskatchewan’s emissions have continued to grow to 74 
million megatonnes as reported by Environment Canada in 
October 2013 and show no signs of decreasing; that slashing 
programs such as the Go Green Fund and the EnerGuide for 
Houses energy efficiency program have set the province on a 
backwards course; and that since 2009 the Government of 
Saskatchewan has reduced climate change funding by 83 per 
cent, including another 35 per cent cut in the 2014-15 budget. 
I’d like to read the prayer. It reads that the people who have 
signed this: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan enact a real plan and allocate appropriate 
funding in the provincial budget to tackle climate change 
by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, helping families 
transition to energy-efficient homes, and encouraging 
everyone in the province to take real action to protect the 
environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Vanscoy, Delisle, and 
Biggar, and I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Missing Persons Week 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today marks the 
beginning of the province’s second Missing Persons Week. 
While we are all saddened by the circumstances that make it 
necessary, I am proud to stand today and mark the 
commencement of the week, as it is one way in which our 
province’s government, police services, and community 
organizations can maintain awareness about this complex and 
troubling issue. 
 
In addition and perhaps more importantly, the designation is a 
signal of support to the families of those missing that we stand 
by their side in action and spirit and keep their loved ones at the 

forefront of our thoughts. At this time, I would like to say once 
more that we are grateful for the work of the provincial 
partnership committee on missing persons in their efforts to 
address this issue. 
 
At an event this morning attended by the Minister of Justice, the 
committee announced that they will be planting a tree in 
Wascana Centre as an ongoing symbol of loss and hope in 
recognition of those who are missing. Our government remains 
supportive of the committee’s work as we also remain 
supportive of a national inquiry into missing and murdered 
Aboriginal women. Until then however, our province will 
continue to work with police and community partners to find 
resolution for missing persons cases in the hope that they might 
reach a point of peace. 
 
I invite all members to join me as we recognize Missing 
Persons Week. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

International Day of the Midwife 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 5th is the 
International Day of the Midwife. I call on members to join me 
in recognizing the role of midwives as key partners in curbing 
maternal, newborn, and infant mortality worldwide and here at 
home. 
 
This year’s International Day of the Midwife carries the 
sub-theme Midwives: Changing the World One Family at a 
Time. Midwives provide important care that changes the lives 
of mothers, babies, and families. Today is a day to underline the 
importance of midwives and their work. 
 
More than 350,000 women and 2 million infants around the 
world die each year from complications in pregnancy and 
childbirth. The education and experience of midwives is 
essential to tackling issues in maternal and newborn child 
health. Midwives also provide options for women and families 
challenged by the lack of services in rural, remote and, 
particularly, Aboriginal communities across Canada. 
 
The International Day of the Midwife is an important 
opportunity to raise awareness of the benefits of midwifery to 
the public and to policy-makers. It is positive that women in 
three health regions in Saskatchewan have access to midwifery 
services if they choose. But there are still so many women and 
families who could benefit greatly from midwifery care but 
don’t because this government has not taken a lead in 
expanding services to ensure equitable access across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on members to join me in recognizing the 
role of the midwife in building healthy communities and in 
celebrating the benefits midwives have provided for women, 
children, and families across the world. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 



5292 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2014 

Rivers. 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is International 
Day of the Midwife. Midwives offer a valuable service by 
providing increased choice to expectant mothers. 
 
Midwifery services have expanded in our province since the 
first clinic opened in Saskatoon in 2009. Since then, midwives 
have participated in the delivery of almost 1,400 babies, and the 
families involved express a high level of satisfaction with 
midwifery services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government continues to support the growth 
of midwifery in our province. We provide annualized funding 
of 2.2 million to support these important services. 
Return-in-service bursaries are available for training and 
recruitment, and 12 candidates have received bursaries to date. 
Last year we provided a program in Saskatoon that will allow a 
qualified nurse or paramedic to take the spot of the second 
midwife, which will increase access to these services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will continue to support services 
that provide safe, high-quality care to people in our province. 
Today I want to thank our midwives in our province for their 
great contributions to the health and well-being of women and 
their families. I ask my colleagues in the Legislative Assembly 
to join me in recognizing these valuable health professionals. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Hunger Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today 
on to May 11th is Hunger Awareness Week. Close to 850,000 
Canadians use food banks each month, and this is the time to 
break the silence surrounding hunger in Canada. This year the 
campaign aims to highlight the voices of hunger, and Canadians 
are being asked to tell their personal stories to raise awareness 
about food security. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to highlight the story here in the 
province. Despite our prosperity, we have tens of thousands of 
people who are not getting enough food. In Saskatchewan there 
are almost 27 per cent of these people utilizing the food bank 
than they were in 2008 and, of those, 44 per cent are children. 
 
We see this growing problem across Canada’s northern and 
Aboriginal communities. In 2011 off-reserve Aboriginal 
households were twice as likely as other Canadian households 
to be food insecure. In Canada, households with children have a 
higher prevalence of food insecurity than households without 
children, and women are shown to have less food security than 
men. Mr. Speaker, it is unacceptable that Canadian’s health and 
well-being is being compromised for the lack of food and our 
most vulnerable citizens are struggling to meet even their most 
basic needs for survival. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan food banks have been leaders in 
tackling issues around hunger and poverty in this province. And 
we need to join them in addressing the roots of hunger and 
making it a thing of the past. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Campaign for Real Beauty 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend, the 
member from Regina Plains and myself proudly hosted and 
sponsored our third annual self-esteem workshop for young 
girls and their female mentors. The workshop is part of the 
Dove Real Beauty campaign. The event was held at the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] Heritage Centre in Regina 
and was well attended by over 235 moms and their daughters. 
 
The purpose of this workshop is to show both young girls and 
their female mentors — whether it is to be their mothers, their 
sisters, their aunties, or their grandmas — that girls can have a 
positive impact in their schools, their communities, families 
and, more importantly, among their peers. It encourages young 
women to become a leader in their own life and helps them 
prepare for those roles of leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am passionate about this, and I was so proud to 
see so many woman and girls come to this event and discover 
that they too can be leaders. I know that if we have strong girls, 
we have strong women. And if we have strong women, we have 
strong communities. And that’s very important to all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Dove for 
their support and my colleague from Regina Plains for 
co-sponsoring this life-changing workshop. I would also like to 
thank all the girls and their moms and their mentors who 
attended this workshop. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Saskatchewan Habitat Day 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — I’m pleased to rise today to advise all 
members that May 2nd was Saskatchewan Habitat Day. In my 
community of Prince Albert and in all habitat communities 
across the province, this day was selected to honour the work 
Habitat for Humanity does in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan recognizes the 
continuing need for affordable housing. Through our 
partnership with Habitat for Humanity, we continue to support 
families in realizing their dream of home ownership. 
 
Since 2009 the Government of Saskatchewan through Sask 
Housing Corporation has committed $7.85 million to Habitat. 
Mr. Speaker, our funding has supported the builds of 97 homes 
that are complete or are under construction in 10 Saskatchewan 
communities. In the 2014-15 budget, we committed an 
additional $750,000 to help build 12 more homes throughout 
Saskatchewan. Through the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, we provide $65,000 per home in funding now. 
That’s up from the 50,000 per home we provided to March 
2014. Let me remind our members that each family served by 
Habitat worked incredibly hard to make their dream a reality by 
putting in 500 hours of work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are making good progress in affordable 



May 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5293 

housing in this province. Our work with Habitat is just one way 
we continue to deliver on our Saskatchewan plan for growth 
commitments. Affordable home ownership is the dream of 
Habitat for Humanity in action and the reason we all celebrate 
Habitat Day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Wings for Life World Run 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s in pleasure, great pleasure, and quite frankly in a 
lot of pain I stand here today and talk about a very unique event 
that happened on May the 4th around the world. The Red Bull 
Wings for Life World Run took place in 34 locations around the 
world: 32 countries, 6 continents, Mr. Speaker, and 13 time 
zones. 
 
This was a run that everyone in the world started at the same 
time, and it was to raise money for spinal cord research, to run 
for those that couldn’t. Mr. Speaker, at the same time around 
the world, at 4 o’clock in the morning in Saskatoon, which was 
the only location in Canada, 35,400 people started running a 
race which included 171 here in Saskatchewan. Thirty minutes 
after those people left the start line, a chase car would come up 
and start travelling the course and, as it went by runners, they 
were eliminated, to have one runner left in the world, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the worldwide winner was Lemawork Ketema, an 
Ethopian who ran 78.5 kilometres, Mr. Speaker. The female 
winner from Norway was Elise Molvik who ran 54. The 
Canadian winner, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatoon was Ryan King 
who ran forty-six and three-quarter kilometres, Mr. Speaker; 
and Chrissy Magneson who ran 32 kilometres. 
 
I want to thank Mayor Atchison from the city of Saskatoon and 
all their workers as well as the Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure to make this really unique event happen, Mr. 
Speaker. It raised millions of dollars. And we look forward to 
them coming back to Saskatchewan and using Saskatoon as the 
start point for the Canadian race into the future. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

First Nations Education 
 
Mr. Broten: — We know that First Nations education is 
absolutely crucial to our province’s success, both for today and 
for decades to come. We believe that the federal government’s 
proposed First Nations education Act has some good aspects to 
it, but it also has some concerning aspects to it, and we think 
it’s wise that the federal government has put the legislation on 
hold due to the many concerns that have been raised about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: what is the 
government’s position on the First Nations education Act? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of the Act’s desire to 
improve accountability and raise standards for the education of 
young First Nations Canadians, that principle is strongly 
supported by this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We do know 
that in the wake of the resignation of the national chief, Shawn 
Atleo, my understanding is that this day the federal minister, 
Minister Valcourt, has withdrawn . . . or not withdrawn perhaps 
but put the bill on hold. I know that our ministers responsible 
for Education and First Nations and Métis Relations have a 
good working relationship with the federal minister and will be 
in close contact with the federal government. 
 
The principles of the legislation, we support. There’s been 
concerns from First Nations about the amount of consultation 
that went into that legislation. Those would be reasonable 
concerns, Mr. Speaker, and we would be willing to give voice 
to those as well, as we interact with the federal government on 
the matter. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Major concerns have been raised about how the 
First Nations education Act gives the federal government all the 
authority but no responsibility while giving First Nations all the 
responsibility but very little authority. There are concerns that 
there is no recognition in the legislation about inherent and 
treaty rights to education and about funding not flowing until 
2016. The bill has some good aspects, but it has its concerning 
aspects as well. 
 
It’s important, Mr. Speaker, for the federal government to listen 
to First Nations and to work together to get the legislation right. 
And it’s important for our province to encourage that because 
of the importance of First Nations’ education today and into the 
future for Saskatchewan. My question, Mr. Speaker, for the 
Premier: has he reached out to the Prime Minister on this vitally 
important issue for Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, over time we’ve had 
discussions with the federal government on the importance of 
Aboriginal education across the country and specifically in the 
province, with Saskatchewan having on a per capita basis one 
of the highest populations of First Nations people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know in Saskatchewan that we’ve seen 
great improvement in terms of Aboriginal engagement in the 
economy, in the reduction of the unemployment rate for First 
Nations people, but there is still a great gap frankly between 
First Nations and the overall unemployment rate. We know the 
key to closing the gap is education, so yes, this has been a 
priority in terms of our dealings with the federal government, in 
terms of the dealings of the ministers as well of the Crown with 
the federal government. 
 
We noted a few budgets back from the feds, in part I think 
because of provincial intervention that we participated in, there 
was an increased investment in on-reserve education. We were 
worried about the deployment of the funds, but supported the 
advancement of those funds. We also know that with this new 
approach to on-reserve education, the federal government was 
going to come with some more dollars. There’s a debate about 



5294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2014 

whether there’s enough of that. We’re doing an analysis on that 
point as well. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, for the Government of 
Saskatchewan, is that this is a priority issue for us. The 
principles of this legislation though are important in terms of 
what the federal government was trying to achieve and why the 
former National Chief Atleo was very supportive of the 
directional changes in the federal legislation. We support those 
as well. We will now take the time to engage on the Act again, 
now that the federal minister as of today has put the legislation 
on hold. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Staffing for Senior and Long-Term Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard a lot of 
concern about staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities, and 
we’ve heard how chronic short-staffing is negatively affecting 
the quality of care that seniors in Saskatchewan receive. We’ve 
heard stories, Mr. Speaker, of seniors being forced to wake up 
at 5 in the morning, of seniors, Mr. Speaker, being forced to soil 
themselves because there’s no one there to help them to the 
bathroom. We’ve heard of some seniors not even receiving a 
weekly bath. And the latest numbers, Mr. Speaker, on staffing 
levels released by this government show how huge the problem 
of chronic short-staffing really is. My question, Mr. Speaker, is 
for the Premier: can he confirm that two-thirds of seniors’ care 
facilities have staffing vacancies? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly with respect to long-term care facilities across this 
province, this government over the last seven years that we’ve 
served on this side of the House, we’ve invested significantly, 
both in the capital side in terms of long-term care, building 13 
new long-term care facilities, embarking upon the replacement 
of three facilities in the city of Swift Current. 
 
We’ve also put tremendous supports to maintaining facilities. 
We’re also putting dollars into front-line staff. So within 
regional health authority budgets over the last seven years, 
we’ve seen significant increases to the point where RHA 
[regional health authority] budgets are up over 50 per cent in 
those seven years overall in global funding, which is translated 
into more than 700 full-time equivalents added to the long-term 
care staffing complement, despite the fact that the number of 
beds haven’t changed much in the last seven years. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the Premier, 
whether he can confirm that two-thirds of seniors’ care facilities 
have staffing vacancies. 
 
When this session began last fall, we put forward written 
questions about health care staffing vacancies, and it was a long 
six months, Mr. Speaker, for this government to provide us with 
some information. What those answers show is that two-thirds 

of seniors’ care facilities in the province have staffing 
vacancies. And that’s concerning on its own, but it’s especially 
concerning when those vacancies are happening within the 
context, Mr. Speaker, of desperately needed staff and chronic 
short-staffing all of the time, a staffing complement that is 
already far too inadequate, Mr. Speaker. And the urgent 
business cases that were put forward by care facilities show a 
desperate need for new staff. 
 
But this government, Mr. Speaker, isn’t even addressing and 
filling the current vacancies. My question to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker: why not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, certainly this government has invested 
significantly when it comes to staffing within all of our health 
care facilities. That’s why we have indicated, that I’ve indicated 
that the regional health authority budgets is up significantly 
over the last seven years, far and away above the rate of 
inflation or contract settlements. That has allowed us to hire 
additional positions, whether that be to acute care or into 
long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at any given time there may be vacancies within a 
regional health authority, regional health authorities. That may 
be because people are changing positions; they’re moving on to 
other positions; they’re moving into management; they may be 
retiring. Certainly we know that as of the date when the 
members opposite asked the questions, for example, within . . . 
Care aids within regional health authorities represented about 3 
per cent of the regional health authority workforce. That is not 
different or much of a change from when the members opposite 
would have been in government. And it’s important to know 
that in some of these facilities it would be a very small number 
of vacancies. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister has more current 
and up-to-date information, he should table that in the 
Assembly. It took them six long months to respond to the 
questions. And if the minister and this government thinks 
they’re on the right track, the right track when it comes to 
addressing staffing shortages, chronic staffing shortages within 
the health care system, Mr. Speaker, they are dreaming. It’s the 
Saskatoon Health Region that put forward a request for 450 
care aids. Do you know how many they got, Mr. Speaker? 
Nineteen. Only 19. 
 
Here’s what the report on the CEO [chief executive officer] tour 
and the report from the urgent requests say, Mr. Speaker. Some 
quotes from the state of, about the state of care. The staffing 
levels are deplorable. Need more people to answer buzzers. 
Average wait time is 40 minutes; someone actually timed it. 
Residents notice staff shortages and often have to wait up to 30 
minutes after they ring their call bell. Continent residents have 
soiled themselves because of it. Residents don’t get their teeth 
cleaned regularly. Shaving is rushed, causing neck rash. Only 
bathed once per week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: has he heard enough? 



May 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5295 

Has he heard enough to admit that it was a mistake to remove 
any sort of reference to adequate staffing from the seniors’ care 
regulations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, 
there are 745 full-time equivalents within long-term care alone, 
knowing that the number of beds has not changed dramatically 
in the last seven years. So over 700 full-time equivalents more 
now today within the system that we are funding than when the 
members opposite were government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the member could answer the fact that 
care aids, full-time care aids, 4,487 care aid positions under the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] in their last budget; last year’s 
budget, 4,924, a 10 per cent increase. LPNs [licensed practical 
nurse] within long-term care, 521 in the last budget under the 
NDP — keeping in mind the number of beds had not changed, 
the number of residents have not changed — 521 LPNs in 
long-term care; last year’s budget 716, a 37 per cent increase. 
And RNs, FTEs [full-time equivalent], 1,211; last year’s budget 
1,324, a 10 per cent increase. How the members opposite could 
ever say that we are understaffed when it comes to long-term 
care, looking at their record. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when we hear stories of seniors 
being forced to soil themselves because of not enough staff, that 
is understaffing within long-term care facilities. When we hear 
stories, Mr. Speaker, of seniors who don’t have the dignity and 
the care that they need, help with meals, help getting to the 
bathroom, help with the absolute basics, Mr. Speaker, that is a 
failure in care that this government is overseeing. 
 
The information that this government released late last week 
shows 703 vacancies of front-line health care workers through 
our system — 345 RN vacancies, 96 LPN vacancies, and 262 
care aid vacancies. And we know the Health Sciences 
Association, which has recently voted to strike, is frustrated 
with this government’s refusal to release information about 
which positions it’s leaving vacant intentionally because of the 
budget squeeze. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: will he table today in 
the Assembly the most up-to-date information about staffing 
vacancies in health care in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly this 
government has acknowledged other work that we need do in 
long-term care. That’s why we embarked on a series of steps 
over the last year to increase the accountability within 
long-term care, through the CEO tours, through the report that 
was issued, through the Urgent Issues Action Fund response by 
this government — I think a responsible response to the 
information that came forward. 
 
But no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that this government has invested 
significantly, to the point where the registered nurses’ 
regulatory body just in the last two weeks has indicated that we 

have never been higher as a province when it comes to 
registered nurses in this province. Many of those have gone to 
long-term care. In fact it’s up 9.3 per cent, when in fact the 
number of beds haven’t changed in that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have taken the step to put in 
additional dollars for both equipment and front-line staff within 
long-term care because we want to address the challenges that 
are faced in long-term care, knowing that there is more work to 
be done. But I will take the response of this side of the House 
versus the members opposite any day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Utilization of Saskatoon City Hospital 
 
Ms. Chartier: — During this session we’ve heard concerns 
from highly respected physicians, front-line staff, and a 
coroner’s inquest jury about the underutilization of Saskatoon 
City Hospital. And we see in today’s StarPhoenix a letter from 
retired RN Lorraine Roadhouse that says, “This hospital is still 
the best built state-of-the-art facility in Saskatoon, and it’s sadly 
underused.” Those are the concerns shared by most Saskatoon 
residents and many people throughout the province ever since 
this government closed City Hospital for acute care in 2008. 
 
The emergency room at Saskatoon City Hospital is already shut 
down from 8:30 p.m. until 9 a.m. But now the opposition is 
hearing concerns that this government is seriously considering 
shutting down the emergency room at Saskatoon City Hospital 
entirely. To the minister: is there any truth to this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, first of all to 
the members opposite, no, that is not the information that 
Saskatoon Health Region has provided to me in my capacity as 
Minister of Health. Certainly the CEO of the health region has 
indicated publicly that Saskatoon City Hospital is an important 
hospital for the people of Saskatoon that does, and despite what 
the member opposite would say, does currently provide for 
acute services including emergency services for part of the day. 
 
But it is important to note that there were over 55 . . . nearly 
5,500 in-patients at Saskatoon City Hospital in the last year, 
provided for 7,000 day surgeries, provided emergency care for 
5,300 people, and ambulatory procedures of nearly 14,100 last 
year. City Hospital is important to the people of Saskatoon and 
will continue to be so. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — We’ve been told by multiple sources that 
senior health region officials have recently refused to rule out a 
complete closure of City Hospital’s emergency room. The 
people of Saskatoon and area deserve to know the truth from 
this government. They deserve to know if such a move is being 
considered. To the minister: will he guarantee today that 
Saskatoon City Hospital’s emergency will remain open — yes 
or no? 
 



5296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
will remain open. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Social Housing 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The shortage of 
affordable housing in communities across the province is a 
major problem, and the government’s new social housing 
policies are making it worse. 
 
Because of the new age requirements for tenants, the Earl Grey 
Housing Authority recently had a one-bedroom unit sit vacant 
for close to six months despite having numerous calls from 
people desperately looking for a place to rent. And because of 
the new community market rent policy, the Earl Grey Housing 
Authority must charge $800 per month. They say that is, and I 
quote, “far too high for a small village.” 
 
To the minister: why is this government, as a landlord, making 
it so hard for people to rent social housing units at affordable 
rates? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m really pleased that the 
member opposite is talking about affordable housing because 
it’s something that our government takes very seriously. 
 
We have the most social housing units of any place in Western 
Canada and the policies hadn’t changed since the 1950s. So 
when we relooked at them, we realized that there were tenants 
in these social housing units that had . . . Fifteen of them were 
making over $100,000 a year. And we had up to 800 spaces that 
we created because there were . . . had a rent cap of about $800 
a month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that in rural Saskatchewan there is need 
for affordable housing as well. We relooked at our policies and 
looked at what would be, something that would be suitable 
when we compare the fact that we have lights, power and lights 
and services are available within our units. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our goal is to make sure that we have, that the 
houses are available to those most in need. Mr. Speaker, that is 
our goal, and we will continue to provide housing for people 
that are in need in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this is what 
the Earl Grey Housing Authority said last week when they 
wrote the minister. They say, and I quote, “For small 
communities like Earl Grey, housing is still beyond the reach 
for most non-seniors with low and moderate income, those that 
need it most.” 
 
The housing authority wanted to discuss these changes with the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation at a meeting in January, but 
they were told it wasn’t acceptable. They write, and I quote 

again, “We were told beforehand the policy we found most 
detrimental, community market rent, was not up for 
discussion.” To the minister: why is this government not even 
willing to listen to very real concerns from those front-line 
workers about the impact its policies are having on 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think the member opposite does know that there was 
meetings in January and that we actually did make a number of 
changes. In fact there was another level of housing that was 
acquired. Now we have A, B, C, D, and E for communities that 
have less than 300 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the work that we are doing and the 
chatting that we are having with area authorities meant that we 
looked at the rental units, and there was a decrease in all of the 
tiers so that it is more acceptable in the areas. We now have a 
maximum unit rent in each area, a discussion that we continue 
to have with our housing authorities. 
 
The members opposite should know that there is 276 housing 
authorities in this province, and our goal is to make sure that 
people can receive a rent that is viable for them. Mr. Speaker, 
the number of people that are paying the maximum rent in this 
province is less than 9 per cent of the 18,000 units. Mr. 
Speaker, we will continue to speak with our housing authorities. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These are very real 
concerns being brought forward by the Earl Grey Housing 
Authority, and the minister ought to be listening to them and 
taking them seriously. The housing authority is concerned about 
the many people that they’ve had to turn away because of this 
government’s new policies, and they outline the specific cases 
in their letter to the minister. 
 
But they’ve also expressed concerns about the sustainability of 
the housing units because the government has slashed their 
improvement budget by 63 per cent. The government has 
decided it won’t even be replacing closet doors anymore, but 
they suggest instead that they can use curtain rods and fabric. 
 
To the minister: is she listening to these concerns from the 
housing authority or is she going to be stubbornly dismissing 
them as usual? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, first of all the members 
opposite should be aware that in our province, the people that 
are paying less than the maximum rent is less than 9 per cent of 
the people paying maximum rent. 
 
And when it comes to maintenance, I’d really like to ensure that 
the members opposite can prove the numbers that they’re 
talking about in the House because far too often they come 
forward and bring numbers that are based on nothing more than 
maybe something that they have dreamt about the night before. 
 



May 5, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5297 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is very, very important to our government 
to make sure that we are maintaining these units. In fact one of 
the things that we are doing is evaluating every one of the 
housing authorities that we have to ensure what actually is . . . 
the state that they’re in. I’m very proud of the fact that by the 
end of May of this year, we’re going to have evaluated every 
one of those units to know what type of maintenance is required 
so we know our ongoing needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have signed another agreement with the 
federal government where we can look at the social housing, 
another $9.1 million from the federal government that we’ll be 
matching to not only build affordable housing but to maintain 
the housing that we do have. Mr. Speaker, in rural 
Saskatchewan this is an important issue as it is in the urban 
centres. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 
federal government’s hasty amendments to the legislation on 
the grain transportation crisis were ruled out of order. The 
government failed to get it right the first time around and then 
introduced amendments to their own bill too late. The feds were 
slapped on the wrist by the Speaker for not allowing proper 
debate and scrutiny. And this botched bill is just the latest in the 
series of many blunders that have characterized the federal 
government’s handling of this grain transportation catastrophe. 
 
Instead of demanding urgent action and putting pressure on the 
federal government to deliver last March, our provincial 
government has been applauding the feds and patting Gerry 
Ritz on the back every step of the way. To the Minister of 
Agriculture: is he still cutting the feds slack on their 
performance or is he finally willing to stand up and demand 
better for Saskatchewan producers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for her question. Mr. Speaker, I understand the bill has 
gone back to committee. It was a procedural issue that held it up 
for a couple of days in Ottawa, but I believe it is back on track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I described the federal response to our requests for 
strong legislation as deficient. I don’t think Minister Ritz felt 
that I was applauding him in that instance. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this grain transportation crisis 
has cost Prairie farmers $8 billion in lost income. Roughly 30 
million tonnes of grain was left in elevators, bins, and in 
farmers’ fields throughout the winter and it’s only now slowly 
moving to market. It’s outrageous that the federal government 
can’t even figure out basic parliamentary procedure in order to 
pass legislation that will finally allow compensation for 
producers when the big rail companies slack off. 
 

To the minister: in the wake of this latest goof-up when it 
comes to something this serious, what exactly has he 
communicated to the federal government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
this legislation is certainly better than what we had before, but 
we asked for different things. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, we asked 
for substantially higher requirements for car deliveries. We 
asked for substantially higher penalties for non-compliance to 
the railways and/or the grain companies, Mr. Speaker, or 
shippers if they were found to be lagging. We asked for specific 
requirements to be put in the bill to require all corridors and all 
customers receive service. Mr. Speaker, we didn’t get all of 
those things. The federal government has gone partway and 
now we do see that grain is moving again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Let’s not forget, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government initially supported the federal Conservatives last 
March on their no-penalty stance and earlier this year on their 
initial weak $100,000 penalties. Only after we questioned did 
they demand $250,000 penalties which were ignored once again 
by the federal Tories. They didn’t even put forward those 
penalties in their latest botched amendments to their own bill 
last week, a month after the Ag minister sent them his letter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s so clear this government has no influence on 
the feds even though come election time they’re out there 
pounding in signs for them. When will this minister put aside 
his own partisan support of the federal Conservatives and 
properly represent the producers of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the question is, when will the 
Leader of the Opposition stand up for agriculture in a spring 
where the most significant economic matter facing the province 
of Saskatchewan is grain transportation? He started . . . Oh now 
we’ve got the member for Lakeview pointing. The Leader of 
the Opposition started today’s question period with a good set 
of questions, an important set of questions about what we’ve 
done with respect to the federal government on a First Nations 
matter. He has stood up and said, we’ve written to the federal 
government on certain issues in the past. Mr. Speaker, as far as 
we know, he has not even written a letter. He has not placed a 
single call to the federal Minister of Agriculture on the most 
important economic issue facing the province of Saskatchewan. 
The critic’s doing her work, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 
agriculture, asking the questions. Why is the Leader of the 
Opposition missing in action, Mr. Speaker? 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 

 
Funding for Regina Bypass Project 

 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



5298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2014 

Speaker, as you know, Saskatchewan is growing at a record 
rate. This growth makes our communities more prosperous and 
dynamic. It allows us to invest in better education, health care, 
and social programming. But this growth also brings 
challenges. Traffic safety and congestion are two of these 
challenges. It’s more than just an inconvenience. It’s a serious, 
significant, safety issue. The communities along Highway No. 1 
east of Regina continue to grow. We have heard the concerns of 
residents in this area. There are new schools, businesses, and 
homes. We understand how important it is that we improve 
safety and traffic flow. 
 
Through the Saskatchewan growth plan, we want to put the 
infrastructure in place that will meet the needs of these 
communities for the long term. The Regina bypass project 
addresses these objectives. It will reduce truck traffic volumes 
on both Victoria Avenue East, and Dewdney Avenue. It 
improves the overall efficiency of the transportation system, 
making the Global Transportation Hub a more attractive place 
to invest. 
 
Recently we announced the finalization of the route for the 
bypass. Today we announce another important milestone. A 
contribution of up to $200 million will be provided through the 
P3 Canada Fund for the construction of the Regina bypass. The 
province of Saskatchewan will fund the remainder of the 
project’s cost at a level which will be determined through a 
competitive P3 [public-private partnership] procurement 
process. By using a P3 model, the Regina bypass is expected to 
be open to traffic years earlier than under a traditional delivery 
model, with priority components opening in advance of the full 
bypass completion. 
 
It is important that this infrastructure gets built sooner rather 
than a decade into the future. This project will be the most 
extensive transportation project undertaken in this province’s 
history. A significant amount of planning work for this project 
has been done; however there is still much planning and 
pre-construction work required. But today’s commitment by the 
federal government marks another important step towards 
making this project a reality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As you 
know, Saskatchewan’s growing at a record rate, and this growth 
makes our communities more prosperous. It makes it more 
dynamic. It allows us to invest in better education, health care, 
and social standing, and programming as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this growth also brings challenges. We are hearing that 
traffic safety and congestion are two key challenges attached to 
this bypass, and it’s more than just an inconvenience. It is a 
serious and significant safety issue. And a lot of the 
communities along Highway 1 East have continued to grow, 
and they are continuing to express their concerns of the 
residents of this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s right. There are new schools, 
businesses, and homes that are coming up. We understand how 
important it is that we improve safety and traffic loads. The 
Regina bypass project addresses this objective and, Mr. 
Speaker, as it will reduce truck traffic, as the minister’s 

indicated, to Victoria Avenue East and Dewdney Avenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that the opposition looked at 
this particular contribution of $200 million will be provided to 
the P3 Canada Fund for the construction of this bypass which is 
vital to our growing population and our growing economy. Mr. 
Speaker, today’s federal commitment marks another important 
step in the right direction towards making this project a real 
thing for Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committee this afternoon and this evening, 
I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:27.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5289 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5289 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5290 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5290 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5290 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5290 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5290 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5290 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5290 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5291 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5291 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Missing Persons Week 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5291 
 International Day of the Midwife 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5291 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5292 
 Hunger Awareness Week 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5292 
 Campaign for Real Beauty 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5292 
 Saskatchewan Habitat Day 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5292 
 Wings for Life World Run 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5293 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 First Nations Education 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5293 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5293 
 Staffing for Senior and Long-Term Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5294 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5294 
 Utilization of Saskatoon City Hospital 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5295 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5295 
 Social Housing 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5296 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5296 
 Grain Transportation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5297 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5297 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5297 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Funding for Regina Bypass Project 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5297 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5298 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


