






















































Hansard: December 02, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 22B  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6199 
 December 2, 2014 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 7 o’clock, 
debate will resume. I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 145 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 145 — The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 
Mr. Vermette: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act. 
 
Just to give . . . I know my colleague earlier made a bunch of 
comments and he was referring to the bill and giving some 
details into the bill. And I guess part of it, of this bill gives 
provisions for the courts to waive fees. And there’s different 
reasons why you would want to waive fees. And I realize at the 
end of the day that there is people who, for whatever reason, 
have an opportunity to go to court and to challenge somebody, 
whether it’s an agency, they want to take proceedings to court. 
Can they afford to bring that forward, to challenge it? Whether 
it’s an individual wanting to do it themself or it would be 
someone who, let’s just say, wanted to hire legal counsel, apply 
to Legal Aid, there’s different proceedings that would come 
forward into the House or in the court. And this provision 
allows that individuals to have the fees waived. 
 
And the court may look at different circumstances and different 
criteria it will be outlined. We don’t know what that is for sure. 
It might be in regulations. It might be . . . there might be 
different reasons why. And you know, when we look at this part 
of it, and I think my colleague was explaining there are many 
opportunities where individuals cannot afford to actually, you 
know, pay for court costs. 
 
So those fees, there’s an opportunity for the court in this 
amendment, gives an opportunity to waive the fees. And I 
guess, depending on one’s circumstances, maybe they want to 
fight something or someone’s taken an action against them, 
then my understanding . . . Let’s say somebody who’s trying to 
make ends meet. And they’re a working family, and they’re 
working hard. They’re trying to pay their bills. They’re trying 
to make a living for their family. And maybe it’s a family 
person, maybe it’s a senior, maybe someone who’s on a fixed 
income who can’t afford to hire a lawyer and to actually pay 
fees when they want to go through, I guess, the Rentalsman, 
there’s different fees.  
 
This court, and I guess this amendment, would give opportunity 
for individuals to have some fees waived. You know, it gives 
you an opportunity, again for many people who maybe not go 
forward or couldn’t go forward with a legal challenge of 
somebody saying they feel they’ve been, you know, not treated 
in a fair way by a landlord or, from my understanding of it, by 

any other court agency where they wanted to take something in 
the matters that come before the court, this would give the 
courts the provision to again waive the fees and to make 
exceptions for those individuals. 
 
So that again, when we look at, we don’t know what the 
numbers would look like. Maybe there’s 25 per cent of 
individuals out there, could be 50 per cent of individuals who 
for some reason cannot afford the fees that are required in order 
for them to bring forward. So you know, so I guess we’ll look at 
this and they’re going to make some changes. 
 
And again, I talked about the courts having the power. And this 
would give the courts and the judges the opportunity to say, 
looking at the circumstance and depending what it is, like I’ve 
said it could be, you know, from cost, that they can’t afford the 
cost because they’re a working family. They don’t have the 
dollars. So this is part of that provision. 
 
And I guess my colleagues have talked about this and, you 
know, gave some . . . he did some reading of some of the Acts 
to try to, you know, come forward and express the concern. 
And I know there is opportunity that we have to go forward and 
actually I guess consult, and we want to make sure. And maybe 
it was lawyers, maybe there was individuals, families that were 
asked for this provision and for this amendment because they 
wanted to bring their, you know, their cases heard and have 
their opportunity and their chance in court. So many people say 
they would like to have their opportunity and their chance. 
 
When I talk about the challenges, I guess that many people will 
have . . . and there are people out there that, you know, they try 
their best to make ends meet. They do everything they can. But 
this is giving a provision and a waiver for, like I said, the courts 
to do that and to give . . . a judge to give some. 
 
And the also thing in this bill, it talks about taking . . . and I 
notice it goes in English and it’s also in French, as of course is 
our second language, official second language. And that 
provision’s in here. When you go through the Act you can see 
both sides of it, and it makes sure that those individuals can 
understand it and those that are comfortable with French as 
their second language. And some of them, you know, 
individuals, that is their language that they speak and they’re 
comfortable with that. They have the provision here to speak 
the French, the language they want. So this Act also gives them 
a French translation and a French language so that they can 
read, understand, and make sure of that provision and that 
they’re covered by it. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I have no . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh anyway, okay at this time, Mr. Speaker, I 
will continue to go on here and have a . . . [inaudible]. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit, and I had said this earlier, talking 
about some of the challenges that some of the individuals, I 
want to get into that. Some people in northern Saskatchewan, 
and I look at the challenges that many people are faced with the 
cost of living. You look at the cost of highways, you know, that 
when you look at the highways that people want to travel on. 
You look at northern Saskatchewan, the housing issues that we 
talk about, affordability. You look at the cost of groceries. You 



6200 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

look at the cost of utilities. Everyone’s talking about the cost 
going higher and higher. And people and families are struggling 
and they have those struggles. And there’s, I guess there’s 
reasons why they have the struggles whether they’re working. 
 
Maybe some people have good-paying jobs where, you know, 
they can provide for their families and they can provide to hire a 
lawyer and seek legal counsel when they need that. And they 
don’t have to have a waiver to waive, you know, any of the 
costs if they want to bring an action forward. They hire a 
lawyer, and some individuals can do that. But when you think 
about those, the elders, and I talked about seniors, people of 
fixed income, maybe they don’t have that opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, you know, for whatever reason — the struggles that 
they’re facing and some people you know, with medical costs. 
They struggle. So you look at the cost. And if they’re struggling 
with medical costs, if you look at the cost of living. 
 
And you know, you’re trying to provide for your family and 
then for some reason you have an action or you have to go 
before the Rentalsman and you have to . . . some reason. This 
order and this Act would give the judges an opportunity to 
waive fees that would maybe cause a hardship to somebody 
who wants to bring forward an action or to have, you know, 
their issues dealt with in the court. 
 
And I know everybody says that you have your day in court, 
and individuals want to do that and they want to feel 
comfortable that they can do that. And I think as a 
Saskatchewan resident, a Canadian citizen, individuals have 
that right and should have that opportunity at all times to come 
before, you know, our courts. And you know? And this is where 
it is. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move that the House 
proceed to government orders, adjourned debates, item no. 10, 
Bill No. 146. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved that the House move 
to adjourned debates, Bill No. 146. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 146 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 146 — The Fee 
Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 
portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again a 
pleasure to join debate on Bill No. 146, the fee waiver 
consequential amendments. Again in terms of providing access 
of people to the justice system, particularly low-income people, 
this is consequential amendments from 145 but adds new 
sections to The Court of Appeal Act, to The Queen’s Bench Act, 
The Small Claims Act to include them under The Fee Waiver 

Act. It will give judges the ability to waive fees at and in each of 
these courts, and of course amends the Acts in English and in 
French where appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before supper there was a report that I was 
referencing from the Law Reform Commission — great reports 
on this particular bill — and it talked about the different sort of 
cases brought forward to groups like CLASSIC [Community 
Legal Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner City Inc.] or 
PLEA [Public Legal Education Association] or that sort of 
derivatives of the Legal Aid Commission, Mr. Speaker. But it 
talked about a case that had come before CLASSIC where: 
 

Ms. W. is an elderly woman whose only source of income 
is her pension. Her adult son has a brain injury and lives in 
a care home. Ms. W.’s daughter-in-law is her son’s 
Personal and Property Guardian, but she has left the 
country and been neglecting her duties.  
 
Ms. W. wished to pursue Guardianship for her son to 
access the funds in his bank account to pay for his medical 
needs. Her application had a high probability of success. 
All of their family members indicated that they would 
consent to the application, and a hearing would not be 
necessary. 
 
When CLASSIC advised Ms. W. of the costs associated 
with the application (which included a $200 filing fee at 
the Court of Queen’s Bench), Ms. W. instructed us to drop 
the application. She said she would not be able to find the 
funds necessary to proceed. Ms. W. was forced to abandon 
her application because of the costs involved. She advised 
that she would continue caring for her son on her limited 
income as she could not afford to become his guardian. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, there are many compelling needs in the 
community in terms of the barriers that exist between people 
and the legal system, and being able to avail themselves of their 
legal rights. We’re glad to see measures coming forward that 
should result in better access of individuals like this elderly 
woman that was brought to the attention of folks by CLASSIC 
here. 
 
Again though, Mr. Speaker, these are consequential 
amendments, and I’ve already had a fairly lengthy discussion of 
Bill 145. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 146, The Fee Waiver Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 146, The Fee Waiver Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I seek leave to make 
an introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to make an 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6201 

introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased tonight 
to introduce, in the east gallery, my sister Michelle is here, 
Auntie Mich who many of you have heard me speak about on 
many occasions; my niece Madigan Chartier who is a grade 9 
student at Holy Cross and is an accomplished athlete and pretty 
neat babysitter and kind of pseudo big sister as well; and last 
but not least, Ophelia Chartier-McDaid who is my almost 
seven- year- old. She will be seven tomorrow, December 3rd, at 
approximately six in the morning, Mr. Speaker. So this time 
seven years ago, I was in the process of having Ophelia, not 
unlike speaking to bills sometimes at night, Mr. Speaker. 
Anyway with that I would ask my colleagues to give Ophelia, 
Michelle, and Madigan a warm welcome to their legislature. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 144 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 144 — The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to my colleagues for giving me a moment to make an 
introduction. I’m always very happy when my family’s in the 
House. It doesn’t happen very often. 
 
I’m happy to wade into the debate on Bill No. 144, An Act to 
amend The Victims of Domestic Violence Act. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to speak a little bit about what the bill will do, but I’ll also 
speak . . . I’d like to define what exactly domestic — or in this 
case it’s being changed to interpersonal — violence is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So when we talk about domestic violence, just a common 
definition, and actually this is . . . And this particular 
organization is called domesticviolence.org. And the definition 
of domestic violence, according to this organization, is: 
 

Domestic violence and emotional abuse are behaviours 
used by one person in a relationship to control the other. 
Partners may be married or not married; heterosexual, gay, 
or lesbian; living together, separated or dating. 
 
Examples of abuse include: name-calling or putdowns, 
keeping a partner from contacting their family or friends, 
withholding money, stopping a partner from getting or 
keeping a job, actual or threatened physical harm, sexual 

assault, stalking, intimidation. 
 
[19:15] 
 
The website goes on to define and say that: 
 

Violence can be criminal and includes physical assault 
(hitting, pushing, shoving . . .), sexual abuse (unwanted or 
forced sexual activity), and stalking. Although emotional, 
psychological and financial abuse are not criminal 
behaviours, they are forms of abuse and can lead to 
criminal violence. 

 
I think that that’s an important point, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The violence takes many forms and can happen all the 
time or once in a while. An important step to help yourself 
[as an individual] or someone you know in preventing or 
stopping violence is recognizing the warning signs . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, and the reality is, anyone can be a victim. So 
that’s one definition of domestic violence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s important to note when we have this bill in front of 
us here today, the term domestic violence with respect to this 
particular bill will be changed to interpersonal violence, and I 
will explain that in a moment, Mr. Speaker. But interpersonal 
violence and abuse that occurs . . . What is interpersonal 
violence and abuse? It is violence and abuse that occurs 
between people who know each other. It may happen within or 
outside of a family. 
 
Violence is defined as an unlawful use of force or threat of 
force that may result in criminal charges of physical and/or 
sexual violence. And abuse can be defined as when someone in 
a relationship does or says things to gain control over you by 
hurting you or causes feelings such as fear, anxiety, 
nervousness, guilt, helplessness, worthlessness, or shame, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So this Bill No. 144 before us is doing many things. As the 
minister mentioned in his second reading comments, in broad 
terms he says the purpose of this new Act, this amending Act, 
“is to provide an additional tool to a responding police officer to 
separate individuals who represent an imminent risk of injury to 
each other.” And he points out that “It’s critical to the 
functionality of the Act that police and victims are able to 
immediately seek an emergency intervention order by 
telephone.” 
 
So when we look at the bill, Mr. Speaker, and in the 
explanatory notes, we can note that, Mr. Speaker, one thing 
that’s changing is, as I said, the name. The long title of this Act, 
we’re replacing victims of domestic violence with interpersonal 
violence. And the minister points out why that is important, Mr. 
Speaker. It extends beyond the traditional domestic violence 
scenario to protect a broader range of victims of violence, Mr. 
Speaker. So it’s not just when we speak about spousal or 
partner violence or intimate partner violence. Interpersonal 
violence covers a whole gamut of things, Mr. Speaker, whether 
it’s a caregiver or a married couple or a common law couple. 
There are many different scenarios under which it can occur. So 
that’s an important thing. 



6202 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

I think it’s important to comment that these are very positive 
changes. I believe Saskatchewan was the first jurisdiction in 
Canada, in the ’90s, to have a bill on domestic violence. And as 
other jurisdictions came on board they included, as all 
legislation evolves, they included things in their legislation that 
are relevant and pertinent to our times now. So I think it’s 
important that we continue to evolve and improve our 
legislation as well. 
 
So one of the pieces that’s being added, Mr. Speaker, is, aside 
from the name, is that one of the following subclauses is being 
added, that “persons who are in an ongoing caregiving 
relationship, regardless of whether [or not] they have lived 
together at any time.” And that’s important, Mr. Speaker, when 
we think about, when we think about elder abuse or abuse of 
perhaps an adult living with a disability, Mr. Speaker, who has 
a caregiver who doesn’t in fact live in the home, but still needs 
protection, Mr. Speaker. So changing that, adding that 
definition is very important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know in the explanatory notes it goes on to say: 
 

The definition of “cohabitants” is expanded to include 
persons who are in an ongoing caregiving relationship, 
whether or not they have lived together at any time. This 
reflects the need to recognize that abuse by a caregiver is a 
serious problem. 

 
And the explanatory notes go on to say in this particular bill 
that: 
 

The definition of “interpersonal violence” is expanded to 
include harassment and deprivation of necessities as 
categories of interpersonal violence for which an order 
may be sought. Harassment includes stalking and other 
forms of electronic or personal harassment. The 
deprivation of necessities will allow for an order to be 
sought where an individual, such as an elderly family 
member, is not being provided with the support required to 
stay healthy. 

 
So this broadens the definition and protects more people, Mr. 
Speaker. And when you think about changing with the times, 
you think about electronic harassment. There’s been some very 
high-profile anti-bullying cases, Mr. Speaker, where, and this 
piece doesn’t address this specifically, but the reality is, abuse 
and harassment can exist, Mr. Speaker, electronically by email, 
by Facebook. So I think this is an important part to cover, Mr. 
Speaker. And again, recognizing that vulnerable adults, whether 
it’s a senior or perhaps as I said an adult living with a cognitive 
disability or a physical disability for that matter, is now 
covered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another change as I go through this bill, Mr. Speaker, we now, 
when it comes to a Justice of the Peace being able to consider 
determining whether an order should be made . . . And I should 
stop and say what an emergency intervention order is, Mr. 
Speaker, because this bill speaks directly to that. 
 
An emergency intervention order is an order that . . . It’s a court 
order, Mr. Speaker, that orders the suspected abuser not to talk 
to or contact the individual or the individual’s family. It gives 
the individual the right to stay in his or her home right now 

without the suspected abuser being there. It directs a police 
officer to remove the suspected abuser from the home. An 
emergency intervention order directs a police officer to go with 
the individual or the suspected abuser to supervise the removal 
of personal belongings from the home. It includes any other 
conditions that may provide for an individual’s immediate 
protection. 
 
So that’s what we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, an emergency 
intervention order here. So in order to get . . . There’s been 
some added materials to that, Mr. Speaker. And talking to my 
colleagues who are lawyers, obviously Court of Queen’s Bench, 
some of these things could already be done but in speaking to 
my colleagues, with the Justice of the Peace some of these 
things are being codified in legislation now, Mr. Speaker. And 
some of these things that are being codified that a Justice of the 
Peace can consider is that the new clause provides that the 
exposure of any child to interpersonal violence shall be 
considered by the Justice of the Peace in determining whether 
or not to make an order. 
 
So I think’s it very important to consider the vulnerable 
individuals in a household where interpersonal violence might 
be occurring, that that would make sense to be able to order an 
emergency intervention order, Mr. Speaker, if children are 
being exposed to this kind of environment. 
 
A few other things, Mr. Speaker. The new clause provides that 
recent changes in circumstance for a respondent that have been 
proven to act as a trigger for interpersonal violence shall also be 
considered, such as the loss of a job or release from 
incarceration, Mr. Speaker. Another clause provides that 
controlling behaviour by the respondent towards the victim 
should be specifically considered. And as well another clause 
provides that where a victim has a particular vulnerability such 
as a mental or physical impairment, this should be specifically 
considered by the Justice of the Peace. 
 
So there’s some new provisions in there, Mr. Speaker, and as 
my colleagues have told me, it codifies this so a Justice of the 
Peace has this to utilize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Going on further, Mr. Speaker, I will just pull out the bill here. 
Another section . . . Actually I’ve got many papers here on my 
desk, Mr. Speaker. I just need to sort through them here. 
 
I think this is an important discussion to have I think in light 
particularly of Jian Ghomeshi and other very high-profile cases 
where, when we think about interpersonal violence, it can come 
in many forms, as I’ve spoken about a little bit earlier, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not just physical. There’s sexual violence. There is 
a broad range of it. But I think this is a particularly important 
bill and being able to have the conversation . . . In the recent 
month I think the conversation around violence particularly 
against women has really hit the forefront, Mr. Speaker, which 
is an important thing. 
 
There’s no shortage of comments on the public record, Mr. 
Speaker. You can go to a website like Maclean’s and see that 
there’s everyday new articles being posted from writers on their 
website, talking of the many different perspectives around 
sexual violence and interpersonal violence. 
 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6203 

We think about the hashtag #rapedandneverreported and the 
vast number of women who have used that hashtag and 
explained that they have many circumstances, experienced a 
variety of circumstances where they didn’t feel comfortable. 
They felt humility, shame, all kinds of things that keep people 
from coming forward when they have been in a violent 
situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We don’t just think about sexual violence. We think about 
people who . . . Sometimes it’s astonishing to those who, where 
you have a partner who has physically abused someone, and the 
individual keeps coming back to that same partner. It’s a hard 
thing to understand, Mr. Speaker, but violence and the cycle of 
abuse can be a very difficult thing to break. 
 
It was interesting in light of the Jian Ghomeshi scandal, and it’s 
important he’s been charged. He hasn’t been convicted but 
some of the women who’ve spoken out publicly about some of 
their experiences . . . There was an incredibly articulate female 
lawyer who said she experienced some sexual violence after a 
date, Mr. Speaker, in going back to his place. And this is a 
highly accomplished woman, confident, beautiful, all these 
things you look at a person and you think this person has their 
life together. She felt good about her life but . . . She was able 
to stop it but didn’t before it went even further than she would 
have liked, but it was still nowhere in the realm of acceptable, 
Mr. Speaker, in her description of the events. But she said, if 
this can happen to me, it can happen to anyone. And she didn’t 
report her experiences to the police, Mr. Speaker, because there 
are those feelings of shame, or did I ask for this, or did I put 
myself in that position. 
 
I remember reading another article just a few weeks ago about a 
woman. She describes herself again as highly successful in her 
career, moderately attractive. And not that that matters, but this 
is a person who feels quite good about herself. And she talks 
about being recently divorced and starting to date, and she talks 
about in the last few months she has had two experiences, Mr. 
Speaker, with seemingly very nice men. And she found herself 
in a situation where she was pinned down with an arm on her 
neck. And eventually this man let her go, but she didn’t report 
that either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again there’s all kinds of reasons why women don’t come 
forward, and I think that the discussion that we’re having now 
that’s moved much more into the public domain is an important 
one to have, Mr. Speaker. And obviously this bill doesn’t speak 
directly and specifically to that, but I don’t think you can talk 
about interpersonal violence without thinking about the broader 
context right now. 
 
It was interesting. There’s an article from Maclean’s written by 
Todd Minerson who is the executive director of the White 
Ribbon Campaign. It talks about, “Social norms around sexual 
assault need to change.” So this is an interesting quote to me. 
He says: 
 

We also need to explore the costs of patriarchy and sexism 
on us as men. It leads to living shorter lives, it makes it 
more likely men will themselves be victims of violence 
from other men due to war, crime, bullying. And men will 
be more likely to experience the pressures to provide and 
protect some of the gendered roles that we’re told to 

embrace. It’s not the same cost to men as it is to women, 
but understanding that there’s a cost can also help 
motivate change. 

 
So interpersonal violence and some of these issues impact 
women very greatly, Mr. Speaker. By and large it’s women who 
are the highest number of victims of interpersonal violence in 
Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact, we have a record of which 
we can’t be particularly proud. We have the highest domestic 
assault charges reported — I just need to make sure I’m 
phrasing this correctly — the highest rate of police-reported 
domestic violence of all provinces, Mr. Speaker, which is not a 
statistic of which we should be proud. 
 
So having some of these conversations around interpersonal 
violence, our roles in society as men and as women, women 
don’t just need to learn how to protect themselves. This needs 
to be a cultural shift where men also take responsibility, and not 
just for women, but as this author, Todd Minerson, points out, 
for their health and well-being, and to lead full and meaningful 
lives as well, Mr. Speaker, and healthy lives. 
 
[19:30] 
 
So Bill No. 144, The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment 
Act, 2014, does bring some very good things to the fore. I think 
that when we speak about interpersonal violence we can’t 
ignore all the missing and murdered indigenous women in 
Canada as well. That’s an important thing that we need to think 
about in this situation, Mr. Speaker. Indigenous women, by and 
large, I think the numbers are quite high in communities where 
it comes to interpersonal violence. 
 
So coming from community and from indigenous groups 
themselves, indigenous peoples, people need to come up with 
solutions at a community level. But having tools, Mr. Speaker, 
like Bill 144 is a very good and supportive step. There needs to 
be legislative changes. There needs to be a cultural shift. There 
needs to be work at the community level. And there’s many 
people doing great work. Our transition houses, our Interval 
House in Saskatoon, there’s many really great organizations 
doing some very good work. 
 
I’d commend the government a couple of years ago. They put 
some money into supporting the northeast outreach centre in 
Melfort, Mr. Speaker. And I understand that just this weekend 
there was a terrible fire. So the building is not yet, this shelter is 
not yet open. It was coming very close and it has burned, and 
from what I understand is all but destroyed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I had an opportunity to, prior to the government, a couple 
of years before the government committed to supporting the 
shelter, I had an opportunity to speak to the folks up there about 
some of the needs. And we talk about women being sent from 
Melfort to the nearest shelter that had a space. P.A. [Prince 
Albert] was always full, from what I’d been told from folks in 
that area. So being sent on a bus with you and your kids to 
Yorkton, being ripped away from your community because 
you’re a victim of interpersonal violence and being sent far 
away to re-establish your life is . . . Well not even 
re-establishing your life, just to make the escape in many cases 
in the first place, Mr. Speaker. 
 



6204 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

So again, as I said, I’ve commended the government in the past 
for supporting this particular endeavour, but I hope to see . . . 
And I know the government has said in light of this fire that 
they will help out, but I hope that this particular shelter will 
open its doors sooner than later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are many, many important parts to this Act, and it’s 
good to see it before us. We will have an opportunity in 
committee to ask many questions, Mr. Speaker, and I look 
forward to the opportunity to perhaps join the critic in asking 
some of those questions with respect to Bill No. 144. I know I 
will have colleagues who will also want to enter the debate, so 
with that I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 144, The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 152 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 152 — The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi 
intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Bill No. 152, The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Consequential Amendment Act, Loi de 2014 portant 
modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014, Mr. 
Speaker, as the minister pointed out, simply amends the 
bilingual Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 to update the reference in 
that Act from The Victims of Domestic Violence Act to The 
Victims of Interpersonal Violence Act. Then I think my 
comments from its companion bill stand. And with that, I would 
like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 152, The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 141 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 141 — The 
Archives and Public Records Management Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
tonight to enter into the debate on Bill No. 141, The Archives 
and Public Records Management Act. This is another 
housekeeping bill that the government has introduced dealing 
with some changes requested to the Act by groups like 
Saskatchewan Archives, the Legislative Assembly Office, court 
services, the Office of the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, and the Ministry of Health. And these are all 
organizations who are impacted by this Act. 
 
And the minister indicated in his comments in the second 
reading on November 4th that the changes in terminology that 
we find in this bill is the result of detailed and ongoing 
consultation with all these various groups: record managers, 
government legal advice, and the public records committee. 
 
And certainly I think a couple of the changes that we see will 
make access to the archives much easier. In particular, earlier, 
maybe I guess it was a couple of years ago with the previous 
minister, when I had a constituent who is a professor at the St. 
Thomas More College at the University of Saskatchewan, he’s 
one of my constituents, and he was concerned about the length 
of time it was taking to access some of the archival information. 
And part of the reason for that was there weren’t enough staff 
able to deal with the volume. 
 
And what these staff had to do was go through . . . This was 
historical information they were doing for; I think it was an 
analysis of labour work force or something like that. And 
because it involved individuals, the staff people at the archives 
had to go through each page of each document to ensure that 
there wasn’t private health information or concerns about 
releasing private information. And so obviously they didn’t 
have enough staff to be able to keep up with the requests. I 
think there was a number of grad students that were also doing 
some research. And it was very frustrating for everybody 
involved. 
 
I think that the proposed changes to this bill are actually going 
to improve that. And what the minister indicated in his opening 
comments on November 4th, or introductory comments on 
November 4th, was that the new changes will exempt certain 
records from The Health Information Protection Act or HIPA. 
And what’s going to happen is it’s going to “. . . allow for 
reasonable access to historical records of the province for 
research purposes while maintaining necessary protocols to 
avoid breaches of privacy.” 
 
And if I understand correctly what the bill will do will allow 
archives to pass on this information without going through each 
page line by line to the researcher. And then the researcher will 
basically sign an undertaking saying that they will not release 
any health or private information. So I think what happens and, 
according to the minister himself, he said, “The proposed 
exemption will allow for reasonable access to historical records 
of the province for research purposes while maintaining 
necessary protocols at the archives to avoid breaches of 
privacy.” And also there are “. . . safeguards to ensure that 
personal health information of individuals is protected where it 
exists in the archival record.” 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6205 

So I think this kind of change is something that’s certainly 
going to help the people that need access to the archives when 
there aren’t enough staff and there isn’t the, you know, if 
they’re understaffed or short-staffed, they can’t actually deal 
with it. 
 
The minister indicated that they received 67 access requests 
involving 60,000 pages of review since April 1st this year. So 
clearly that’s a lot of review for individual archival workers. 
And of course that’s something that will, this change will 
facilitate a much better response for individuals seeking to do 
the research from the archives. 
 
There’s a number of other changes. I think another one, and I 
spoke to someone who is a professional archivist that’s also in 
my constituency, and he said that changes to the board of 
directors are interesting. And I’m hoping we’ll have time in the 
intervening break here, coming up, Mr. Speaker, to have an 
opportunity to discuss this with folks who are involved in the 
organization just to make sure that all of these changes are 
appropriate and do reflect the wishes of the groups that were 
consulted when the amendments were coming in. 
 
So I think, other than that, there’s some other inconsequential 
changes to the bill. They changed the name of the organization 
to Saskatchewan Archives to reflect the important role it plays. 
I mean a name is a name, but that’s good they’re changing it I 
guess. And there’s a few other smaller details in the legislation 
to deal with some of the concerns and through the consultation 
of the users of archives. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have much to add. We 
certainly want to be able to consult with people who use the 
archives to make sure that this bill reflects the changes that 
were requested. And so I will adjourn the debate on Bill No. 
141. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 141, The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 142 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 142 — The 
Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
this is just yet another one of those consequential amendment 
Acts that are required to be separate from the previous bill 
because it is modifying some bills that are en français, monsieur 
le Président [Translation: in French, Mr. Speaker]. And so again 

we get a chance to see The Education Act and The Evidence Act 
are both being amended here by changing the name of The 
Archives Act, 2004 for the new Act which is The Archives and 
Public Records Management Act. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t anything else to comment on in this 
particular bill. It’s just a consequential amendment and it’s of 
no real consequence. So I would move that we adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 142. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 142, The Archives and Public Records 
Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 147 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 147 — The Class 
Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on this 
Bill No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014. I guess 
there’s different ways individuals bring an action like this 
forward, and I was trying to get some understanding from some 
of my colleagues on it, you know. When we talk about that, it’s 
numbers, and I guess it sounds like it’s a large, it could be a 
large number of individuals for whatever reason might be 
dealing with a situation. There may be many of them that all of 
a sudden, for some reason, a firm or they created a class action 
lawsuit against, could be a company I guess — different reasons 
why, I’m not sure — with a product that people are being . . . 
harm is done to individuals.  
 
And it might be, I guess I think of some of the different ones 
that have, you know, I think of some of the residential schools. 
They had a class action lawsuit that went forward. I think about 
some of the individuals who . . . I guess medical devices and 
stuff where you heard about that. You see it, you know, people 
bringing forward an action like that to compensate them. And I 
guess the courts look at that and it’s a process that gives a group 
of individuals to come together and to say, have a legal counsel 
represent them, whether it’s I assume with a law firm or a 
number of them. 
 
I don’t have all the details, Mr. Speaker, on that, but I do know 
I’ve heard of many different cases that have come forward, and 
it’s to deal with individuals who have been harmed. And you 
know, whether it’s the loss of a loved one, it could be that. It 
could be injuries, it could be out of money. I guess there’s 
different reasons why you would bring a case like this forward. 
 
But this amendment gives the opportunity for the, you know . . . 
I guess the bill changes the rules for the class action lawsuit but 
also gives some discretion to the judges when they’re awarding 
cost, damages, whatever. So they have an opportunity to look at 



6206 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

that, and I think the way this . . . And we’ll be asking these 
questions. 
 
Obviously there must have been some homework, and I hope 
the homework was done on this bill, and I imagine the Ministry 
of Justice did what they need. The minister, you know, got 
some input, consulted with individuals. There must be a reason 
why, you know, we have legislation like this and bring it 
forward. 
 
[19:45] 
 
They talk a little bit about that so, you know, that gives the 
judges some discretion. And that’s good. And the bill, it also 
talks about . . . And I guess maybe this is different or maybe 
this is how some of the . . . The change is retroactive. 
 
So you know, when you look at that . . . And I know that we’ll 
have some clarification in committee and some of my 
colleagues will ask some tougher questions and share some of 
their knowledge of this as, you know, we have legal counsel 
and we have individuals that were lawyers at one time. I guess 
they’ll talk from that point. They’ll know and maybe have 
experienced some of that. So they’re going to give some good 
detail into this to make sure the questions are asked and to make 
sure individuals were consulted, the legal system and 
everything else, you know, our judges, legal system, justice 
system had this opportunity. 
 
So really at this point, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any further 
comments on that, and I know members will ask a lot of 
questions in committee, so I’m prepared to adjourn debate on 
Bill 147. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 143 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 143 — The 
Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
the discussion about Bill No. 143, An Act to amend The Degree 
Authorization Act. Mr. Speaker, it is, despite the minister’s 
quite lengthy second reading speech, this bill is very short. It’s a 
four-page bill. And what it does in essence, this amendment, 
and this is from the explanatory notes, Mr. Speaker: 
 

This amendment will remove from the Act the specified 
end date of the grandfathering period, which is the time 
given to certain institutions to come into compliance with 
the Act. This amendment also clarifies that an end date 

will continue to be specified in The Degree Authorization 
Regulations. These Regulations will be amended in the 
future and it is anticipated that the amendments will 
include an extension of the grandfathering period to allow 
grandfathered institutions more time to come into 
compliance with the Act and Regulations in ways that will 
not adversely affect students. 

 
So that is one part of it, Mr. Speaker. And it also “. . . adds a 
regulation-making power to authorize the prescribing of a date 
for the purposes of subsection 4(3),” Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think the one thing to thing about, Mr. Speaker, again as I 
said, this bill removes the grandfathering clause from the Act 
and moves the date of the exemption into the regulations. And 
in essence actually, the grandfathering clause allows 
particularly Briercrest College to grant degrees. 
 
It’s an interesting thing when you think about having to make 
some of these changes, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had a couple bills 
before us in this legislature this session that had just previously, 
just in the last year or two been before us, and the government 
seems to have not done all of its homework on those particular 
bills, as the bills have had to come back to us for changes. And 
not that fixing legislation is a bad thing, Mr. Speaker, if there’s 
pieces missing or if things have been left out. But I think it’s 
also incumbent upon the government to make sure that they get 
things right. 
 
So did this government not do its homework if Briercrest still 
isn’t in a position where it can grant those degrees without an 
exemption, Mr. Speaker? So again, perhaps the government 
didn’t do enough legwork ensuring that Briercrest would be in a 
position to grant degrees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I know that I will have colleagues who have more 
knowledge in this area who will speak to this bill and will have 
some questions at committee. So with that, I would like to move 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 143. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment 
Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 151 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 151 — The 
Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
my pleasure to rise in this wintry evening to speak to Bill No. 
151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
We see a lot of changes in professions over the years, and I 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6207 

think this bill reflects that kind of change as we see the role of 
pharmacists changing and the function of pharmacies changing. 
And certainly the complexities of health care and all those 
things seem to add up to these kinds of things just evolving over 
time. 
 
When I think back to I guess it was around 1917, my 
grandfather, Grandpa Belcourt, my mom’s dad, was a 
pharmacist. Back in those days he was able to hang his shingle 
as a pharmacist without training, but then he went and served in 
World War I and when he came back, he actually went to the 
University of Saskatchewan and got his training as a 
pharmacist. 
 
So I used to . . . I remember going through the Thorvaldson 
Building, I think was the name of the building on campus, and 
they had all the old photos, Mr. Speaker, of all the pharmacy 
students from way back when, and I could find my grandpa’s 
picture on the wall. He took a one-year program, and he 
practiced as a pharmacist in my hometown of Lafleche for 
decades and sold it in the 1960s to my uncle who then took 
over. 
 
And that was in the days when liquor vendors were first being 
issued. I was talking to my uncle about that a couple of weeks 
ago, and he was able to apply for the first liquor vendor. And I 
guess they trusted pharmacists to be able to dispense liquor in a 
proper way, so that’s what happened in my hometown. And I 
can remember going as a kid to the pharmacy. We were way 
more interested in the comics than we were in the liquor. But 
that was certainly, you know, the Rexall drugstore and all the 
sort of what we think as iconic images now, as I age myself. 
 
But anyways we know that the role of pharmacists have 
changed greatly. I think when you look at the modern drugstore 
these days in large urban centres where they’re often tucked 
into . . . There’s a pharmacy kiosk in all kinds of larger stores 
these days, like London Drugs and Shoppers Drug and the 
Co-op and the grocery store, Safeway. So there’s often it’s part 
of a larger shopping place, and those roles are really important 
as well. 
 
I think what we’re hearing about pharmacists in the news these 
days though, Mr. Speaker, is the concern about short-staffing. I 
mean obviously that’s an issue that we’ve been raising on this 
side of the House in a number of contexts in the health care 
field, but it’s one that’s particularly concerning with 
pharmacists. And they’ve been coming to the media recently 
and explaining how this is a really dangerous situation, where 
you have people dispensing in a frantic and often confusing and 
chaotic atmosphere of an emergency centre in a large urban 
hospital or in a busy surgery ward or all of those things where 
those requests for meds are complex and they’re voluminous. 
 
So I think there’s a lot of concern from the pharmacy profession 
of making sure, again, client safety, patient safety, which needs 
to be always paramount. We hear the Minister of Health 
speaking a lot about that, but I think what more and more is 
we’re hearing demands from the people of Saskatchewan for 
action on that front. It’s one thing to talk about it. It’s one thing 
for the government to rest on the accomplishments that they 
often cite here in the House, but we know that there’s people at 
risk and people being put in danger because of the short-staffing 

that we see not only in the long-term care homes but also in the 
pharmacies in the hospitals in our province. 
 
This bill, however, deals with some other issues that I think the 
minister worked in concert with the pharmacy association of 
Saskatchewan to address. One of the biggest changes I guess 
that is really important here is the fact that the name is changing 
to reflect a new way of doing business for pharmacists. And the 
name is going to be called The Pharmacy and Pharmacy 
Disciplines Act rather than The Pharmacy Act. And what 
happens now is we see the College of Pharmacists now being 
responsible for two streams of the pharmacy profession, so the 
pharmacist themselves, but also they are adding responsibility 
now for a profession called pharmacy technicians. 
 
And you know, you think of registered nurses and licensed 
practical nurses, so there’s different roles for those two types of 
professionals. I believe this is similar in this context where we 
see pharmacists and then these pharmacy technicians who will 
now be able to do more clinical work, and they will assume 
more of the technical duties such as dispensing. And currently 
that’s something that only pharmacists can do. 
 
Other amendments in the bill will allow pharmacists to 
administer vaccines and drugs like flu shots and vitamin B12 
shots. Also they can order, access, and use laboratory tests, 
working in collaboration with a physician. 
 
So I think it shows there is a much more collaborative approach 
in including the pharmacist in the care spectrum that individuals 
are encountering. We know the use of drugs and prescriptions is 
becoming more and more complex as well, so ensuring that the 
pharmacist is integrated into the care plan for individuals and 
that they’re working closely with the physicians I think is 
something that would be desirable. 
 
We’re hoping, you know, once we have a break here coming 
up, that we will be able to talk to people, find out whether or 
not that consultation was properly done. We want to make sure 
that these changes were requested. 
 
We know the folks from the College of Pharmacists were here 
in the legislature on the day the bill was introduced, and 
presumably they have requested some of these changes. We 
haven’t any indication from the Minister of Health in his 
opening comments whether that’s the case, so we’ll need to 
assure ourselves and assure the public that this is something 
that’s desirable, that it makes more sense for the profession of 
pharmacists, and also that the pharmacist technicians will be 
adequately protected as they are now being brought in under the 
same Act. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the extent of my 
comments on Bill No. 151, and I will move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



6208 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

Bill No. 150 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 150 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 150, An Act to amend The Residential 
Tenancies Act, 2006. Mr. Speaker, this bill amends a number of 
the clauses in The Residential Tenancies Act, and we hope that 
the proposals are there to make the Act easier to enforce. But 
there are some things where we’ll want to get more explanation 
about how the Act works when we get into committee. 
 
But the comments that I have now relate to the bill itself. It is 
interesting how the term social housing program is removed 
from the legislation and just becomes a housing program. And 
I’m not totally certainly certain what that means other than it 
may be that there’s no longer a reference to the fact that there’s 
a responsibility of the provincial government around social 
housing. That’s something we need to examine. 
 
We know that a number of the policies have changed as far as 
the development of housing for low-income people. We know 
that there are dramatic needs for that kind of housing, and the 
capital is not always available. We know that we had one 
unfortunate situation in Regina where a project that was 
developed as social housing was then at the last minute turned 
into a regular housing program, and we still don’t have the full 
explanation about that, given that it’s important to find places 
for people to live, especially in our major cities. 
 
Now there’s another interesting choice made in this legislation, 
which is that the minister becomes responsible for appointing 
the director of residential tenancies. And this is described as a 
change in statutory drafting. That means that these kinds of 
appointments are made by the minister rather than by the 
cabinet or by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, and that’s an 
interesting question for those involved in governance. 
 
I know that in previous decades this was always a fine issue 
because you would end up having people who were appointed 
by Lieutenant Governor in Council and they had a bit of a 
higher or more protected status than the person who was 
appointed by the minister. And I don’t think the intention in this 
legislation is to reduce the protection for that director of 
residential tenancies, but it may have that effect. And that’s 
something that we need to watch very carefully because clearly 
the director of residential tenancies has a job to be a person who 
rules in some fairly difficult situations. And if the minister in 
charge of the housing program — now not the social housing 
program — has the power to quickly change that director, it 
puts . . . make some changes, it makes that job to be a little 
more vulnerable than it has been before. So I think that’s a 
question that we need to ask about that. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Now there are also some other changes around some of the 
technical rules between landlords and tenants. And I know 

some of my colleagues have gone through and described those 
in more detail, so I will not make comments about that. But the 
general tenor of the legislation seems to maybe move the 
balance a little bit more to the landlord’s side than the tenant’s 
side. And this is something that we need to watch very carefully 
because part of the job of the legislature and legislation is to 
protect those with little power or no power. And it’s very clear 
that landlords are normally ones that have much more power 
than the tenants. So we need to watch this very, very carefully. 
 
Now the legislation also goes into some of the rules around rent 
increases. It’s notable that section 11 exempts non-profit 
housing corporations from giving 6 or 12 months notice before 
a rent increase. I’m not sure what the purpose of that is, but I 
think that once again it puts much more power into the minister 
or the ministry puts much more power into sort of the political 
side of the operation rather than providing a more even-handed 
basis for this. And so once again it’s something we need to look 
at very carefully as this legislation moves forward. 
 
The legislation itself is legislation which comes to the 
legislature relatively often, or at least suggestions about how to 
change it comes here fairly often because of the nature of the 
disputes that will arise around the tenancy or around the 
residential issues. And so I know we’ll have another, you know, 
other chances to look at this legislation. But ultimately it’s 
about getting that balance right so that it’s fair both to the 
landlords and their backers who put capital into some very 
expensive properties but also for the tenants who want to have 
some security of their place in that residence so that they can 
build a home and know that it has substantial protection. 
 
We know that our rules in Saskatchewan are not like they are in 
some of the larger cities in Canada and the United States. We 
don’t have rent protections like they maybe do in New York 
City, that people can keep their rents at a same level for, you 
know, 10’s and 20’s, 20 years, maybe longer. But what we need 
to do is to make sure that our rules here are fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that I have any more comments to 
make at this time on the specific details, but I know that a 
couple other of my colleagues have some comments and that 
some of my colleagues have already made some quite lengthy 
comments about this legislation. And we’ll all look forward to 
asking questions when we get into the committee. But at this 
time, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
150. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 
Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion?  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 153 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 153 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6209 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 153, An Act to amend the Statute Law. 
Mr. Speaker, this is quite an extensive piece of legislation and it 
has probably even more extensive explanatory notes for the 
legislation. But I think some of my colleagues have started to 
call this one the hyphen bill or the bill around putting an “e” in 
judgment because, Mr. Speaker, it deals with updating a 
number of words to current and socially acceptable spellings. 
And practically what that means I think, Mr. Speaker, is they’re 
spellings of these words that don’t get rejected when people go 
and search them in their various search engines on their 
computer. 
 
So the legislation itself is quite lengthy and goes through many 
pieces of legislation but this is basically what it does. It changes 
words that are in legislation now like lunatic or insane or 
mentally incompetent and then uses the term lack capacity or 
lacking capacity.  
 
The word facsimile becomes fax so we use f-a-x as the term that 
covers all of those types of electronically transferred 
documents.  
 
Electronic mail becomes email, I guess the more acceptable 
word in the 21st century.  
 
Safe-keeping becomes safekeeping without a hyphen. Once 
again that’s obviously something that computer users have 
brought forward.  
 
Pipe-line becomes pipeline without a hyphen. Or if it’s pipe line 
two words it becomes one word: pipeline.  
 
Judgment adds an “e” into it, and we understand that that’s 
adopting the Oxford English Dictionary way of writing that 
word. It’s probably not the way most people in Saskatchewan or 
Canada use the word judgment because I think here we use the 
American spelling more often than the British spelling. So that 
one’s one that I question. 
 
The word chairman becomes chairperson throughout the 
various pieces of legislation.  
 
The word extra-provincial loses once again a hyphen to become 
extraprovincial, one long word.  
 
Data-base loses a hyphen to become database, one little bit 
longer word.  
 
And then subject-matter loses a hyphen to become two words: 
subject and matter.  
 
And probably the most interesting one of all, insofar, which is 
one word becomes three words: in, so, and far. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, for those people who are searching the word far, well 
they’ll now find a few more in the Saskatchewan pieces of 
legislation. 
 
But all of these changes are part of updating legislation. And I 
think there were some of them that are a bit offensive but a lot 
of them are well, not totally understandable or defensible and 

maybe even some of the wrong choices have been made. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I think we’re a pretty forgiving lot in this 
legislature. If they come back next year and decide to have 
judgment without an “e” I think we’ll all probably go along 
with that because that maybe would make more sense. 
 
But practically this bill is a bill of corrections, of updating, and 
it’s one that we see relatively regularly, but this year it has a 
special length, quite long, and it has some words that we don’t 
often see being amended in legislation. And so we have that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I have any more comments on 
this legislation at this point. I know some of my colleagues will 
want to put their two cents worth on the legislation. But at this 
time I would move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 154 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 154 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant 
le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 154, An Act to amend the Statute Law 
(No. 2). Mr. Speaker, this bill does what Bill No. 153 did to all 
of the unilingual, English bills and does the same thing to the 12 
bilingual Acts that are affected. So the same words that I 
described before are being changed in the English version. And 
I think there are some minor changes in some of the French 
words that are used, but it’s substantially the same piece of 
legislation as No. 153. And any comments that I’ve made about 
No. 153 would apply to Bill No. 154. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments, but I 
know some of my other colleagues will have comments. But I 
move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 157 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 157 — The 
Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 



6210 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m happy to rise 
tonight to speak to Bill No. 157. It has a very long name which 
I think I will read into the record because it’s an interesting 
name. It’s An Act to Facilitate the Donation of Certain Tissues 
from One Living Person to Another for Transplantation and to 
Facilitate the Donation, after Death, of Tissues, Bodies or Body 
Parts for Transplantation, Medical or Scientific Purposes and 
to make a consequential amendment to The Adult Guardianship 
and Co-decision-making Act. So it’s a nice long Act title, and it 
sort of indicates what you would find if you were to look into 
the actual mechanics of the bill itself. 
 
I think when we talk about this type of health care or the 
changes that are coming up in health care . . . Just a few minutes 
ago I talked about the changes in pharmacy and the practice of 
pharmacy. I think this an example of harvesting of human 
tissues. That’s something that would be probably unthinkable 
many, many years ago. I know when heart transplants first 
started from . . . And I think kidney transplants is another major 
change in medicine, and I know this bill deals a little bit with 
cornea transplants. 
 
I think one of the things that’s interesting here is in some of the 
definitions. First of all, I had to get out the dictionary because 
the definition of the organ means “a perfusable human organ for 
use in a transplant.” So I looked up perfusable and what that 
means is something that you can force fluids through, so it’s 
forcing a fluid through by way of blood vessels. So I think in 
this case when we’re talking about organs, it’s ones where 
blood flows through. So you can easily imagine that would be 
things like your kidney or a lung transplant or even the corneas. 
And I know we’re talking a lot about corneas in this bill as well. 
 
So the definition of an organ is: 
 

a perfusable human organ for use in a transplant, whether 
whole or in parts, and whose specific function is intended 
to return after revascularization and reperfusion, and 
includes any adjunct vessels that are retrieved with the 
organ for use in the organ transplant. 

 
So the idea is that it’s a perfusable organ that can be taken, and 
then it can be revascularized and reperfused. And I think what 
that means is it can be brought back to use and then once 
you’ve inserted it in somebody else, the blood will start flowing 
again. 
 
Another very interesting definition in this bill is the “organ 
procurement organization.” And this speaks, Mr. Speaker, to in 
some ways the privatization of organ transplants because what 
it does is it allows “a person, a partnership or an unincorporated 
body” that is properly registered with Health Canada in 
accordance to the federal regulations “respecting the 
importation, processing, distribution and transplantation of 
tissue or other body parts.”  
 
The minister indicated in his comments that this is sort of a 
revitalization of the old human tissue Act. He said it’s now 
outdated. And I think there’s some interesting parts to this. The 
bill is divided into different parts. Part II is about “Gifts for 
Transplants During Life.” And I know, Mr. Speaker, there is a 

lot of frustration with people about kidneys, kidney transplants 
in particular. I have one friend who is living in Manitou Beach 
right now who’s waiting for a kidney transplant, and he’s 
shared with me a letter that he actually wrote earlier this year. I 
think it was in September, where he wrote to his doctor at St. 
Paul's Hospital, and he expressed a number of concerns about 
the delays he was experiencing in the transplantation process. 
And here’s a quote from his letter: 
 
[20:15] 
 

I asked you what the protocol was regarding the 
transplantation process, and you told me that if I was to 
present with a living donor, the transplant would be 
“expedited.” Weighing this promise from you, along with 
my health status, I agreed to start dialysis immediately. 
This happened in the following week on Wednesday, May 
14th, 2014. I’m writing today to inform you that three 
potential living donors matching my blood type of O 
positive have come forward, wishing to provide me with a 
second kidney donation. 
 
I have heard nothing from the pre-transplant coordinator in 
the time period since my initial referral back in March 
2014. I strongly feel that this lack of communication 
amounts to mental cruelty as I find myself in limbo, 
awaiting some confirmation of my assessment. Surely 
after six months this person could have taken the time to 
either phone or write me to inform me of the fact that I 
have been referred, and also provided me with a date for 
my initial assessment that would hopefully lead to a 
transplant. That would be the compassionate and 
professional approach. This lack of communication does 
not strike me as expedited, seeing as how three individuals 
have indicated they wish to be assessed as candidates to 
donate a kidney to me. 
 
I am young and healthy, in the prime of my life and career. 
I do not appreciate being stranded in bureaucratic limbo. 
While I appreciate the life-saving intervention of dialysis, 
I certainly do not appreciate the absence of 
communication from the pre-transplant coordinator. 

 
So you can see some of the frustrations that this individual is 
having with the system. 
 
I know when I was door knocking in the last election I ran into 
two or three people who were desperately waiting for kidney 
transplants. Now the minister has indicated in his introductory 
comments to the bill that this will expedite people waiting for a 
kidney transplant. He said that, you know, often it can mean 
months and years of intense and tiring and time-consuming 
dialysis. And we all know that, Mr. Speaker. He’s saying 
people wait too long for transplants, and so he’s saying that it’s 
because of the legislation, and he wants to modernize it so that 
the system can respond quickly to innovations.  
 
What you find in part IV, I believe, yes, in section 22 is the 
regulations. And much of the ability for the minister to move 
forward on this transplantation innovation, as he refers to it, is 
found in the regulations itself. And I think what’s really 
important is to look at subsection (f), which refers to section 17 
of the bill, and that’s where we talk about the privatization of 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6211 

transplantations, and that’s where people can sell these tissue or 
organs for various reasons. 
 
So section 17 reads, no person shall buy or sell or deal in, 
directly . . . I’m just paraphrasing it. They shouldn’t buy or sell 
or directly deal with anything for a valuable consideration, 
which means money, any tissue for a transplant or any body or 
part of a body other than blood, for the purposes of transplant. 
So only subject to the regulations can you sell, so it’s a 
prohibitive clause. It says you can’t sell any of these except 
what it says in the regulations. 
 
So let’s look at the regulations. In section 22(f) it says, for the 
purposes of section 17, the Lieutenant Governor can make 
regulations prescribing exemptions from the prohibition against 
the purchase, sale, or other dealings with respect to tissue and 
body parts; and secondly, prescribing the types of people that 
are exempt. So we’re going to be able to have regulations that 
will say who can sell these body parts. And also the third part of 
that section talks about prescribing the circumstances of the 
purchase, sale, or other dealing. 
 
So we now have a situation where, through the executive level 
of government, they can make regulations talking about who 
can sell tissue or bodies or body parts and the types of 
exemptions they will have for the sale of these things plus the 
circumstances of the sale itself. So I think I feel like in some 
ways we’re moving into a brave new world here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, where we can see that we’re entering the world of 
selling body parts. Up to this point it’s always been donation, as 
far as I know. 
 
And I’m not sure how the minister feels that will expedite the 
transplant process. He’s saying that these will remove 
impediments to getting life-saving treatments for people whose 
health is compromised, and I’m just really not sure how that’s 
going to be accomplished. So I think this is something we’re 
going to keep a very close eye on in terms of this bill and 
certainly the regulations that the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council will make in relation to this type of innovation, I guess 
you can call it. 
 
I really do see it as a privatization of body parts, basically, 
where we’re allowing people to now enter into businesses, and 
the definition again in terms of that is the organ procurement 
organizations. So using the word organization, perhaps it will 
be more NGO [non-governmental organization] type 
organizations that will get into this business for importing, 
processing, distributing, and transplanting tissue and other body 
parts. Hard to say but it’s certainly something that I think we 
will have to keep a close eye on. 
 
Just briefly before we go, before I conclude my comments, the 
third part of the bill deals with gifts for transplant and other 
uses after death. So part II is “Gifts for Transplant During Life,” 
clearly these being gifts, or donated and no money changing 
hands. And the part III is “Gifts for Transplant and Other Uses 
After Death.” 
 
And so these are ones where . . . And I certainly am one who 
has signed my consent under The Human Tissue Act which will 
now . . . I guess my driver’s licence and my consent form is 
going to have to change too. But I think it’s incredibly 

important that people take the time to think about this and to 
sign that card. If in fact you’re in an accident, I’m not sure as I 
get older how much value my organs will have but they’re 
welcome to it, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve signed the card and it’s in 
my wallet and I’ve told my kids. And I think it’s very important 
for everyone to take a moment to think about it. And if you are 
willing to let those parts of your body go after you’re gone, then 
it’s incredibly important. It could save a life.  
 
And we’ve all heard stories. You read in the Reader’s Digest 
about, you know, the amazing stories of these transplant issues. 
There’s very heartbreaking stories where, you know, a young 
individual is killed in a car accident and then when the recipient 
of those organs actually meets the family afterwards. I just can’t 
imagine what a heartwarming and human kind of story that is 
where you can keep somebody alive even after you have, 
you’ve passed on. 
 
So in that context, Mr. Speaker, I know we’re going to want to 
really take a close look at these regulations and how the 
government proposes to get into the economic business of 
transplanting body parts and tissues. And it’s a brave new world 
out there so I guess we’ll have to look for comments from the 
public and certainly in the intervening months before the spring 
session we will want to find out who’s been consulted and 
whether there are concerns about this approach that the 
government’s taking. 
 
At this point I would like to move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 157. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 155 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 155 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en 
matière de soins de santé be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter 
debate on Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Heath Care Decision Makers Act. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s not really any substantive changes with respect to this 
bill. What it is, is turning this particular bill into a bilingual bill, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it will move from being The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act to Bill No. 155, An 
Act respecting Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 
Care Decision Makers and to make a consequential amendment 
to The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002, Loi concernant les 
directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé et 



6212 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

apportant une modification corrélative à la Loi de 2002 sur les 
procurations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this particular bill is simply becoming a bilingual bill. But I 
think I need to put on the record, health care directives are what, 
for those people who might not be sure what a health care 
directive is, if they’ve ever heard the term a living will, a living 
will is also called a health care directive. 
 
If you look at the Ministry of Justice website, this Act initially 
came into force in 1997. I know my colleague from Saskatoon 
Nutana was in law school at that point in time when that bill 
came into force. I remember her telling me a little bit about, she 
immediately went out and put together a health care directive, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
“Health care directives give directions about medical treatment 
to treatment providers. It comes into effect when you are no 
longer able to make and communicate your own health care 
decisions.” So this is from the Ministry of Justice website, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in Saskatchewan there are currently two kinds of health 
care directives. “The first gives specific directions to treatment 
providers as to the treatments that you consent to or refuse, 
should you one day be unable to make a health care decision on 
your own.” 
 
And “The second names another person (called a ‘proxy’) to 
make health care decisions for you if and when you cannot 
make a health care decision yourself,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
The directive “can also be a combination of both these types, 
including specific treatment directions for certain situations, as 
well as a proxy named for other health care decisions.” So, and 
again from the Ministry of Justice website. 
 
So why would you prepare a health care directive, Mr. Speaker? 
And it points out that “The directive lets you make decisions 
about your future treatment. It makes sure that your wishes will 
be known and respected.” 
 
When we think about health care directives and some of the 
discussion here we’re talking about, we’ve got a bill before us 
around organ and tissue donation, Mr. Speaker, which is a very 
different issue, but again it speaks to the need to make sure that 
your family, that loved ones who may be making decisions for 
you both while you perhaps are unwell and incapacitated or 
deceased, Mr. Speaker, in the case of the donations in some 
respects, in some cases it’s important to have these kinds of 
discussions with your family. 
 
I think we often put those things on the back burner. We like to 
think that we are infallible and immortal, Mr. Speaker, until as 
the older we get, we get a little bit closer, Mr. Speaker. You 
have to live every day as if it’s your last because one of these 
days you’re going to be right. So I think that that is important to 
keep in mind, that we need to make sure our families know our 
wishes, Mr. Speaker. And that is the point of a living will or a 
health care directive. 
 
So who in Saskatchewan can make a directive? So this is 
interesting, which I didn’t realize, that: 

Any person over the age of 16 who is able to make his/her 
own health care decisions can write a directive. A 
directive is especially useful to terminally ill and elderly 
individuals who have specific directions about treatment 
that they would like honoured as death approaches. 

 
And it asks the question, what should be in your directive or 
what should it say? 
 

You may give specific instructions about medical 
treatment you would or would not want when you are no 
longer able to make or communicate your own health care 
decisions. To help make your wishes as specific as 
possible — especially if you have a serious illness — you 
should discuss with your doctor how your illness will 
progress and what treatments will be offered to you. 

 
And the second thing that your directive should say: 
 

You may name a proxy to make health care decisions on 
your behalf in the event that you would not be able to 
make or communicate your own health care decisions, or 
if you have not provided a specific written directive. Your 
proxy does not need to be a family member. 

 
So what happens, Mr. Speaker, if you’re not able to make a 
decision and do not have a health care directive or a proxy? So 
the Ministry of Justice points out: 
 

If you become unable to make your own health care 
decisions and you have not named a proxy and not 
provided a specific written directive, the Act permits 
health care decisions to be made by your nearest adult 
relative; or, if no relative can be located, a treatment 
provider. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think if these are things that we think about 
when we hear stories in the news, I think creating a health care 
directive is probably a very positive step when we hear stories 
about other people who maybe haven’t taken those steps. And it 
makes you think about what you would or wouldn’t want to 
have happen if you are incapacitated, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
good to think about these things and ensure again that those 
around you know what your wishes are. 
 
And interesting: how should you write a health care directive? 
Your directive can be handwritten or typed. It must be signed 
and dated. It must be clear and as specific as possible, and it 
points out that it is difficult for treatment providers to follow 
directions that are not clear. The Act does not require them to 
follow directions that are not specific enough. So being clear 
and specific is a very important thing to do in your health care 
directive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[20:30] 
 
If you name a proxy, it’s a good idea to record his or her full 
name, address, and phone number. And after you’ve written 
your directive, again it says to discuss your directions with your 
proxy if you have named one, your family or others close to 
you, and your doctor. You may want to keep a copy in your 
wallet and give copies to your proxy, doctor, and those close to 
you. 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6213 

It’s important to note that you can cancel a directive, Mr. 
Speaker, so you may make these decisions now, and if in a 
decade from now or whatever time frame it might be, you can 
change your mind. The best way to cancel a directive is to 
destroy it or write on the document that you are cancelling it. In 
an emergency you can also tell another person that you no 
longer want to follow the directive. And you may also simply 
write a new directive which will automatically replace your old 
one. Let those who have copies of the earlier directive know 
that it has been cancelled or replaced. And you can change the 
directive at any time, Mr. Speaker, but written changes must be 
signed and dated by you. 
 
So that’s what this bill speaks to, Mr. Speaker, in general, and 
what a health care directive or a living will is. But with respect 
to the bill that is directly before us right now, Bill No. 155 and 
the changes, it’s simply moving from a unilingual bill to a 
bilingual bill, French and English, Mr. Speaker. I know that I 
have colleagues who will also have some comments about Bill 
No. 155, so with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 156 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 156 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
speak to Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 
Amendments Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a companion bill for the 
previous bill to which I just spoke. That was Bill No. 155. 
 
This particular bill, Bill No. 156, makes consequential 
amendments to four Acts that reference The Health Care 
Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act. 
This includes The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making 
Act, The Electronic Information and Documents Act, The 
Health Information Protection Act, and The Public Guardian 
and Trustee Act. So that is simply what this bill does, Mr. 
Speaker, and I actually have no further comments. So with that 
I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 159 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 159 — The 
Family Farm Credit Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s with a 
certain amount of bittersweet nostalgia that I rise to speak to 
this bill tonight. We know this is the full extent of this 
government’s legislative agenda as it relates to agriculture and 
farms in this go-round, and it’s a one-line bill that basically 
repeals a bill that’s part of our history. 
 
I guess the nostalgia for me and why this is bittersweet is that at 
this point in time my two brothers are in the process of selling 
our family farm, which was established by my grandpa in 1909. 
So 115 years later, it’s going out of the family. And it’s, I think, 
indicative of a trend that is happening across the province and 
certainly across the prairies, when we see farming becoming 
agricultural production. And the notion of the family farm is 
more a romantic notion I think these days, Mr. Speaker, than a 
reality. Certainly there are a lot of family farms still in 
Saskatchewan, and my brothers are good examples of that. But 
their kids, none of their children are interested in taking on the 
farm, so the intergenerational transfer is coming to an end. 
 
My grandpa sold the farm to my dad in the 1950s. Dad took up 
the farm just when the war was on. He started farming. He was 
too young to go to war, but somebody had to stay home and 
look after the farm. He could have gone to school in Regina 
because his dad was working in Regina with the Wheat Pool at 
the time, but he decided to take up farming. He had a wonderful 
career as a farmer. 
 
I think he told me the other day that he’s lived in the best time 
that there was. He’s concerned as an 88-year-old about what’s 
coming for future generations when we look at environmental 
concerns with global warming, and he’s quite worried about 
that. And he said, I think I lived in the best time. And certainly 
for me, growing up on a farm with six of us kids running 
around and a couple dogs and, you know, the chickens and the 
neighbours, the cousins across, a mile down the road, it’s 
probably one of the most carefree lives I think that a person 
could ever have. 
 
So that notion of the family farm where you grow your garden, 
you have, you know, 10, 15 quarters — for us, that was the 
average size in our area when I was growing up — that’s 
becoming a thing of the past. And I don’t think there’s any right 
or wrong to that or any judgment to be had. It just is a reality. 
We know that the number of grain elevators in Saskatchewan 
peaked in the 1930s and that they started declining at that point. 
 
So the whole evolution of agriculture in Saskatchewan is a 
fascinating story and one that I think this . . . this particular 
repealing bill is part of the story. If you look at the original bill 



6214 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

that’s being repealed here . . . And I think the minister was very 
clear. This bill is no longer in use. It’s not being used anymore. 
It’s redundant and therefore it’s appropriate for it to be 
repealed. But I think it reflects so much of our history as a 
province, in particular in the development of our province as an 
agricultural, the breadbasket of the world, so to speak. 
 
If you look at the original bill, section 3 is very telling. It says: 
 

The purpose of this Act is to make long-term credit 
available to farmers to assist in the establishment and 
development of family farms as economic farm units and 
in the transfer of family farms from members of one 
generation to members of a later generation and to assist in 
the enlargement and conversion of family farms that are 
uneconomic farm units into economic farm units. 

 
I don’t know if this is something that my dad took advantage of 
when he bought the farm from his dad. I don’t even know the 
economics of that or what happened, but I do know that this 
kind of notion that was enshrined in legislation tells us how 
important it was to the people of the time when this bill was 
passed to see that intergenerational transfer going on. It 
certainly is a little more difficult these days, when we look at 
the massive corporate farms that are becoming the norm in 
Saskatchewan. Again that’s neither right nor wrong; it just is. 
 
And so the face of farming is changing rapidly, as I think 
anyone from rural communities would confirm that. And 
yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure you see that all the 
time, how farms are getting bigger. And certainly we know that 
investment in farm land has attracted a lot of attention, certainly 
across Canada, and we know that things like pension plans or 
the board of the Canada Pension Plan just bought over, I think 
it’s 100 sections of land, a very large land purchase just 
recently. We see some of these huge corporate farms now filing 
for bankruptcy protection and creditor relief. That’s concerning. 
And it’s just the face of farming since when I grew up as a kid 
in the ’60s is something quite different, and I think the repeal of 
this bill is just part of that continuum of change on the family 
farm. 
 
One of the things I found interesting in the original bill is that 
the company that was entrusted with the lending and the 
financial arrangements to bring to fruition these 
intergenerational transfers and the development of family farms 
as economic farm units was the Co-operative Trust Company of 
Canada. And again, that speaks much to the history of this 
province and the prevalence of co-operatives within the 
development of the agricultural industry here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I was looking a little bit on the Internet on the 
Saskatchewan Co-operative Association page and just finding 
out a little bit about how these co-operatives influenced farming 
here in Saskatchewan. And I don’t know if the member from 
Saltcoats knows this, but in 1895 a group of dairy farmers in the 
settlement of Saltcoats formed the province’s first co-operative 
butter creamery. So 1895 was the first butter creamery in 
Saskatchewan, and that was in Saltcoats, the community of 
Saltcoats. 
 
The first co-operative to register in the province of 
Saskatchewan was the Grain Growers’ Grain Company in 1906, 

and from 1905 to 1929 there was an increase of co-operative 
organizations across the province. And this was the pool 
marketing phase of Saskatchewan’s co-operative development. 
Many of the province’s farmers began pooling their resources 
and marketing their products as a group instead of individual 
farms. 
 
And we certainly know about the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 
Again that was an organization that my grandpa was an 
organizer for back in the 1920s. And back further on they also 
formed The Co-operators insurance company. And just recently 
I think The Co-operators celebrated, was it their 75th 
anniversary a few years ago? My dad and my uncle were 
invited at the head table of that event and they still have policy 
no. 8 and no. 9 in The Co-operators insurance company. And 
that was something . . . when my grandpa was involved with the 
Wheat Pool, he wanted his children and other people to have 
access to a co-operative insurance company. 
 
The Co-operative Trust Company of Canada was also formed to 
help farm . . . what does it say here? The co-operative . . . first 
general co-operatives Act was passed by the government in 
1914 and the Co-operative Trust Company, which was just 
changed to Concentra Financial I think about five years ago, 
was formed in 1952 to meet the corporate financial needs of 
credit unions and co-operative members in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the rich and vibrant history of the co-operative movement in 
Saskatchewan is something that’s imbued in all aspects of who 
we are as a people here in Saskatchewan. And certainly I think 
the establishment of this bill and giving the Co-operative Trust 
Company the responsibility for the management of the 
financing that was contemplated in The Family Farm Credit Act 
was . . . It’s just part of the history of this province, and I think 
it’s something that we need to keep to track of and remember. 
Because I think, as we’ve heard other people say, if you don’t 
remember the past it’s hard to not make mistakes in the future. 
 
So at this point I think, Mr. Speaker, we’ve indicated, many of 
my colleagues have indicated this is a very short bill. It’s 
repealing The Family Farm Credit Act, and although I would 
like to take more time to maybe speak more about the history of 
farming in this province and the importance of the co-operative 
movement in that development of farms, and I think many of 
our colleagues would like to maybe speak more about the 
importance of that, at this point we have a number of other bills 
to cover this evening. So I would like to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 159, The Family Farm 
Credit Repeal Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 149 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 149 — The 
Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6215 

second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 149 and make 
some comments. And I guess at the end of the day, this bill 
transfers the health registration from the ministry to eHealth. 
And eHealth is able to now make some of the decisions on how 
data is stored without going and getting permission from the 
minister. So the minister is turning over certain powers to 
eHealth. 
 
And when you look at it, you know, we have a lot of individuals 
in our province of course, whether you’re new to Saskatchewan, 
you apply for a health card. You used to apply to the Ministry 
of Health. You no longer do that. You can actually go online 
and individuals can go to eHealth. And I was just talking to 
somebody the other day who actually went through and came 
from Alberta and was here for a little bit of a visit and said, you 
know, I’m going to come back. And that person said if they do 
come back, and when they do, they have to transfer their health 
card. Which is good, you know. But they would just do it online 
and they could do that with eHealth. And now instead of going 
through Health it’s a process. 
 
So the changes reflect, you know, that eHealth now has the 
responsibility for taking care of the health cards and making 
sure they provide I guess the data and make sure that . . . you 
know the privacy. You know that information is protected when 
they’re dealing with applications for health coverage or 
replacing a card or, I assume, when you’re applying for your 
. . . When your health card expires and you need a new one, I 
assume you can go to eHealth and get your actual little expiry 
date on it that says 2017. 
 
[20:45] 
 
But that’s mainly what this bill does. It’s giving those powers to 
eHealth, as the minister made in his comments, to do some of 
the business. We’ll watch it. I know some of us will have some 
comments and in committee we can ask some clarification if 
there is something to be cleared. But we’ll deal with that at that 
time. And I know some of my colleagues have more to say, so 
at this point I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 149. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 149, The Health 
Administration Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 148 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 148 — The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil be now read a second 
time.] 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 148, An Act to Amend the 
Vital Statistics Act, 2009. Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation, 
according to the minister, modernizes The Vital Statistics Act 
but keeps the original principles of the legislation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s probably a pretty accurate description of 
what happens here. What we have in The Vital Statistics Act at 
the present time is a transition piece of legislation moving from 
a paper-based registry system to an electronic system. One of 
the pieces that was not fully modernized was the whole concept 
of signatures on pieces of paper that would then be sent to the 
registry and then in turn translated into digital information for 
the registry. What this legislation does is allow for the 
electronic transfer of signatures as it relates to registrations of 
births and deaths and marriages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s what’s happening in the banking 
field. That’s what’s happening as far as signing contracts in 
many other areas. So this is fully in compliance with those 
concepts. One of the further things that the legislation does 
which is uniquely — or maybe not uniquely, but relates to a 
province like Saskatchewan where we’re a very widespread 
number of people with not that dense of a population — is the 
fact that it’s going to allow for medical practitioners and other 
prescribed practitioners to sign these various registration 
documents. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this is dealing with is those 
situations where there’s not a medical practitioner or the 
traditional signer of these documents within easy access of 
usually a health care facility where a birth takes place or where 
a death takes place. And so what can happen is that some other 
person in that institution can be designated to be the official 
recorder of the vital statistic event. And so, Mr. Speaker, what 
this will allow the Cabinet to do is describe people who are able 
to do that particular function. Most often it will be, I think, 
nurse practitioners who are covering different health facilities 
and working together with medical practitioners that cover a 
broader area. This once again is a practical solution to a specific 
problem that arises in Saskatchewan. And I think it does make 
sense, and so it’s part of this legislation. 
 
Another interesting question that has arisen with respect to our 
provincial legislation in Saskatchewan was presented by the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, the 
federal-government-appointed commission that was looking for 
death information on Aboriginal children. And we all know 
how important it has been for Canada that this information be 
gathered together and talked about and dealt with in a respectful 
and organized way. And one of the problems that arose in 
Saskatchewan is that there was no way that the information 
from Vital Statistics could be transferred to that commission 
following the rules as we’ve had them up to date. And so what 
this legislation does is allows for the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council to approve the minister entering into an agreement 
where large amounts of information could be transferred to 
something like the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of 
Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the provisions that are put in the legislation 



6216 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

do cover that situation, but they also are a little broader than 
that, and it may also authorize the transfer of some of this 
personal information from Saskatchewan for other uses. And so 
we will want to be asking some very specific questions about 
the changes that have been made in the legislation because we 
also know that this legislation may be used to allow for transfer 
of some of this information to management consultants such as 
John Black and Associates in the work that they do. And it says 
that there’s to be protections for this, but we need to understand 
exactly what the process is that is being contemplated by this 
legislation. 
 
Now it may be that we’re just reading more into the legislation 
than is here, but I think it’s an important question to ask is, who 
else besides the Truth and Reconciliation Commission might be 
asking for this broad-based information in bulk, and how and 
when might this be used again? And so, Mr. Speaker, that 
becomes an issue that we need to look at very carefully. 
 
Now one of the things that the legislation does do very directly 
is allow for more immediate or quicker access to information 
through various electronic means. We also know that that also 
has with it some of the dangers around the protection of 
electronic information, and we will want to know that the 
procedures that are being put in place will be very well secured 
with many layers of protection. And that doesn’t necessarily 
and isn’t necessarily in the legislation itself, but it is something 
that we will want to ask about when we deal with the matter in 
committee. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think the legislation is the type of 
legislation that’s important to bring forward to the Assembly. 
And so I know that we will look at the provisions very 
carefully, but I think that practically it’s something that we will 
respect and want it to go forward in the best form possible. So 
at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 148. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 148, The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 158 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 158 — The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I’m happy to be rising to my feet to speak to this Bill 158, 
An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act and to 
repeal The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013. 
 
This is a bill that makes a number of changes to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. I think the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan is an important plan for people who want to contribute and 
don’t have access to a pension plan at their place of work. 
 
I know when it first came in, I remember the bill in the 1980s, 
and I remember seeing the promotion for it. I don’t know why, 
but I do remember that. And basically for homemakers, people 
who are working out of their home, this was the first time they 
had a chance to contribute to a pension scheme without being at 
a larger workplace that had those kinds of things available. So 
it’s an important pension plan for people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s a bit of curiosity here because last year the government 
introduced Bill 82, which was An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act, but I’m not sure why it wasn’t 
declared in force. The minister wasn’t entirely clear in his 
comments, and we’re not really sure why they didn’t enact that 
one. But the way the minister explained it is that this bill is 
actually incorporating all of Bill 82 plus more. So it’s kind of 
like the new, improved Tide or something like that where, you 
know, Bill 82 kind of was okay, but all of a sudden in 2014 now 
the minister decides that he needs to improve it and make it 
more special, so he is bringing in Bill No. 158. 
 
And I don’t know, maybe they just want some more bills, Mr. 
Speaker, to increase the number of bills. I know this particular 
government has introduced the least number of bills of any 
legislature in the history of the province. So it’s kind of 
interesting that that’s the case. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t generalize without fact. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — And I actually prepared a spreadsheet for that 
information. I’ll share it with the members opposite because 
they’re questioning whether or not that’s true, which is a habit 
they seem to have. But anyways, happy to confirm that for the 
members opposite if they want to see the spreadsheet. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll get into a discussion about 
assessments and property tax as well. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I think the Finance minister is confusing 
himself. We’re talking about pension plans and not property 
assessment. 
 
So at this point we want to talk about his bill, and he didn’t 
really explain in his opening comments why 82 wasn’t enacted 
— I know we passed it in the legislature — why Bill 82 wasn’t 
passed and brought into effect . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
So his response at this point in time, maybe I’ll read that into 
the record because he didn’t say it in his opening comments, is 
that they wanted it to be a PRPP [pooled registered pension 
plan]. And he hasn’t exactly explained what that is, but I’m sure 
he will . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he’s indicated it’s a pooled registered pension plan. 
And that is something that I don’t know why he didn’t do that 
last year when he had the opportunity to do it but, for whatever 
reason, he’s decided he needed another bill to make that 
happen. 
 
The minister indicated there’s a number of changes in terms of 
married members of the pension plan. And there’s something 
called a specialty fund which will bring it into lockstep with 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6217 

what other government pension plans look like and allow the 
board to do something called unitization, which I have read 
about a little bit in terms of my meagre mutual funds, but that is 
something I think that the minister is trying to adjust at this 
point in time. And I think there’s a number of other sorts of 
amendments that are an attempt to modernize language in the 
Act, clarify the board’s duties and responsibilities. 
 
And so really it’s a piece of work, a piece of business that this 
government has undertaken. We are hoping to be able to check 
with people who are members of the plan to understand or to 
find out if this is meeting the needs of the people who are 
currently using the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. And at that 
point, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the extent of the comments 
that I would like to make on Bill No. 158, so I would like to 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 162 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 162 — The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on Bill 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment 
Act, 2014. 
 
I guess about two years ago the minister introduced the bill, and 
now he’s coming forward I guess with . . . And we’ll talk about 
a little bit about he’s making some amendments to the bill that 
was introduced I believe about two years ago. 
 
[21:00] 
 
The bill will make it easier for those who owe money to collect 
their debts. Now I’m not sure why this is needed, if there’s 
trouble with collecting debts for different reasons. And we’ll 
get into some of the issues, the amendments that they’re going 
to give, and certain provisions will be there and changes that 
are, you know, amendments that are going to be introduced to 
the Act, I guess to make it easier. So people, I assume whether 
it’s . . . I guess you could get a vehicle. I don’t know if this 
refers to a home, if it’s small loans, if it’s personal loans. You 
can take . . . [inaudible] . . . if there’s the work, you can take the 
loans from your paycheque. I hear people do all . . . There’s all 
different things. 
 
And I don’t know if this is the reason why the amendments are 
being introduced, because certain companies are saying they’re 
having trouble, at the end of the day, you know, retrieving the 

money that they’ve lent out, or they’ve sold something and 
they’re trying to get their money. So I know we will ask more 
questions about that, you know, get details. Some of us will 
comment. 
 
But when you look at this overall, you look at some of the . . . 
to collect the debt. And when I say that it makes it easier for the 
agency or I guess to bring forward a claim that if you owe 
money, the amendment is that there will be an opportunity for 
individuals to I guess use the courts, use the sheriff to I guess 
collect some of the . . . whether it’s land. 
 
And they refer to some of the changes in here and I mean if I 
look at one part of it, they talk about going from your wages. 
Like right now you can garnishee your wages. If you owe 
money and you go through the proper procedures, then an 
institute, an agency that lent you money, whether it’s a 
business, a bank, a loan . . . I guess there’s many different 
things, ways that you borrow money and, you know, might have 
incurred some debt. I guess it could go as far as doing work on 
a vehicle, on your house. There’s so many different things you 
could look at this, if there’s debt. I don’t know if this is credit 
card, bank loans. 
 
But having said that, even going to garnishee your wages from 
your job, and they can actually not only now . . . This 
amendment is changing it from one year to two years where 
there’s a provision now by this amendment that instead of 
garnishing your wages for one year, they can garnishee your 
wages for two years. And I think that’s, without reviewing it, I 
don’t know what the conditions would be with it. And I know 
we’re going to have more questions. I know we will. We will 
ask more questions about that. 
 
It also talks about simplifying seizing your bank account. You 
know, a simple process. They’re going to actually go ahead and 
actually seize your bank account. Now I don’t know who, if it’s 
the courts, if you have an action put on you by the courts, or if 
it’s you register. And I mean that’s interesting to see. I mean 
I’ve never dealt with that side of it, with a lending institute 
where you’re lending money and seeing that provision come 
back. But having said that, they’re going to make it . . . simplify 
a way of seizing. And I know we’re going to have questions on 
that and we’ll want to make sure we have clarification on that. 
 
It also talks about in parts, in section 30 creates a director of 
sheriffs. And appointed by the minister, he would develop new 
forms for the Act and take the responsibility to determine . . . 
So by the minister. So the minister will have powers to appoint 
someone to be I guess in charge of the sheriffs and to direct 
them how they’re going to carry on and how this amendments 
and this legislation will be used. And it’s a tool they’re saying 
that they need to collect more money, you know. 
 
And I mean you’ll have people saying, well there’s different 
ways. I mean some people might say well, you know, pay your 
bills and you won’t have to worry about that. You make your 
payments. I guess some people for whatever reason, maybe 
they’re running into job or there might be they’re sick, they get 
sick. They’re struggling to make ends meet and maybe they run 
into some problems that they can’t cut the, you know, make the 
payments that they needed to or pay the debt in the agreement 
that they set. And I’m hoping that agencies or banks, whoever, 



6218 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

would make some accommodations. I know some places do 
that. You know, they make it easier. And they’ll work with 
people. I’m hoping at the end of the day, in committee, we can 
ask some of the details. We can find out, you know, who asked 
for this and what was the reasons why this was brought 
forward. Was it the institute, banks, whoever? 
 
So I guess, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have any 
more further comments on this amendment to this bill. So at 
this time I’m prepared to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of 
Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 161 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 
sur la faune be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to enter the discussion on Bill No. 161, An Act to 
amend The Wildlife Act. There are several changes in this bill, 
Mr. Speaker, that when it comes into force it will do here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I think, when walking through the 
bill, the first thing we see is there is a new definition, an 
amendment to section 22, that references a new term licence 
issuance agreement, which requires a definition. And that 
definition, Mr. Speaker, a licence issuance agreement is being 
added. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, as we go through the bill here, there are 
amendments that broaden the scope of wildlife research 
activities that will now require a licence. The bill specifically 
adds “provisions that unobtrusive wildlife surveys such as 
detection, observation or presence/absence surveys may require 
a licence.” And in the explanatory notes of the bill, Mr. 
Speaker, it explains that: 
 

Current legislation only mandates licence authorization in 
cases where wildlife is taken or killed. [And the reality is 
that] Wildlife research activities especially those dealing 
with species at risk require a variety of passive techniques 
to determine the presence, or absence, of an animal in a 
given area. This [particular] amendment will allow the 
ministry to regulate these activities ensuring that these 
surveys are conducted responsibly, follow approved 
methodology and meet information submission standards. 

 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, when you undertake any research you 
should make sure that whether it’s people, animals, all those 
kinds of things, there are ethical requirements you have to 
undertake, Mr. Speaker, before you embark upon those. And 

this bill is putting those in place for more passive activities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
“This [particular] licencing requirement will only apply to 
surveys being undertaken for academic, scientific or 
commercial purpose and will not include recreational wildlife 
viewing activities.” 
 
Another change, Mr. Speaker, currently the existing licensing 
and vendor provisions were developed for the good old days, 
Mr. Speaker, “for the previous process of paper based hunting 
issuance.” 
 
But we know now that: 
 

Hunting and trapping licence issuance is now outsourced 
to a single vendor, [not in Canada] who provides an 
automated licensing system which is delivered through a 
private licence issuer network. Proposed amendments . . . 
support this model of licence delivery detailing the powers 
and duties being delegated as well as the provisions and 
limitations of a licence issuance agreement. 

 
So again that’s the definition that we’ve had to add to this bill, 
Mr. Speaker. I think it’s important. 
 
Another amendment, Mr. Speaker, is the increase, the limitation 
period for prosecutions for an alleged contravention of this Act 
or the regulations. Right now the existing provision is: 
 

No prosecution for an alleged contravention of this Act or 
the regulations shall be commenced more than two years 
after the day on which the minister becomes aware of the 
alleged contravention. 

 
But now the amendment will increase the limitation period for 
prosecutions to three years. And one of the challenges here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that wildlife investigations are, from my 
understanding, harder to conduct particularly because they 
occur in remote locations and away from witnesses and are 
often seasonal in nature. So undercover operations can be 
required to collect sufficient evidence to support prosecutions 
and this type of investigation can require an extended period of 
time. So that’s from the explanatory notes that accompany this 
bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another change, Mr. Speaker, a new section is being added that 
. . . And currently an individual who’s been convicted of a 
wildlife offence is able to lawfully purchase a hunting licence 
once his or her suspension period has expired, whether the 
prescribed fine has been paid or not. And this amendment will 
extend the suspension period until the fine is paid. So 
previously, Mr. Speaker, you could be fined and have a 
suspension period and sit that suspension period out and still be 
able to buy your licence even if you haven’t paid the fine. 
 
And when you think about legislative tools, those things that we 
do — the carrot-or-stick approach — how do you keep people 
from behaving poorly or sort of contrary to the social norm, Mr. 
Speaker? In this case, this would be hunting and trapping 
infractions, Mr. Speaker; the fact that you could not pay the fine 
that you are obliged to pay and still be able to continue to hunt 
after you outlasted the suspension. I think it’s a good move to 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6219 

ensure that those who are convicted of an offence do in fact 
complete that to its entirely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another change, Mr. Speaker, existing suspension periods right 
now include one-, three-, and five-year provisions, dependent 
on the severity of the infraction. So an amendment will create a 
two-year suspension period for offences which carry significant 
risk to public safety like hunting while intoxicated. I can’t even 
imagine, Mr. Speaker. I’m not a hunter. My dad was a hunter; 
he hasn’t hunted for several years, Mr. Speaker. But there are 
many things you shouldn’t do while you are intoxicated and 
carrying a firearm is probably one of them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So again as I said, this amendment will create a two-year 
suspension period for offences which carry a significant risk to 
public safety or are of serious resource impact in nature. So 
poisoning wildlife, chasing wildlife with a vehicle, or hunting 
from an aircraft. Those again, as I said, I’m not a hunter, Mr. 
Speaker, but I have lots of good friends who are. My assistant, 
her family, they only eat wild meat, Mr. Speaker. Their freezer 
is full of wild game. I can remember her being eight months 
pregnant and still being in my office and her brother had just 
shot a bull moose and had . . . Eight months pregnant and 
cleaning and prepping the moose, Mr. Speaker. I can’t imagine 
doing that at eight months pregnant. 
 
I think when you think about hunting and whether it’s for sport 
or for in fact food provision, which would be my preference, 
Mr. Speaker, I think that personally is my preference. If you’re 
hunting, you should be hunting to feed yourselves, Mr. Speaker. 
So the idea of poisoning wildlife, chasing wildlife with a 
vehicle, or hunting from an aircraft seems completely unfair if 
you think about . . . Even if you were a sport hunter, Mr. 
Speaker, that sport to me is when you . . . That’s not an even 
playing field at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another amendment to this section will establish a reciprocal 
hunting suspension provision, which individuals who have had 
their hunting rights suspended in another jurisdiction will be 
prohibited from purchasing a Saskatchewan hunting licence. 
That makes good sense, Mr. Speaker, and when we talk about 
sort of seamless legislation across jurisdictions, I think if 
you’ve committed an offence elsewhere, you shouldn’t be able 
to come to Saskatchewan and do what you’ve done illegally 
somewhere else, Mr. Speaker. So that’s I think a very positive 
thing. 
 
And another amendment to this section will establish a lifetime 
hunting ban if a person has been convicted on three separate 
occasions for serious wildlife offences. 
 
So those are some of the changes to the bill, Mr. Speaker. I 
know in the minister’s second reading statement or speech, he 
talked about consultation with hunters which took place in the 
spring of 2012 which was for the government to do more to 
conserve our wildlife resource. So I think these measures will in 
fact support that, Mr. Speaker, and I think these changes are by 
and large good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know there was a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 
story on November 18th after this bill was introduced where 
Ken Aube, the director of compliance and enforcement with 

Saskatchewan Environment, said that, “If it’s a world record set 
[of antlers] I’ve heard there’s been blank cheques for people 
trying to get a hold of those.” 
 
So the market for animal parts like antlers can kind of 
incentivize people to operate outside the rules for hunting. It’s 
important. Their incentive might be the trophy antlers, but the 
disincentive is many of these amendments, which is good: 
longer suspensions, having to pay fines, not being able to hunt 
if you have . . . not being able to get a licence if you’ve 
committed offences in other jurisdictions. Those are all positive 
things that should support some of this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, with respect to this particular bill, Bill No. 161, 
The Wildlife Amendment Act, I know that I have colleagues who 
will have more to say about this bill, and we’ll have an 
opportunity to ask questions, further questions in committee. So 
with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
[21:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 161, The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 163 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 163 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
de 1995 sur l'éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s 
really only one word that is possible to describe this bill, and 
that is oops. This is a bill to correct a big mistake that this 
government made when they introduced changes to The 
Education Act a couple of years ago when they decided and 
took it upon themselves to fix the beginning day of school. 
 
In particular clause 5(1) of this bill amends subsection 163(4) 
and adds a new subsection which establishes that: 
 

For any school year in which Labour Day occurs on or 
after September 5, the minister may, by order, set a date in 
September that is earlier than Labour Day as the first 
instructional day for the school year. 

 
So they dropped the ball when they passed the bill in a hurry a 
couple of years ago, and this is just another example of this 
government rushing things through without really thinking 
through all the consequences and too busy getting their own 
agenda on the record rather than making sure the bills are 
properly drafted. 
 
The minister indicated there was a couple other pieces to this 



6220 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

bill that he managed to fit in in terms of other than fixing the 
mistake that they made when they first passed the changes to 
the school year. 
 
One of the things he is doing is streamlining the borrowing 
powers of boards of education and the conseil scolaire 
[Translation: board of education]. So I think this was dealing 
with a particular situation that the school boards were finding 
themselves in when they had to retender for loan rates and get 
new resolutions passed by the boards when interest rates 
changed. So this was something that was needed. It’s a good 
change. 
 
The other change is to rename an education scholarship fund 
based on a Premier’s announcement from 2012. 
 
And then there’s a couple expressions in French that apparently 
needed fixing. One was the changing . . . In English it’s a 
“home-based education program,” and in French they’re 
changing it from “programme d’études à domicile” to 
“programme de scolarisation à domicile.” So that was 
something apparently that was identified by some of the 
legislative drafters, and the goal was to capture the nuances of 
the language of the Act so the roles and responsibilities laid out 
are clear and properly representative of expectations. Another 
French change they made, the phrase is “pupil with intensive 
needs” and they’re changing it from “élève bénéficiant d’un 
programme de soutien intensif” to “élève à besoins 
particuliers.” 
 
So that’s basically the changes in this bill. Again, it’s to fix a 
mistake that this government made when they were in a hurry to 
change the beginning day of school, and they didn’t take a close 
look at the calendar and realize that when Labour Day was later 
on in September, that the start day would be way too late and 
cause significant problems for schools, school boards, students, 
parents, and the whole bit. 
 
So basically that’s about all there is to talk about in this bill. It’s 
just fixing a problem that they created. And it certainly ups their 
numbers in terms of bills, so I guess that’s one thing we can say 
about it. But other than that, I would move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 163. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 164 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 164 — The 
Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 164, An Act to amend The 
Health Information Protection Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 164 maybe could be called the 
dumpster bill because it comes directly from the problems that 
arose when the Privacy Commissioner, assisted by a few 
members or a member of the legislature, discovered medical 
files in a dumpster in south Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, as that 
issue became I guess unravelled or unpacked or whatever you 
do with things you find in a dumpster, it became clear that the 
rules around medical files for trustees who presently had the 
responsibility of taking care of those files were not as clear as 
they should be. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what this bill does is to make sure that the 
rules that apply to former trustees also apply to present trustees. 
And the legislation puts into place a means whereby the 
government can appoint someone or some body, some 
institution, to be responsible for collecting or gathering medical 
records or other health information and keeping it in a safe 
place when a person who is in charge of it no longer is doing 
their job. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what we’re hoping to see from this 
legislation is a whole new system that will have the 
Government of Saskatchewan, in its role as protector of the 
public’s information, have appropriate procedures in place to 
protect the information. Now what it may mean when we look 
at the material that we have with the bill is that, together with 
the College of Physicians and Surgeons and other health 
professionals, it may be that there will be a new institution 
created or a new place created where these materials can be 
collected and protected and then eventually disposed of 
appropriately. We hope that it will mean that there will no 
longer be files found in inappropriate places like dumpsters. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is good legislation. It’s in 
response to a report that has been prepared by a number of the 
people who are involved. We’ll want to make sure, when we’re 
looking at this in the legislature and in committee, that the 
various suggestions that have been made will be all in the 
legislation. A substantial number of the provisions are I think 
placed into the regulatory power, so we’ll have to look at how 
that plays out as the legislation goes forward. But ultimately we 
all want to know that health records in Saskatchewan are 
protected when they’re in the care of your doctor or the hospital 
or health care institution, and that when they’re no longer in 
their care that they will be put into a place that is safe. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we know that the legislation will . . . 
We’ll have a number of questions around how it practically will 
be brought forward, and we’ll want to have a better explanation 
of how that is going to be done. It’ll also take revenues from the 
government, so we’re hoping that the Minister of Finance will 
be including funding for whatever process they put in place in 
next year’s budget. And practically we hope we have a solution 
to this particular problem. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments on this 
bill. I know some of my colleagues may, but at this point I will 
move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6221 

debate on Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 165 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 165 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 
(No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. This bill is 
an interesting little bill. It’s basically being used to support one 
of the Premier’s cheerleading efforts to bring about freer trade 
of alcohol in Canada. I think it follows an announcement he 
made in August when he was at a premiers’ conference to allow 
people to have alcohol shipped directly to them. 
 
I think, you know, this is probably a natural continuum along 
the trend that we see for alcohol, obviously a number of arcane 
rules back from the days when there was a temperance 
movement to a much more liberalized attitude towards alcohol 
in our society. So I think this is a reflection of those, that 
liberalization, and certainly a soapbox for the Premier that’s in 
charge of the province right now. 
 
So it provides opportunities for consumers to seek out and 
purchase unique products and demonstrates Canada’s . . . He 
said, the minister said it “. . . demonstrates Saskatchewan’s 
continuing commitment to removing barriers to interprovincial 
trade within Canada.” So specifically it’s going to allow 
Saskatchewan to enter into agreements with Canada and other 
provinces regarding direct-to-consumer alcohol shipments. I 
think that’s something that’s pretty straightforward. 
 
We see a couple changes to the Act. There’s a new section 19.1 
which talks about how Saskatchewan can enter into 
arrangements with other provinces to allow this kind of activity 
where people can get direct shipments to their homes, of 
alcohol. 
 
We see a change to clause 107(2)(e) which allows . . . That’s 
the actual change right there when you look at the repeal of 
107(2)(e). If you look at the original Act and see what it says on 
that section — I’m just going to pull that up quickly here, Mr. 
Speaker — 107(2) says the minister may prohibit . . . 107, I 
have the wrong section, 107(2)(e), and for whatever reason it’s 
escaping me at the moment. Anyways it’s been repealed. I 
know where I can find it. It would be in this section here. It says 
107(2)(e) currently says: 
 

A person who is not a minor may: 
 

bring into Saskatchewan beverage alcohol legally 

purchased or acquired in any part of Canada other than 
Saskatchewan . . . 

 
This one says, “. . . bring or import into . . . [Canada], for 
personal consumption, beverage alcohol legally purchased or 
acquired from another part of Canada,” subject to the 
regulations. 
 
And then there’s a new section in the regulations which is 
section 185(1)(y.1) which allows the Lieutenant Governor 
general to prescribe: 
 

the kind and quantity of . . . alcohol that may be brought or 
imported into Saskatchewan; 
 
the jurisdictions within Canada from which . . . may be 
purchased or acquired; 
 
the vendors or classes of vendors from whom the beverage 
alcohol may be purchased or acquired; 
 
any other term or condition pursuant to which the 
beverage alcohol may be brought or imported into 
Saskatchewan. 

 
So basically that’s the extent of this bill. It’s a very simple bill 
that just attempts to achieve that goal that the minister identified 
when he made his opening comments, allowing Saskatchewan 
to enter into agreements with Canada and other provinces 
regarding direct-to-consumer alcohol shipments, allowing 
individuals to import alcohol for personal consumption from 
other provinces where such agreements exist, and then create 
regulation authority regarding types of alcohol, type of seller, 
and the province from which the product originated. 
 
It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, when I looked at the section 
185, regulations section. And this is something that I’m often 
interested in. It’s actually four pages long, the types of 
regulations that the Lieutenant Governor in Council and the 
executive arm of government can make regarding liquor and the 
use of liquor and the consumption and sale of liquor in our 
province, again I think reflecting the intricate and historical 
connection governments have had with the sale of alcohol in 
our province. And certainly that’s not unique to Saskatchewan. 
So other than that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 165. 
 
[21:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 166 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 166 — The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 



6222 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 166, An Act respecting Elections in 
Municipalities and School Divisions and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is quite a long bill and there are a number of 
interesting issues in the bill, but in many ways it’s an updating 
and a consolidation from previous bills with some changes that 
are necessary over the last few years, especially in light of the 
2012 municipal elections. And as happens on a regular basis 
after elections, local officials, both in municipalities or in the 
school elections, identify problems that should be corrected in 
the legislation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this type of legislation, this bill, and we’ve 
had a few others in this session, are a perfect example of where 
the Ministry of Justice and the legislative draftspeople who are 
working on this bill should follow the precedents that happened 
in a number of other provinces. If this bill was brought forward 
in Alberta or Ontario, it would come forward with explanatory 
notes like we have but also the side-by-sides which are used in 
the department to prepare the bill. And so my suggestion would 
be to the Minister of Justice that he see whether he can provide 
those for the pieces of legislation that we have this session and 
that on a go-forward basis, the ministry would do like other 
provinces and provide the full side-by-side descriptions of the 
legislation. This would be helpful for the government as they 
proceed with the bill, but it also would be helpful for the 
opposition and for the public to identify where changes have 
been made which are ones of great importance or where 
changes have been made that are purely stylistic or punctuation 
or removing hyphens or other things that happen. 
 
And so this is a very good example of that kind of legislation, 
because it makes it difficult for the minister and officials as they 
present the bill to not have the appropriate questions being 
asked. I know that we’ll be looking at a whole number of areas. 
I mean one area that it would be helpful to understand is how 
the changes that are made in this legislation relate to the 
changes that have been made in The Election Act that’s used by 
the province. There’s a reference in the minister’s notes, I think, 
that says that there are some parallels, and you can see some of 
the parallels in the legislation. 
 
But I think practically, this is a situation where Saskatchewan 
should join the practice of other jurisdictions in Canada and 
have for the public and for all of us more information. The 
information has been prepared already, and it wouldn’t take too 
much to transfer the digital version online so we could all take a 
look at it. So that’s my suggestion for this evening. 
 
Now the legislation itself has been prepared in consultation with 
SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], the 
Association of City Clerks, and some of the other municipal 
organizations. But, Mr. Speaker, when it’s as dense and as long 
as the legislation is, it’s not very possible for others to decipher 
what in fact has been done. And so I know that we can ask or 
we could speak for many days on this legislation in the 
legislature, but practically we can identify some small changes 
that are in here. 

But the overall import of the legislation and the changes that are 
there will have to be dealt with in committee. And I guess I give 
notice to the minister and to his staff that one of the questions 
will be for the minister to show us where the changes have been 
made in the legislation. That can be and should be done by 
sharing of side-by-side comparisons and we look forward to 
that in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the election legislation is always some of the most 
important legislation that we have in this legislature because it 
goes right to the heart of what democracy is. And we don’t want 
to be supportive of legislation which restricts or causes people 
not to go to vote. We know that the participation rate in local 
government elections, which this legislation applies to, is 
abysmally low, and we would rather look to legislation coming 
in this area which makes it much simpler for people to vote 
rather than create more hoops which maybe some of this does. 
There are some aspects of this bill which do make it easier 
including the advance voting rules, but there’s a whole number 
of ways where it could be a lot better.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to spend much more time 
talking tonight, but I do give notice that we’ll be asking 
questions about how this legislation compares with the other 
previous legislation, and the simplest way to respond to that 
will be by providing the side-by-sides that the Department of 
Justice lawyers already have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 166, The Local Government Election Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 166, The Local Government Election Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 167 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The Local 
Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to speak to Bill 
167, The Local Government Election Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014, and this is the bilingual version of the 
legislation. It’s very short. It only amends one Act, The 
Education Act of 1995, and that particular legislation refers to 
The Local Government Election Act so now it will be amended 
to refer to The Local Government Election Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. I think, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have to 
make any comment. It doesn’t do anything more than what was 
there before. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6223 

debate on Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 168 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 168 — The 
Government Relations Administration Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in Bill 168, 
The Government Relations Administration Act. The Act sort of 
repeals four Acts, The Northern Affairs Act, The Rural 
Development Act, The Rural Affairs Act, and The Urban Affairs 
Act. Repeals it and gives certain powers. And I guess in this 
Act, I know our critic will want to go over this. He’ll be talking 
to a number of different municipalities seeing, you know, what 
the reason. 
 
But one area I just want to make a point of. I guess it gives 
certain powers and provisions for the minister where there’s 
disputes with municipalities, I guess, to deal with that. We’re 
not sure if that’s going to be out in regulations or how they’re 
going to work through that process and exactly what’s in the 
details. And I mean we’ll have to go through that, and in 
committee we can do that. We can research it and, you know, 
maybe individuals that have talked to already our critic or to the 
minister have expressed why. 
 
And obviously there’s reasons why they’re introducing this 
changes, and giving, you know, the minister some powers to 
where he can, it sounds like . . . And let’s hope that it’s 
something that’s been requested from municipalities, whether 
it’s New North, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities. 
There’s a number of different municipalities are represented. 
Hopefully that their issue, and this was brought forward by 
them, or we’re not sure why it was brought forward, but 
obviously to repeal the four Acts. The minister has done that. It 
gives him different powers and provisions as I set out in this 
provision. 
 
So having said that, I know we’ll have lots of opportunity. And 
I think our critic will do his work to make sure he asks the 
municipalities and the people that he’s in contact with if this 
Act and these amendments and, you know, repealing this, and 
the changes are giving the minister maybe too much power. 
Like, I’m not sure. We’ll have to go through that. But at the end 
of the day, there’s some things that are being changed. There’s 
some stuff that will stay, some stuff that he wants to change that 
won’t be brought forward in the new Act, from what I can get 
from the comments the minister made and the Act itself.  
 
So at that point, I have no further comments. So I’ll adjourn 
debate on this bill, and we’ll wait for it to go to committee and 
the good work that needs to be done. 
 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 
Administration Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:42.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6199 
 Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6200 
 Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6201 
 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 
 modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6204 
 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6204 
 Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 
 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records Management Act  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6205 
 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6205 
 Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6206 
 Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6206 
 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6208 
 Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6209 
 Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif  
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6209 
 Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6210 
 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6211 
 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers  
 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6213 
 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6213 
 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6215 
 Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil  
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6215 
 Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6216 
 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6217 
 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6218 
 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6219 
 Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014  
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6220 
 Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014  
 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6221 
 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014  
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6222 
 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant  
 modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014  
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6222 



 

 Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6223 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6201 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


