
























































Hansard: March 24, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 38A  MONDAY, MARCH 24, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4817 
 March 24, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce in your 
gallery Ms. Ellen Williams, originally from Amherst, Nova 
Scotia. She is a graduate student at the University of 
Saskatchewan. She’s a recipient — one of 55,000, new numbers 
just out — benefiting from the graduate retention program. 
 
Her dissertation is on the 2009 labour market strategy and its 
impact on Aboriginal integration in the labour market. Her 
supervisor is Dr. Loleen Berdahl. And I’d ask all members to 
help me welcome Ms. Williams to her Assembly, especially 
since she now calls Saskatchewan home. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you, seated in your gallery it’s my pleasure to introduce 
some very special guests here today that are integral in the 
Spring Free From Racism event each year that occurs. It 
occurred yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and once again we had 
thousands of people come together here in Regina to celebrate 
diversity, but also recommit ourselves towards the elimination 
of racial discrimination. 
 
I’d like to introduce some leadership from the committee here 
today. The Chair is here today. The Chair has served for each of 
the 15 years right from the start, and I’d recognize Barb Dedi. 
Give us a wave there, Barb. And I’d like to recognize two other 
committee members that’s here with Barb today; that would be 
Randy Ward and Corinna Kantymir. These individuals and so 
many others certainly make Spring Free From Racism a great 
success. I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in also welcoming the Spring Free From 
Racism committee. I had the great opportunity along with the 
member from Regina Dewdney, and we had an absolute great 
experience. And I’d like to thank Barb in particular for your 
leadership the last 15 years. And it’s an absolutely vital and 
important role that you provide, and thank you for helping to 
combat racism. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition against Saskatchewan health care laundry 
privatization. And we know that in May 2013, the Government 
of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize health care 
laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a for-profit, 
Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen. We know that as a 
result of this decision to privatize health care laundry, six 
non-profit, public health care laundry facilities will be closed 
within two years in the communities of Prince Albert, Moose 
Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon. We know that 
the privatization of health care laundry will mean that fair-wage 
jobs will be replaced, poverty wages, and public accountability 
will be lost. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in the 
devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse vital taxpayer’s dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 
an Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 
privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 
risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 
over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 
ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents that 
are in support of safety on Dewdney Avenue and in support of 
rerouting heavy-haul truck traffic from Dewdney Avenue. 
 
They state that any further delays from the government to 
address a problem that government created is entirely 
unacceptable. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents from Regina. 
I so submit. 



4818 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program also known as RPO. These families 
are very proud homeowners in their communities. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 
ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 
the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 
destroyed for many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 
government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
This is signed by many people of this good province. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Spring Free From Racism 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. Over this past 
weekend, I had the great opportunity to bring greetings at the 
15th annual Spring Free From Racism event that took place at 
the Italian Club here in Regina. This event is a great way to 
celebrate International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination, which took place on Friday. Mr. Speaker, this 
year’s Spring Free From Racism included entertainment, food, 
and display groups representing the many different cultures and 
cultural organizations from around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with more and more families immigrating to 
Saskatchewan from around the world, it is important for us to 
take the time to learn about other cultures so we can understand 
their uniqueness. Spring Free From Racism is a great event that 
allows us to learn about diversity and respect in a fun and 
upbeat atmosphere. But it also reminds us that racism and 
discrimination are still alive in our cities, at our schools, in our 
businesses, and on our streets. And it’s everyone’s 
responsibility to stand against it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event could not have happened without the 
hard work from the Spring Free From Racism committee, the 
sponsors, and all the volunteers who prepared the amazing food 
and provided the wonderful entertainment. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking all those who helped to 
make Spring Free From Racism possible and to celebrate the 
many diverse cultures that were represented. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I too am pleased to bring 
attention to a proud spring tradition in Regina, Spring Free 
From Racism. Held yesterday, it once again brought together 
thousands of people together in our community. I was pleased 

to attend, along with other members, including the member for 
Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Spring Free is both a day of celebration as well as a day to 
recommit to the elimination of racism every day. This year 
marked the 15th Spring Free From Racism and people, like its 
Chair, Barb Dedi, and all committee members and supporters 
past and present, deserve our thanks. This event supports the 
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
and does so by celebrating and sharing our cultural diversity. 
It’s a day filled with cultural dance, festivities, food, and 
kinship. I look forward to it every year. 
 
Our province is built on a rich and proud history of First 
Nations people. Our modern story of immigration and 
multiculturalism builds on that foundation. Just like the diverse 
weave of my Scottish tartan or of the Métis sash, this is what 
makes us stronger. As our motto states, “from many peoples, 
strength” Waves of immigration from all over the world 
continue to this day, enriching our province, evolving who we 
are, and making us stronger. But we have more work to do. 
There’s more we can be, and it’s through knowledge, sharing, 
learning, and celebration provided through events such as 
Spring Free that we will make progress. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in thanking the organizers, 
performers, supporters, and attendees for their role in making 
Spring Free From Racism another great success. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

World Tuberculosis Day 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is World TB [tuberculosis] Day. TB Day is meant to raise 
awareness of the fact that tuberculosis remains an epidemic in 
much of the world. This year’s World TB Day is focused on a 
global effort to create and cure 3 million people, work towards 
zero TB deaths and infections, and reduce the stigma related 
with TB. 
 
Our government recognizes more work needs to be done to 
prevent and control TB in our province. Mr. Speaker, last June 
our government announced a provincial TB strategy aimed at 
reducing TB rates over a five-year period. Special efforts will 
be directed to communities in the North with high TB rates. 
Every year the Ministry of Health provides 2 million to 
Saskatoon Health Region for TB prevention and control 
Saskatchewan, and 180,000 for focused prevention and control 
programming in the North. An additional 500,000 was provided 
in 2013-2014; half of this funding was specifically allocated to 
northern communities with a high rate of TB. 
 
The Ministry of Health is collaborating with health regions, 
First Nations, the Inuit Health Branch of Health Canada, and 
the Northern Inter-Tribal Health Authority on initiatives to 
prevent and control TB. We are working with these agencies 
and communities to raise awareness of TB symptoms, reduce 
the stigma associated with TB, and support individuals and 
families impacted by TB. 
 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4819 

Mr. Speaker, our government will continue efforts to prevent 
TB, reduce TB rates in our province. We’ll continue to work on 
improving the quality of life for all of our residents. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Canadian Interuniversity Sport Men’s Hockey 
Championship 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to congratulate the 
Saskatchewan Huskies for their incredible performance at the 
CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport] men’s hockey 
championship at the University of Saskatchewan this weekend. 
The Huskies were defeated 3 to 1 by the University of Alberta’s 
Golden Bears in Sunday’s amazing final. 
 
All sorts of records were broken this weekend, Mr. Speaker. 
The number one ranked Bears prevailed again, marking a record 
14th win and their third CIS title in Saskatoon. The attendance 
levels broke records for the 52-year-old tournament, and there 
were 6,289 fans at Sunday’s final at the Credit Union Centre. 
The Huskies had a great showing and were said to have played 
a scrappy game. The guys left it all on the ice in their first final 
since 2005. Despite the loss, the Huskies performed 
exceptionally well as the host team. We couldn’t be more proud 
of the focus and determination of these players. 
 
Dave Adolph is the head coach and, despite the heartbreaking 
loss, said he remains proud of his team. He told reporters over 
the weekend:  
 

Our guys gave it everything they had. They fought their 
way to credibility, and they proved they belonged in this 
tournament. Today they just ran into a powerhouse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do take great pride in seeing our young athletes 
representing not only their university and their team but also the 
whole community. Mr. Speaker, I ask members to join me in 
congratulating the Huskies men’s hockey team for their 
performance and to the sponsors, volunteers, and organizers 
who made this tournament possible. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 
 

Headstart on a Home Program 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the 
House to talk about two new housing developments in the city 
of Warman that will allow 11 individuals and families to build a 
future in their own home. I am pleased that our government 
provided over $1 million to Marco Developments and $1.3 
million to Welcome Homes through the Headstart on a Home 
program. 
 
The goal of Headstart is to increase the availability of 
entry-level housing across Saskatchewan. And I’m happy to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that we are making progress. When we began 
the Headstart partnership, we expected about 1,000 new 
entry-level homes would be built throughout the province but, 
Mr. Speaker, the program has become a resounding success. 
Headstart on a Home was expected to create 1,000 new housing 

units in five years. To the end of February 2014, Headstart on a 
Home has financed 1,086 new housing units, either completed 
or under construction in just three years. An additional 265 
units have been approved for financing but are not yet under 
construction. 
 
The federal budget, delivered February 11, 2014, announced the 
termination of the federal immigrant investor program that 
funds Headstart. However there is no immediate impact on the 
program, and I am pleased that Headstart will continue to help 
people purchase a home because, Mr. Speaker, housing matters 
to everyone. 
 
Our government will continue to work hard with our partners to 
improve housing options for all of Saskatchewan people. Thank 
you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Big River Saw Mill 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to share with 
you and my fellow members a positive success story happening 
in my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
On March 7th I had the wonderful opportunity to tour the Big 
River saw mill with Carrier Forest Products president Bill 
Kordyban. Mr. Speaker, it was extremely difficult for the 
people of Big River and surrounding area when the mill was 
shut down in 2006. Now with the work of Carrier Forest 
Products, the mill is back up running with one shift already 
working in the saw mill, and the second shift will be starting 
today. The total number of workers is expected to reach around 
80 persons when the mill is running at full production. 
 
This mill uses scanning and optimization equipment that is 
among the most advanced technology of any saw mill in North 
America. Carrier Forest Products also utilizes the Prince Albert 
saw mill as a reloading site for getting their finished product 
onto rail. This is a wonderful opportunity for Big River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in celebrating the 
running of the Big River saw mill and the emerging 
opportunities in the forestry sector in my constituency. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Canadian Interuniversity Sport Men’s Hockey 
Championship 

 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As expected it was an 
exciting weekend for men’s hockey at the Credit Union Centre 
in Saskatoon. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan Huskies came on strong at the 
Canadian university men’s hockey championship with a 3-2 
win against the Acadia Axemen and an impressive 9-0 victory 
against the Windsor Lancers in the semifinal before facing off 



4820 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

against the top-seeded Alberta Golden Bears in the 
championship game. Unfortunately they were unable to 
overcome Canada’s western powerhouse and were defeated 3-1 
yesterday afternoon. 
 
It was a record 14th University Cup victory for the Golden 
Bears, who ended the season with an extremely impressive 
25, 2, and 1 record. The Huskies fared extremely well in the 
tournament after going into it ranked fifth. 
 
It was a bittersweet moment for the Huskies’ star Derek Hulak 
who scored Saskatchewan’s lone goal in the final, as he was 
named the championship MVP [most valuable player] after 
leading the tournament with four goals and two assists. The 
championship game was played in front of a crowd of nearly 
6,300 people, bringing the total attendance to a record 41,089. 
 
On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, my father-in-law, Bernie 
Broughton, who was in attendance for the final game to cheer 
on the Huskies, had a little bit more luck than our home team 
Huskies, and he won the 50/50 of over $10,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to congratulate 
the University Huskies Saskatchewan men’s hockey team on 
the hard fought tournament, and the sponsors, organizers, and 
volunteers of the 2014 PotashCorp CIS University Cup on a 
successful event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, even hard core supporters of lean 
believe this government has gone overboard. They’re publicly 
questioning why this government is so intent pushing Japanese 
terminology on health care workers, and they’re publicly 
questioning why on earth this government is spending 40 
million on one US [United States] consultant and $3,500 per 
day on Japanese sensei. 
 
One tweet from a lean supporter says, “Forty million. I can’t 
stop laughing. Premier Brad Wall’s getting fleeced.” So this 
cash cow contract with John Black is bad enough, even for 
those who love lean, but that’s just the start of the government’s 
expenses when it comes to the lean project. So my question for 
the Premier is this: how much money in total is the government 
spending on lean promotion? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member has indicated . . . [inaudible] . . . Ministry of 
Health, what we will spend over a four-year period on the lean 
journey, Mr. Speaker, is approximately $40 million. It’s 
approximately $10 million a year. We have the ability to renew 
that contract at the end of each contract renewal period, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s important to say that this is, while 
it is a part of a contract, Mr. Speaker, this is a process that we’re 
going through. It’s not an event, Mr. Speaker. We are trying to 

change the culture within the health care system in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other provinces have begun around the corners in terms of 
advancing lean. I know British Columbia has had some small 
projects, Mr. Speaker. Ontario has looked at lean. The Manitoba 
government is looking at bringing in a lean office, Mr. Speaker. 
And in fact, some early lean work did involve the member from 
Regina Lakeview when he was the minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker. I think the difference is this is the first government to 
take the time and the energy, Mr. Speaker, to implement lean all 
across the entire health care system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is the first government to sign 
up for a cash cow contract to one US consultant for $40 million. 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s just the start of the lean expenses that 
this government is pursuing. We know about the $40 million 
cash cow contract. We know about the $3,500 per day Japanese 
senseis, but we don’t know the grand total of what government 
is spending to promote the lean project. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve an answer from 
the Premier on this. So my question, very specific, to the 
Premier is this: how much money, in total, is the government 
spending on lean promotions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve said before, Mr. Speaker, we have made a decision as a 
government to implement lean all throughout the health care 
system, Mr. Speaker, to focus on continual improvement within 
the system, Mr. Speaker. This side of the House frankly is not, 
Mr. Speaker, not satisfied with the status quo when it comes to 
the work that we need to do to provide a better service to the 
people of Saskatchewan, to be more patient focused, Mr. 
Speaker. That began early under the former Health minister, in 
terms of a focus on the patient through the Patient First, Mr. 
Speaker. That continued with Releasing Time to Care, Mr. 
Speaker, and then with the deployment of lean across the 
system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what people are saying. This is the director 
of network operations for ThedaCare, Mike Stoecklein, and he 
says: 
 

There is commendable effort to bring lean thinking to 
healthcare in an entire province of Canada — 
Saskatchewan to be specific. This is a huge effort. In my 
experience, no one has taken on something this large and 
this hard. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think it demonstrates that this government on 
this side of the House continues to be leaders when it comes to 
health care in this country. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan taxpayers deserve 
to have an answer from the Premier about what the grand total 
is for this lean project, Mr. Speaker. 
 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4821 

Mr. Speaker, this government hasn’t found a fat lean cheque 
that they’re not willing and anxious and eager to write, Mr. 
Speaker. We know about the $40 million contract to one US 
consultant. We know about the $3,500 per day Japanese 
senseis, Mr. Speaker, but we know that there’s a lot more 
spending going on. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, has created at least, at least 15 
kaizen promotion offices. The Ministry of Health has a kaizen 
promotion office. eHealth Saskatchewan has one. 3S Health 
[Health Shared Services Saskatchewan] has one. The 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has one. At least 10 health 
regions have kaizen promotion offices and the Health Quality 
Council runs the provincial kaizen promotion office, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is all well and above, Mr. Speaker, well over 
the $40 million lucrative contract and the $3,500-a-day 
Japanese senseis. 
 
So my very specific question to the Premier, not to the Health 
minister but to the Premier is: how much are taxpayers paying 
for the 15 kaizen promotion offices? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to date the Ministry of Health has spent $18.8 million 
and the RHAs [regional health authority] have spent $6.7 
million, Mr. Speaker, on the deployment of lean throughout the 
health care system with respect to the kaizen promotion offices, 
Mr. Speaker, within the Ministry of Health. At one time that 
was the branch of policy and planning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we’re doing is, we frankly changed the name, Mr. 
Speaker. Much of the same individuals who would have been 
working within those offices, within the branch. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve put, Mr. Speaker, we’ve decided to put our focus on 
deploying lean, Mr. Speaker, knowing the benefits, knowing 
that it will serve a useful purpose, Mr. Speaker, in transforming 
the health care system here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what the Mayo Clinic has to say about lean. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll just quote from a document that was produced 
by Dr. John Toussaint for the Mayo Clinic, Mr. Speaker. It 
says, “Lean is a cultural transformation that changes how an 
organization works,” Mr. Speaker. It says that “Unlike specific 
programs, Lean has no finish line. Creating a culture of Lean is 
to create an insatiable appetite for improvement.” 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on SaskJobs there are still 
postings up for kaizen specialists that are being advertised. 
 
My question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan 
taxpayers deserve to have this answer, what is the grand total 
for all contracts, for all RHA work, for all kaizen promotion 
offices for the lean bill? Question to the Premier: what is the 
total? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I mentioned before, $26 million has been spent to 
date by the Ministry of Health and the RHAs. The contract that 
the Leader of the Opposition is referring to, it’s an option of up 
to a four-year contract where the Ministry of Health will spend 
up to $40 million. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there’s also the kaizen promotion 
offices and many other expenditures. It’s not just the $40 
million for the one consultant. It’s not the $3,500-a-day 
Japanese senseis. It’s also the kaizen promotion officers. But 
it’s also, Mr. Speaker, the training that health care workers are 
forced to go through, Mr. Speaker, in these training sessions, 
Mr. Speaker, where they learn how to fold paper airplanes, 
where they learn Japanese words. My question to the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker, is: how much money are taxpayers paying for 
health care workers to go through the lean training? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much again, Mr. 
Speaker. To date we’ve spent $26 million — $18.8 million by 
the ministry, 6.7 by regional health authorities. Mr. Speaker, we 
have to date saved more than that dollar amount, Mr. Speaker, 
through the deployment of lean, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has indicated that he 
has received concerns from front-line workers, Mr. Speaker, 
which is . . . Mr. Speaker, we’d be interested in that information 
because at the heart of lean, Mr. Speaker, is using the front-line 
staff to actually find the improvements within the system to 
focus on quality, to focus on safety rather than the old way of 
doing things in health care where it’s top down. Mr. Speaker, 
this is actually engaging the front-line workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would urge the Leader of the Opposition, we 
don’t need the information of who the people are or where they 
work, Mr. Speaker, but I will again put out the offer to the 
Leader of the Opposition to provide that information. We’re 
always interested in that feedback and always interested in 
hearing from the front lines in how we can improve this 
program, Mr. Speaker, which I think will be very effective for 
the front lines and for patients over the long term. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen how this 
government treats families who speak out against it. We’ve 
seen examples over the last year, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I will not betray the trust of individuals who have 
written to me in confidence explaining situations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when looking at the cost, we know that this 
government created a special fee code for physicians to attend 
lean training. In fact doctors are being paid more than $30,000 
each to take lean training. So over and above the $40 million 
contract with the US consultant, the $3,500 senseis, the 
promotion offices, Mr. Speaker, doctors alone are earning and 
being paid more than $30,000 each to receive lean training. And 
that doesn’t include the expenses, Mr. Speaker, for senior 
executives, managers, nurses, care aids, and other front-line 
providers, Mr. Speaker, and it doesn’t include the staff 



4822 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

replacement costs. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker is to the Premier: how much money 
are taxpayers paying for health care workers to take training 
sessions where they fold paper airplanes, learn Japanese 
terminology, and how much in total is this government 
spending on its lean promotion pet project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I just think it is just such a disservice to the entire 
system and those who are working in the system for the Leader 
of the Opposition to disparage people that are involved in this 
process, Mr. Speaker, people that have been involved in it, Mr. 
Speaker, front-line workers, whether they be doctors, yes, that 
are an important part of the system, Mr. Speaker, or nurses or 
other staff members as well as patients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Here’s what the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] had 
to say about lean: 
 

We support Saskatchewan’s transformation agenda in 
improving the health of the people of this province, and the 
use of LEAN methodology to improve access to safe, 
quality patient care. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s directly from the SMA. Here’s Dr. Joy 
Dobson from Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region: 
 

Having seen many patient safety initiatives over the years, 
I have been a member of the “lean cult” for almost a 
decade. I believe it is a powerful method to improve both 
the care of each patient and the system in which we [do] 
work. 

 
Mr. Speaker, again we don’t need the information of who sent 
the information to the Leader of the Opposition. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, even by tweets alone, we know that 2 to 1 people that 
have responded to the Leader of the Opposition are actually in 
favour of lean. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government has hired an 
army of lean proponents to be advocating lean out in the 
broader public. But what’s important, Mr. Speaker, is for this 
government to be listening to the front-line health care workers 
who are voicing very real concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my criticism is not with those working within the 
health care system, but it’s within this government, Mr. 
Speaker, who signs the fat lean contract, $40 million contract 
for one US consultant, Mr. Speaker, Japanese senseis. 
 
Front-line health care workers, Mr. Speaker, are saying that this 
government has lost its common sense when it comes to 
improving our health care system. My question for the Premier, 
as it has been throughout all of question period: what is the total 
tab of this government’s lean promotion cost to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve said before, the total contract costs will be approximately 
$40 million over a four-year period. Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
what lean has achieved and in terms of the cost, Mr. Speaker, I 
would just ask the Leader of the Opposition, by using lean 
methodology and reducing the wait-list for people accessing 
mental health and addictions in Regina Qu’Appelle, Mr. 
Speaker, by reducing the wait-list from 400 people down to 70 
people, by reducing cancelled appointments, Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder if the Leader of the Opposition would tell us what is the 
cost of not doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Reducing the number of cancelled MRIs [magnetic resonance 
imaging] in Regina Qu’Appelle from 12 a week down to one a 
week, which allowed 450 MRIs a year without a single dollar of 
additional resources, what is the cost of not doing that work, 
Mr. Speaker? In terms of the efficiencies that we’ll find within 
the system including, Mr. Speaker, if people would just take a 
second to think about it, reducing the amount of blood products 
that people donate freely, that we don’t discard anymore, Mr. 
Speaker, nearly $40 million in blood products that are not 
thrown away as they used to be, what is the cost of not doing 
that work in our health care system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Capital Funding for Schools 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, existing schools in our 
province require a lot of attention but this government hasn’t 
been meeting those needs. The Chair of the Saskatoon school 
board says this. I quote: 
 

If a building has to get to the point where there are 
significant health and safety issues to get any funding from 
the province, that will put us in a very awkward position, 
because we tend not to let our buildings get to that stage. 

 
To the Education minister: is this the case? Do our schools need 
to be unhealthy and unsafe before that government will pay 
attention? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to answer the member’s question. He’s referring to a letter 
written by Ray Morrison, Chair of the Saskatoon Public School 
Board, regarding Pleasant Hill School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I used to live across the back alley from that 
school, so I am familiar with that school. It’s been on the list, 
the request list from Saskatoon Public since 2003 during the 
time when the NDP [New Democratic Party] were in 
government. They chose to serve the members, those 
constituents by providing a liquor store instead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve made a major commitment in Saskatoon. 
We are going to work our way through the list. Mr. Speaker, I 
can advise the members opposite that that particular school is 
operating right now at about 57 per cent capacity. It is on the 
list. It’s a ways down the list. And we’ll work with Saskatoon 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4823 

Public ongoing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Pleasant Hill School in 
Saskatoon, as referenced by the minister, desperately needs a 
new roof. It needs electrical, plumbing, and a mechanical 
upgrade, and it also needs asbestos to be removed from that 
school. 
 
The $11 million renovation to Pleasant Hill School was near the 
top of the old capital repair list. Now, Mr. Speaker, with what 
was announced this last week, it doesn’t even crack the top 10 
of that government. So this leaves the Chair of the Saskatoon 
Public School Board asking, “Does the building have to be like 
Connaught and falling down to get any attention?” To the 
minister: what’s his answer to that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that the 
members opposite are even asking questions about our 
commitment to capital and what we’re doing. 
 
We built two emergent needs in the city of Regina but, Mr. 
Speaker, in Saskatoon we have committed and spent $146.019 
million. Ten major capital projects — Willowgrove, Nutana 
Collegiate, Holy Family, Georges Vanier, Holy Cross, St. 
Matthew, E.D. Feehan, St. Mary’s, Martensville High School, 
Warman Middle School — 21 relocatables, 180 renovation 
projects, 14 early years projects. Six new joint-use P3 
[public-private partnership] schools — Evergreen, Rosewood, 
Stonebridge, Hampton Village, Warman, and Martensville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll make no apologies for having spent $146 
million when the members over there chose to build a liquor 
store. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can boast and 
brag all he wants, but the reality is that the Chair of the 
Saskatoon Public School Board says that the new process is 
puzzling and it’s characterized as a head-scratcher, Mr. 
Speaker. And in the fall we heard that 75 per cent of the school 
roof systems across this province need to be replaced within the 
next five years or else they’re going to have system failure, so 
you’d think this government would be taking this issue 
seriously. 
 
But what do we see from that government? We actually see a 
$23 million cut from the capital budget to build and repair the 
schools that we need. No wonder we have people like the Chair 
of the public school board in Saskatoon questioning whether 
schools need to be unhealthy, unsafe, and crumbling before that 
government will provide any funding or any commitment. To 
the minister: why is that government cutting $23 million from 
school capital, and why is it waiting for schools to be unhealthy, 
unsafe, and crumbling before it pays attention? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite had 

a unique method of dealing with capital needs: they just simply 
closed the schools, 176 of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since we’ve been in government, we have spent 
$700 million on school projects, big and small: 43 major capital 
projects, 22 brand new schools, 25 major renovations, nine 
joint-use schools. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget, $96.2 million which 
will provide for four new projects, seven ongoing projects like 
those in Langenburg and Gravelbourg, 29 new relocatables 
plus, Mr. Speaker, a 23 per cent increase in preventive 
maintenance funding so that schools can build roofs, do 
electrical as they see fit. And those funds are absolutely 
unrestricted. They can do with them as needed. In 2007-2008, 
the last year the NDP would govern, $18 million, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll take no lessons. We have a lot of work left to do, Mr. 
Speaker, but we won’t be taking instruction from them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s sort of what we see 
from this government so often. We bring forward the voice of 
leadership in this province for democratically elected . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Ray Morrison? You want to laugh at 
Ray Morrison? The Chair of the Public School Board in 
Saskatoon brings forward concerns and it’s dismissed. And all 
we see is political partisan spin and boasting from that 
government. 
 
And this is a repeat of what we saw last year. Portables over 
real classrooms, a P3 rent-a-school scheme instead of honest, 
upfront investments in the schools and classrooms we need. 
And capital planning, a capital planning list that doesn’t even 
address the needs that school boards have identified as their top 
priorities. 
 
Question to the minister: why does this government stubbornly 
refuse to listen to the boards and trustees who are on the front 
lines of education and know their capital needs best? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it was not that long ago the 
Leader of the Opposition was advocating that we get up and 
build tent schools. We’re not building tent schools. We’re going 
to work to . . . We have good methodology. We worked with 
the school divisions to develop that methodology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we inherited a $1.2 billion building deficit when 
we took government. We have invested more in our first seven 
years in government than the opposition did in 16 years. Mr. 
Speaker, there has been a 268 per cent increase in school 
infrastructure spending. The members opposite can call it spin; 
they can call it whatever they want. But their reality is a closure 
of 176 schools. 
 
Some of the very first money we allocated when we went 
through it was completing projects. They were announced as far 
back as 2003. Mr. Speaker, over 70 per cent of our schools are 



4824 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

at least 40 years old, and we’re making up for years and years 
of neglect. We have a long ways to go and, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
doing it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Minimum Wage 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last July 
the government promised to make changes to the minimum 
wage before 2014. It broke that promise, and what the Labour 
minister told the Canadian restaurant and food association is 
that, and I quote, “Saskatchewan’s minimum wage will not rise 
until the new Saskatchewan employment Act indexation 
formula kicks in next November.” 
 
To the minister: why did this government break its promise, and 
why is the minimum wage not going up until at least 
November? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we last increased 
minimum wage December 1st, 2012. We increased it to $10 an 
hour at that time. At that point in time, we were the 
third-highest after-tax income for full-time minimum wage 
earners. Since we have been in government, we’ve increased 
the minimum wage from $7.95 an hour to $10 per hour, an over 
25 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that it’s necessary to index the 
minimum wage to provide security for low-income workers. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re well on in drafting regulations and 
doing final consultation. It is not very far off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — The minister is not saying it looks like it’s 
going to be November. And he’s right. The minimum wage has 
not gone up since 2012, but Saskatchewan has fallen behind 
Nova Scotia, Quebec, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British 
Columbia], the Yukon, and Nunavut. And we know that the 
Saskatchewan people continue to be squeezed by the rising 
costs of living. This government needs to increase the minimum 
wage and index it to inflation. 
 
And we saw a couple of weeks ago how quickly this 
government can draft regulations. They can do it overnight 
when the pressure is on them. So there’s no reason why this 
government has to keep delaying this. To the minister: why is 
this government breaking its promise and dragging its feet on 
minimum wage? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a 
commitment to low-income people. We want to make sure that 
we do everything we can to ensure that they’ve got good 
opportunities for employment, that the wages are indexed and 
brought up reasonably expeditiously. Mr. Speaker, they will 
always ratchet up and down depending on what’s . . . 
[inaudible] . . . in places in other provinces. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when we formed government, we also chose to 
increase the basic personal tax exemption which eliminated 
personal income tax for 114,000 people in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can also advise the members opposite that they 
had a chance to introduce indexation. And, Mr. Speaker, they 
were in government for 16 years. They did not index, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to put the question to them why they didn’t 
choose to index during their 16 years in government. They 
knew about it. They could have done it. They did nothing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what the 
media report from last July says, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan’s Labour minister is promising changes to 
minimum wage legislation before the new year. Don 
Morgan’s pledge comes after the NDP yesterday accused 
the government of unnecessarily delaying a minimum 
wage index. Morgan says a formula is being developed and 
that a policy will be in place before the end of this year. 

 
Well that’s over eight months ago. The government missed its 
year-end deadline and now we know the minimum wage won’t 
go up until at least November. And meanwhile Saskatchewan 
people continue to get squeezed by the rising cost of living. To 
the minister: what’s the real reason why this government is 
refusing to help those who make minimum wage? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
indicated earlier that the NDP could have introduced indexation 
during its 16 years but they didn’t know about it. They didn’t 
care about it. The previous leader of the opposition knew 
nothing about minimum wage. He claimed we hadn’t raised 
minimum wage in three years while the fact is that we’d raised 
it from 9.25 and we’d raised it up and continued to raise it up. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the previous leader, Dwain Lingenfelter, said on 
CHAB radio, minimum wage workers in Moose Jaw have not 
had an increase in three years. Flat out wrong, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re a government that has a commitment to 
low-income workers. We’ve increased it by over 25 per cent 
since 2007. We’ve . . . [inaudible] . . . the personal income tax. 
We’ve doubled the low-income tax credit. We’ve decreased the 
education portion of property tax by nearly $166 million or 22 
per cent. We’ve increased the disability tax credit by 25 per 
cent, and exempted the disability tax credit. Mr. Speaker, we 
have a record that we’re not apologizing for. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 263. 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4825 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 
question 263. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 
Mr. Hickie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
it’s a pleasure to rise in this House and talk about our budget, 
our seventh consecutive balanced budget, and to speak about 
what it’s doing for my community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to first of all take some time to — of course like we 
always do, and I always have in the past — thank my family for 
supporting me in the adventure I’ve been on since 2006, being 
lucky enough to be voted in in 2007, and having the honour to 
serve the Prince Albert Carlton constituency with my 
colleagues here in the Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Day in, day out we come to work, whether it’s in our offices in 
our constituencies or to Regina, and we hear from people who 
want to have this province thrive. They want to see their 
children stay in this province. They want their loved ones to 
have a very happy, fruitful life in Saskatchewan and to see a 
future. 
 
And with every balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, we bring forth 
new initiatives. We bring forth new incentives, or we in fact 
have maintained what we started off with, a consistent message, 
Mr. Speaker, of controlled spending, being prudent in our fiscal 
responsibilities, understanding that we have the awesome 
responsibility to spend taxpayers’ dollars, the taxpayers of this 
province who day in, day out go to work, build this province, 
made it what it is today, Mr. Speaker, and continue to support 
their families. So every time that there is a very difficult budget 
to put forth, we still surpass the expectations of the people of 
this province I believe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to take a second to thank my wife, Charlene, for 
supporting me from day one. And every time I get to stand up 
here, I talk about my lovely daughters, Alyssa and Mackenzie, 
who are now currently in University of Saskatchewan, doing 
very well, I might add. I’m very proud to say that. And I will 
say that they are doing a little better than their father had, I 
think, back in his day to be sure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that’s where I want to start this particular talk today on my 
supporting the budget itself, Mr. Speaker. You know, there was 
a time that when university students went to school, they took a 
chance. They went to high school, got their diplomas and 
thought, maybe I’d stay in Saskatchewan and get my degree, 

and maybe, if I’m lucky, get a job here. 
 
Well one thing we did as this government, Mr. Speaker, from 
day one, we put in the graduate retention program. And we see 
more and more students who are staying in this province who 
are . . . Actually I believe the number is somewhere around 
55,000, Mr. Speaker, a top-of-my-head number I just picked out 
of the air. I think I’m correct on that one. 
 
And I think that bodes well that we see graduates who aren’t 
just staying here looking for jobs that are, you know, maybe not 
in line with their degree or what they want to take in life, what 
they wanted to do in university, but they’re finding professional 
level jobs because this province has a need for those students, 
Mr. Speaker. The ones who stick around this province have the 
academic qualifications, whether it be through a technical 
school, any post-secondary institution, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
demands for those positions in this province. 
 
So I know my wife and I are very happy to see our daughters in 
university at the University of Saskatchewan. We’re both 
alumni from that school. I know it’s made many changes since 
we were at university, Mr. Speaker. We can thank the ministers 
of Advanced Education for the amount of dollars that went into 
those post-secondary institutions like the University of Regina 
and University of Saskatchewan. 
 
We saw capital projects go up and up in spending because we 
had a need to address that shortfall left for so many years by the 
previous government. That bodes well for the fact that those 
institutions are attracting students as well, Mr. Speaker. And if 
you have the attraction mechanism in place to bring students 
into academia, they will stay in Saskatchewan hopefully after 
and still bolster those academic ranks, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 
one of those, kind of, you know, self-fulfilling prophecies — if 
you build it, they will come. And look what’s happened now, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, there’s one other thing that was really nice to see for 
our government to put in place when we took over in 2007, and 
to this day we still do it, Mr. Speaker. It’s the Saskatchewan 
advantage grant for education savings. Those are dollars that 
parents never would have seen before, Mr. Speaker. And the 
actual Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship is another one that 
helps to lessen the burden on those students entering 
post-secondary education right after high school. And it’s not 
just a one-time deal, Mr. Speaker. So it’s good to see that we 
have this initiative, this promise we made. And we are keeping 
that promise moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The budget talked about many, many things around this that are 
going to be beneficial to many people in this province, but you 
know I want to focus now more on my city, the lovely city of 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. You know, the school divisions in 
Prince Albert have demands, have needs that they want to see 
addressed. And one thing in this budget, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
did see money increased to both school divisions for 
preventative maintenance and renewal programs. 
 
So both divisions are seeing an injection of dollars to help 
bolster those particular programs, Mr. Speaker, insomuch as 
that it’s been money continuously given, granted for repairs to 
things like roofs and other things like that. But it’s autonomous 



4826 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

as well, Mr. Speaker, so thereby letting the actual school 
divisions put those dollars to use as they see fit based on a 
needs-based assessment, Mr. Speaker, which is important. 
 
You know, another piece that’s near and dear to my heart for 
Prince Albert is of course the continued funding that we have to 
our specialized police operational units, whether it be RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officers or my own Prince 
Albert Police Service that I was from, Mr. Speaker. The 
government — and to give some credit due, the previous 
government did fund some positions initially — but this 
government took a strong stance on specialized units to attack 
drugs and gangs and internet exploitation of our children.  
 
And again this government is very committed to that ongoing 
dollar spend, to increase those dollars for those positions as 
they’ve been required throughout the years of this government 
to this day where Prince Albert, I believe, is using those dollars 
in their joint forces units especially to make some pretty 
significant drug busts as well, which keep drugs off the streets. 
It keeps our youth safe. And it’s one of those things, it’s one 
those damn right ideas, Mr. Speaker, so you can’t say much 
more about that than that. It’s money well spent. And I’m sure 
this government will always look at that as a means to keep our 
community safe, not just Prince Albert but others, more spots as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The biggest part of this budget really is the $2 million renewal 
planning dollars coming to the Victoria Hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
What’s exciting about that is that I found it interesting when the 
member from Athabasca did an op-ed piece in the Prince 
Alberta Daily Herald about a week before the budget. I think it 
was a Friday or the Thursday before the budget. He talked 
about how the members from Prince Albert and area had never 
raised this issue in the House that there was a need for dollars to 
renew the Vic Hospital. 
 
Well I hate to tell members opposite, but the member from 
Athabasca should know this. Maybe some members over across 
like Rosemont don’t understand the process how government 
works. But you know, when you’re a member of this 
government, a government, you have accessibility to all the 
ministers, whether it’d be at caucus meetings or one-to-one 
meetings, Mr. Speaker. So it’s important here that the members 
opposite recognize that you don’t have to bring up an issue in 
the House because we have access to the great front benches of 
this government who time and time again have an open door 
policy for the backbenchers and members of caucus to bring 
concerns forward from their communities. 
 
So this $2 million renewal study planning dollars that are 
coming into play as a result of the Minister of Health, it’s to be 
expected that if you were able to approach a minister and ask 
for those dollars, there’s a chance it’s going to happen, Mr. 
Speaker. So if the members opposite don’t understand that, well 
welcome to government. Welcome to how the government 
process works. We don’t have to worry about bringing it up in 
the House. We can do it through meetings with the ministers, 
either as a team from the area or individually. And the previous 
Health minister was no different as this Health minister is 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing that the . . . The North is well serviced by members 

of this caucus. Whether you look at Lloydminster, Meadow 
Lake, Sask Rivers, Carrot River, Prince Albert, I mean we do a 
good enough job day in, day out to service our, help our people 
get what they need. And I think the members opposite should 
recognize that. There’s no line that says the North is north of 
Prince Albert. Because that’s what they want to pick, then the 
Sask Rivers MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] does 
a wonderful job in bringing points forward to service your area, 
like infrastructure demands, the flooding issues from the past. 
Same the member from Carrot River, same thing. Where’s the 
line that the members opposite want to say is the North? 
 
I believe that, as the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook said 
when he seconded the budget speech, is that the North is 
represented from a wide base, whether it be south of La Ronge 
or a little further south of Prince Albert even, Mr. Speaker. So 
the North is well represented, day in, day out. 
 
And we have support in the North as well. We saw the mayor of 
La Ronge thank us for the long-term care facility funding that 
he was looking for. And he looks forward to how the study’s 
going to come forth to either look at additional beds or it’s 
going to be a brand new building. He’s not sure yet, but he’s 
looking forward to that. And he thanks our government for that. 
 
I think the member from Athabasca should understand how 
government works. It’s disheartening to think that he wants to 
play partisan politics in the Prince Albert Daily Herald to say 
that we don’t do our job. And clearly in this budget our job has 
been done, Mr. Speaker, as it was in the past. We got money . . . 
We saw money released and given since day one for the 
twinning of Highway No. 11 which we were able to paint that 
last stripe on with the help of MP [Member of Parliament] 
Randy Hoback. We also had the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote and Batoche there that day as we painted the stripe, 
the last stripe, much like the last stake, the last spike in the 
railway system the member from Batoche had talked about that 
day. 
 
That was money that was put into place budget after budget. So 
I believe that as we see these budgets come forward, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to see a continued presence for Prince 
Albert in one way, shape, or form. We saw the housing, the 
Minister of Social Services continuously put money into 
housing projects to service those individuals who needed that 
help. So we have to thank the Minister of Social Services who 
didn’t lose sight Prince Albert’s necessary in her scheme as she 
budgeted through the whole process. So I want to thank the 
minister for that. 
 
You know it’s also important that we look at some people who 
support us. Some people actually, you know, don’t always 
speak in the public but they get a chance on budget day to give 
quotes. I want to thank my mayor for his quote in the paNOW 
article from March 20th. I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, in 
regards, this of course is in regards to the budget: “I think the 
biggest announcement is that there’s no education tax increase, 
no personal tax increase, no tax increase at all for all of 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan.” 
 
He goes on to say, “So I think that’s a big positive considering 
the revenue that they’ve lost, and they were looking for new 
sources, and they were talking at the SUMA conference about 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4827 

increasing education tax,” Mr. Speaker. That’s from my mayor 
and I’m proud to say that quote in the House today. Because 
you know what, Mr. Speaker, he is coming forward to thank 
this government for not raising taxes, which is part of our 
mantra. It would be the very, very last step we would ever, ever 
do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we heard of course, talking about the 2011 campaign, about 
the $5 billion credit card the NDP had across the way and their 
campaign promises. To this day we have no idea how that 
would have cost the people of this province had they got 
elected, except for massive deficits most likely. And they would 
have taken money from Municipal Affairs and Agriculture to 
pay for other things, which is a sad testament to how they 
would have robbed Peter to pay Paul. 
 
And of course in this budget we saw controlled spending, Mr. 
Speaker. We saw a mechanism in place where we recognize it 
was a tight budget. And you know what, the members of 
treasury board did a great job. I want to thank them, along with 
the Minister of Finance, because they put in some gruelling, 
long hours to come forth with this budget. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? Those nights and those days 
they spend in the Finance ministry talking about item by item 
— to look at a controlled spend, to not raise taxes, to keep the 
balanced budget approach that we have — should be 
commended. The members opposite fail to realize that because I 
do believe when they were in government many of their debates 
and their time in treasury board meetings had their feet up on 
tables, reading newspapers while officials did the grunt work, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s sad to say because in this government, 
our people are at the front, at the table doing work, time and 
time again looking at ways to ensure that we have balanced 
budgets, ensure we have our needs addressed as MLAs in the 
area, for our areas. 
 
But we also saw in this budget money for the members opposite 
like Elphinstone, Mr. Speaker, who are seeing, after his hard 
work — I’ll give him credit — petition after petition about a 
new school, he’s getting that money for it, Mr. Speaker. But we 
have that kind of thing going forward. So as a government, we 
aren’t just being biased. We aren’t just saying it’s for our needs. 
We’re addressing needs across this province, even for the 
members opposite.  
 
So maybe they should take some time and thank us in the 
budget. And maybe, Mr. Speaker, they should vote in favour of 
this budget because the controlled spending puts money in their 
constituencies as well if they’ve asked for it. They should be 
thankful for that and hopefully they’re going to support the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So today, I’m going to finish up by saying this, Mr. Speaker, I 
will be in support of our budget, but I will not support the 
amendment opposite. Thank you. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to join in the budget debate. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

start off with just a few very brief personal remarks, a few thank 
yous. 
 
I want to thank my constituency assistant in Saskatoon, Gordon 
Rutten, for helping me deal with issues on a day-to-day basis 
when I’m in session, and would like to thank the staff in the 
minister’s office in Regina. These are some of the brightest, 
most hard-working people that I’ve met, and they do a 
remarkably good job. And in both ministries, we’ve got some 
wonderful staff that work there. And those people in all of the 
offices continue to amaze me at the support that they give the 
citizens of our province. Our province is a better place for the 
hard work that is done by our civil service, and for that I thank 
them. 
 
I want to also thank the citizens of Saskatoon Southeast for their 
support and their candour. I’m pleased that when I go out to 
places I go, stand in line in the grocery store or wherever, and 
people will come up and say thank you for having done this or 
could you do more of that, could you do less of this, whatever 
else. And I respect and value that kind of input on a ongoing 
basis. 
 
And of course I want to thank my wife, Sandy, who frankly 
continues to amaze me by her ongoing continuing ability to put 
up with me. 
 
Both of our mothers are now in their 90s and are doing very 
well. Late last year my own mother developed a tumour in one 
kidney and at the age of 93 had the tumour and the entire 
kidney removed. She received excellent care at St. Paul’s 
Hospital in Saskatoon. To anyone that has criticism of our 
front-line health care workers, I would say hogwash. These 
people work hard, offer great comfort to their patients. Mr. 
Speaker, these people care and it shows. From our family to 
them, we say thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk for a few minutes about what’s 
taking place with regards to Labour Relations and Workplace 
Safety. Saskatchewan continues to have the second-highest 
workplace injury rate in Canada. This is something that is 
simply unacceptable, and we’ve been working hard to reduce it. 
We’ve seen a 43 per cent reduction in the injury rates since 
2002. We’ve increased the number of workplace inspections 
and the number of files being sent to Justice. We’ve also 
increased the maximum dollar of fines. 
 
This budget retains funding levels for the Ministry of Labour 
Relations and Workplace Safety in order to continue our 
offering education and enforcement of labour standards and 
OHS [occupational health and safety] safety standards as well 
as labour mediation. 
 
The office of the workers’ advocate will receive an additional 
$100,000 in order to continue our offering high-quality 
advocacy services to injured workers who need assistance with 
understanding their claim or preparing an appeal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as came up in question period, we are well on in 
being able to announce the indexing of minimum wage. This 
legislation also will allow for some additional leaves for 
workers to allow for citizenship, personal tragedies, and a 
number of other things. So, Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with 



4828 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

those through the amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Employment Act, and we also have introduced most recently the 
final chapter which is the essential services provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the essential services provisions are designed to 
ensure the continued health and safety of the public and will 
provide unions and employers with the tools that they need to 
resolve issues and ultimately reach collective agreements. 
Essential services agreements will only be required once an 
impasse in bargaining has occurred and conciliation and 
mediation has been unsuccessful. We’ve also expanded the 
definition of public employer to include all employers that 
include and provide a public service, for example, a private 
ambulance service such as exists in Saskatoon. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there are provisions that will enable 
disputes to be heard by an arbitrator, arbitration board, or 
Labour Relations Board. Hearings are required to be 
commenced within seven days of an appointment of an 
application, and a decision is to be rendered within 14 days of 
the conclusion of a hearing so that the essential services process 
can be expedited all the way along. Mr. Speaker, there is 
provisions in the Act that unions will be able to challenge 
aspects of the essential services notices. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, I can indicate just a little bit about 
the process. An employer would be required to identify the 
essential service, the classifications of employees providing the 
service, the number of positions, and the location where the 
employees are to work. The union provides in turn a schedule. 
If there is disagreements, there is the ability to go the Labour 
Relations Board. 
 
There’s also provisions to resolve a collective agreement where 
a strike or lockout is determined to be ineffective. Either party 
would have the ability to apply to the Labour Relations Board 
for a determination as to whether a strike is ineffective in an 
essential services situation, and if so, the parties would submit 
to binding arbitration. 
 
All of the changes that I have mentioned are the result of 
consultations that occurred in 2012 and 2013. 
 
The amendments to the essential services part will not be 
proclaimed until after the Supreme Court of Canada has made a 
final determination regarding the current challenge which is 
tentatively set to be heard in May of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to close by talking about the other 
portfolio that I hold, Education. Last Wednesday our 
government tabled a balanced budget and that balanced budget 
supports steady growth. For education, steady growth means 
investing not only in new initiatives and infrastructure, but also 
ensuring that our initiatives and infrastructure are well 
supported. That’s exactly what this budget provides for. 
 
Our population is at an all-time high. There are now 1,117,503 
people living in Saskatchewan. That’s 20,000 more people 
calling Saskatchewan home in just one year, and what that 
means for education in our province is a growing student 
population. We have over 2,000 new students in our education 
system this school year. 
 

I read a document recently that was produced in June of 2001 
under the previous NDP government. It was a document that 
outlined student enrolment projections for the next 10 years. 
The NDP projection for the year 2010-2011 was 141,074 
students. Had the government of the NDP been re-elected in 
2007, the province would be in a sad place with continued 
out-migration. Thankfully they lost, and what we saw in 2010 
was 165,000 students — an increase of 25,000 over what the 
NDP had projected. 
 
So that’s the choices, Mr. Speaker — 141,000 or 165,000. To 
those additional 24,000 students I would say to them, welcome. 
We have work to do to make sure we have schools for you, and 
we’re well on our way to doing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re a government that’s planning for growth, 
not decline. This budget accounts for that. 
 
This budget provides a 2.4 per cent increase in operating grants 
to school divisions. It recognizes projected enrolments by 
school divisions. Nineteen million dollars is budgeted for an 
additional $2,000 to enrol our students this fall. We’ve recorded 
birth rates in our province that are at an all-time population 
high. We also have growing diversity in our population. This 
represents challenges, but let me be clear. These are good 
challenges to have. Our government knows that we need to 
support our education, and we’re doing it. It’s far better than the 
members opposite that chose to deal with budget problems by 
closing 176 schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the supports for learning component of the 
funding formula, which directly supports the classroom, will 
increase by 3 per cent this year to a total of $276 million. The 
opposition may be interested to know that part of those dollars 
pay for education assistants, of which there are more today than 
there ever were under the NDP. 
 
This budget also provides for our First Nations and Métis 
students: $4.3 million for First Nations- and Métis-specific 
initiatives in school divisions, $600,000 for summer literacy 
camps in the North, $6 million to continue to respond to 
recommendations from the joint task force on Aboriginal 
education and employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also recognizes the importance of 
early childhood learning: over $1.2 million to support creating 
15 new pre-kindergarten programs to bring the total increase in 
pre-K programs under this government up 104 per cent; over 
$2.2 million to create 500 new child care spaces to bring the 
total increase in child care spaces under our government to 53 
per cent. 
 
The budget provides nearly $100 million in capital dollars. That 
makes our government’s seven-year investment in school 
infrastructure to about $700 million. Forty new schools, of 
which 18 are joint-use P3 schools, one in the Opposition 
Leader’s constituency. He’s complaining about it. What I’d do 
is I’d suggest to him that he might want to get in touch with his 
constituents. They need it. They want it. He should remember 
what happened to the last NDP leader that was out of touch 
with his constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was also 25 major renovations and additions, 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4829 

900 smaller capital projects. That’s how this side of the House 
handles population growth and economic growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition has been calling for a plan for 
education. This budget provides that. For the first time ever, an 
education plan was developed by and for the sector. It’s hard to 
believe that this was never done before in the history of our 
province. We value our sector partners in education, and this 
budget reflects our shared commitment to putting students first. 
 
This is what some of the sector partners are saying about this 
budget. Colin Keess, president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, had this to say on budget day: 
 

I’d like to compliment the minister on acknowledging what 
teachers do for the province of Saskatchewan, the value of 
work that teachers have and the work that they do every 
day with our children. 

 
The president of the Saskatchewan School Boards Association 
had this to say: 
 

We’re happy that the government has put education as a 
priority this year. We knew it was going to be a tight 
budget, so we’re quite happy. We’re also happy to be 
working with them and having the conversation going 
forward. 

 
I’d like to encourage the members opposite to join the 
education sector and support this budget. I want to be clear that 
this is not a status quo budget. This budget provides new 
funding for increased enrolment, supports for learning in the 
classroom, First Nations-Métis initiatives, library initiatives, a 
funding increase to a number of CBOs [community-based 
organization], new pre-kindergarten programs, more child care 
spaces, more new schools, more relocatables, more preventive 
maintenance. It has something in it for everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the member for Lakeview, he’s getting 
Connaught School rebuilt. For the member for 
Elphinstone-Centre, he is getting a new school to replace 
Sacred Heart. Mr. Speaker, those members complained about 
P3s. Well, Mr. Speaker, those are going to be traditional builds. 
I’m going to be watching for how they vote on the budget 
because, Mr. Speaker, these are things that are needed by their 
constituents. Their constituents have asked for them. I’ve gone 
to those schools. They need them. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going 
to watch how those members opposite vote on those things. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell their constituents how they 
voted. 
 
That’s how this side of the House is going to deal with growth. 
We intend to be balanced and responsible. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why I’m going to be supporting this year’s budget. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
honour that I rise today as representative of Fairview to speak 
about the 2014-15 budget. And, Mr. Speaker, how do I feel 
about this budget? In the words of Duck Dynasty’s Phil 

Robertson, “Happy, happy, happy.” And here’s why. 
 
I’d like to start out by saying that this budget is about people, 
all the while living within our means, which my late mushom 
always stressed how important it was to live within your means, 
Mr. Speaker. He didn’t use the terms fiscal probity or fiscal 
constraint, but he understood what it meant to live within your 
means. Take care of the bills first and then see what’s left to 
spend carefully on necessities, and if you need to tighten your 
belt, then do what needs to be done. 
 
This budget is doing exactly that — living within our means 
while paying down the debt, Mr. Speaker. This budget was able 
to invest in people while living within our means. 
 
I’d first like to thank my family, my daughter, immediate and 
extended family for being there for my mother who is in 
palliative care in Saskatoon while I’m here in Regina 
representing my electorate. I’d like to thank those in our health 
care system of taking great care of my mother. 
 
I’d like to thank my electorate for the opportunity to be their 
voice in the legislature, and I would like to thank my 
constituency assistant, Adrienne, for all the hard work and 
handling, at most times, difficult cases that come to our office 
and for going above and beyond for our Fairview constituents 
and others who decide to come to our office. We have a student 
who is getting some experience at the Fairview office, one of 
the many vulnerable youth, and his name is Jared. And thank 
you, Jared, for picking our office to do your work placement. 
 
I’d like to also acknowledge the long hours that treasury board 
members put in and also the work of the Finance minister and 
his staff at the ministry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all still learning, myself and Adrienne, in 
my office. There’s no handbook on how to be an MLA, and we 
do our best to advocate for our constituents and others. 
 
We’ve had a relationship with the Parkridge Centre, which is a 
long-term care centre facility in Fairview, very early on after 
the 2011 election, one which is a business relationship. The 
residents print my Christmas cards every year, and this allows 
them to make a little money to buy equipment for their 
computer room. So I am very excited about the 8 million 
allocated in this year’s budget to the facility renovation of the 
long-term care home. My office is located kitty-corner to the 
facility, and I live down the road. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I’m going to put in a little plug in for the centre so people know 
how much this centre does for the community. It is home to 
over 240 residents ranging in age from preschool to over 100 
years of age. It is a heavy-care facility, and many residents 
require specialized care. In addition to the long-term care 
programs, there are also some short-stay programs including a 
geriatric enablement unit, emergency respite, and planned 
respite. And Parkridge is also the home to the community day 
program, where clients who live in the community come to 
Parkridge for the day to receive support services to help them 
remain in the community. The 8 million will be going toward 
much needed renovations and let them continue doing excellent 



4830 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

work. 
 
This facility is deeply embedded in the community of Fairview. 
As the MLA, I would like to say thank you. Many families 
depend on the services Parkridge provides, as well as families 
knowing that their loved ones are well cared for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other investments in long-term care, 
home care, acute care, prescription drugs, and other services for 
seniors. The government will also target funding to continue 
enhancements to long-term care facilities and home care 
programs for seniors. 
 
So some of the highlights are, 27.3 million to continue 
construction of five previously announced long-term care 
facilities in Biggar, Kelvington, Kipling, Maple Creek, and 
Prince Albert; 4.5 million, which is a $2.5 million increase, for 
the Home First/Quick Response pilot program to serve 
innovative home care supports to better serve seniors; 3.7 
million for Urgent Issues Action Fund to continue to improve 
services for long-term care facilities, and 800,000 for a new 
seniors’ house call pilot program to develop an innovative 
mobile outreach team to provide intensive home care supports 
to seniors with complex health issues. 
 
And this is particularly important, Mr. Speaker, to myself. 
When we had my mother in my home, it was easier to call the 
home care nursing staff than rush her to the emergency room 
when she had issues which happened in the middle of the night. 
The home care staff were familiar with our situation, and their 
response time was timely. And in some cases like my mom, you 
know, it was very traumatic to her physically and difficult to 
move her to the car, to the emergency room, and then back 
home again. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency and the vital role it plays in our health care 
system. And the 4.9 million increase to help plan, organize, 
deliver, and evaluate cancer care and related health services is 
significant. They are a part of my mom’s health care team, and I 
want to thank them for everything they do every day for 
Saskatchewan families. The 3.3 per cent increase will help them 
to continue to do their good work. 
 
And there’s also funding in place to plan replacement of 
long-term care facilities in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 
and plan for more long-term care beds in La Ronge. Mr. 
Speaker, before I go on to other subjects, I would like to say 
thank you for the allocation going towards long-term care beds 
in La Ronge. I have friends and some family living there, and 
the Minister of Advanced Education and I were able to visit 
with some of the community last summer. As well I had the 
opportunity to have anti-bullying consultations about a week or 
two later. We met some amazing people and their dedication to 
the community is phenomenal. I hope to be able to go visit 
again soon. 
 
And speaking of bullying, I had the opportunity to tour the 
province, you know, last summer and bring forth 
recommendations as a result of the consultations. And you 
know, a significant amount of the 1.4 million was dedicated to 
the bullying initiative over three years; 815,000 was dedicated 
for the 2014-15 budget. 

There will be an allocation of 250,000 for the online reporting; 
50,000 for the Kids Help Phone; 250,000 for risk assessment 
training for school divisions; 100,000 for restorative-based 
restorative action approaches, which is the prevention model; 
and 15,000 for the second Student First forum; and 80,000 for 
professional development opportunities to teach students 
appropriate online material. 
 
So far, you know, the Ministry of Education has been able to 
partner with the SaskTel I Am Stronger campaign to house 
anti-bullying resources, supports an anonymous reporting tool, 
and developing an anonymous smartphone-friendly Internet 
reporting tool, and continue to support the toll-free Kids Help 
Phone, and to distribute a handout which promotes the 
establishment of gay-straight alliances and understanding of 
LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and/or 
questioning] students, and strike a provincial advisory body to 
establish consistent policies and protocols across our school 
divisions. 
 
So the Ministry of Education and Justice got together and they 
assessed the implications of the federal cyberbullying 
legislation and also coordinate work with the child and family 
agenda ministries to help vulnerable children get the services 
they need to keep children in school. 
 
So we’re also engaging the Advocate for Children and Youth to 
provide another method of having unresolved bullying 
complaints heard and enhance school-based restorative justice 
approaches, building on the success of the restorative action 
programming. So this will teach children how to resolve 
conflict, develop leadership, and build healthy relationships; 
and also partner with the Human Rights Commission to educate 
children on how to build positive relationships; also provide 
instructional supports for teachers in order to teach responsible 
online behaviour to our students. And, you know, we will be 
holding the second annual Student First Forum — one we 
already had this past fall and one coming up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education is very near and 
dear to my heart, as a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] student in 
sort of a holding pattern for now. I am still constant at the 
U of S [University of Saskatchewan] campus and very much 
still a part of the university community, Mr. Speaker. So I was 
very pleased to see this as well. The budget provides an 
increase in operating funds to post-secondary institutions, 
investment in students, and support and funding for key capital 
projects. You know, the Ministry of Advanced Education will 
receive 817.8 million, which is an increase of 24 million or 3.7 
per cent over the last year. 
 
To support operational increases in several key investments at 
post-secondary institutions, we definitely heard from the 
post-secondary community. So this includes a 12.3 million 
increase in operating funds, representing an average 2 per cent 
increase for universities, federated and affiliated colleges, 
technical institutes, and regional colleges, as well as 19.8 
million direct investment in First Nations and Métis education. 
 
So you know, the budget, it makes post-secondary education, 
you know, more affordable for families by providing 134 
million in student supports including 82 million in refundable 
and non-refundable tax credits for the graduate retention 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4831 

program and 7 million for the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship, which my daughter was able to utilize this past 
year when she started her first year of university. So 7.5 million 
in funding for the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 
savings and 32 million for the Student Aid Fund to support 
grants and bursaries through the student loan program and 5 
million for other scholarships. And as a past student who 
depended lots on scholarships just for, you know, to pay 
everyday bills, it’s huge. 
 
So the budget provides also 32.6 million in capital investments 
to support post-secondary infrastructure including, you know, 
6.5 million for the Health Sciences facility at the U of S; 4.5 
million to support construction of the Trades and Technology 
Centre at Parkland Regional College; 1 million to support 
ongoing construction of the Southeast Regional College; and 
20.6 million for capital improvements, repairs, and equipment 
at post-secondary institutions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is going to transition nicely to my interest 
in training because, you know, I’ve always had an interest in 
education and training and they go hand in hand, Mr. Speaker. 
Not everybody, you know, would like to go to university. 
They’d like to utilize some of our colleges and our training 
institutions. And again one of them is my daughter as well. She 
tried a year of university and decided it wasn’t for her, and now 
she wants to go into training and get a journeyman’s trades 
certificate. 
 
So increasing investment in training programs and labour force 
development, the Ministry of Economy allocate 500,000 for the 
establishment of a manufacturing centre of excellence which 
will focus on productivity improvement, innovation, and 
workforce development for the provincial manufacturing centre. 
My brother, he’s a welder and wanted to stay close to home. He 
got tired of, you know, going up to northern Alberta for work, 
decided to stay here, and he’s working at one of our 
manufacturing centres near his small town. So he’s able to see 
his family every night, which is nice. The total value of 
Saskatchewan manufactured shipments for 2013 was 15.2 
billion which is a new record for the province and up from 14.2 
in 2012. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know, I could go on and on about 
education and training but I kind of wanted to highlight a little 
bit about the First Nations and Métis and Northern Affairs 
initiatives. So this budget allocates 189.2 million for program 
funding targeted primarily for First Nations and Métis 
organizations and individuals, which is an increase of 4.4 
million or 2.4 per cent from the funding in last year’s budget. 
And what’s really significant is the 6 million to double the 
funding for initiatives in response to the joint task force on 
improving education employment outcomes for First Nations 
and Métis. And this is part of the growth plan, you know, which 
is to build on the report and recommendations of the joint task 
force and seek partnerships within, you know, the experts, the 
Tribal Councils, the First Nations themselves, and the 
businesses to increase employment, businesses, and 
engagement in the economy. 
 
One thing that really stood out was the Parkridge allocation. 
Because as the representative of Fairview, I think this is a pretty 
significant. And as the MLA, I’m very grateful for the 

allocation. And I know that there is many others who would 
like to speak, so I’d like to conclude that I support this budget 
going forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly for the umpteenth time, to 
have had the pleasure of, having had the pleasure of 
representing the constituents of Moosomin since 1986. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that certainly wouldn’t have been possible had it 
not been for the valued support of my wife, my family, certainly 
a lot of friends, and a lot of friends I’ve made over the years as 
the member for the constituency of Moosomin. 
 
Another group of individuals that is certainly integral to the 
well-being of an MLA is constituency assistants. And I’m 
pleased to have a young gentleman, Jeff Cole who has now ably 
filled in the office and is doing an excellent job. And he is 
supported by Audrey McEwen. So I say thank you to Jeff and 
Audrey for their support in the office. Tina Durbin spent almost 
20 years in my office and did a superb job as well. And I know 
she’s now enjoying retirement and the opportunity of getting to 
spend more time with her granddaughter. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we all know that this job sometimes is not 
always the easiest. And certainly we can look at the negative, 
but I’ve tended to, over the years, to look at the positive. So 
many people that I’ve had the privilege of getting to know and 
meet, individuals who’ve contacted the office or spoken directly 
to me, and while we may not have been able to answer their 
inquiries to the degree that they would have liked, at the end of 
the day have always expressed their gratitude for the efforts that 
have been made, whether it’s through the office and my staff or 
whether it’s myself. Mr. Speaker, those are rewarding 
experiences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past week the Minister of Finance presented 
another balanced budget to the people of Saskatchewan. This 
year’s budget is certainly balanced, and the most important 
factor I think, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that it’s balanced without 
any tax increases. And that’s something that I’ve heard a lot of 
people speaking about over the past weekend, things that they 
were really impressed with. 
 
And I believe what the budget basically does is speaks to steady 
growth and moving the province of Saskatchewan forward. It’s 
a budget that, as people will look back, they will be looking at 
what the Minister of Finance has done this year in balancing the 
books with revenues that were very slim, actually down from 
last year. But by not increasing taxes, but by controlling 
spending, the minister was able to let the people of 
Saskatchewan know that this government is being a fiscally 
conservative — I use the word conservative — Saskatchewan 
Party in moving this province forward. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And when I talk about moving our province forward, many of 
my colleagues have seen exponential growth in the 
communities and the constituencies they represent. Well the 
constituency of Moosomin is no different. 
 



4832 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

The number of people that have been moving into the 
constituency, the job opportunities that are availing themselves, 
I’m going to speak of one specific industry. Seed Hawk 
manufacturing, a direct seed equipment manufacturer, which 
started something like, I believe around 12 years ago in the 
constituency, and through the progress of time has ramped up 
their manufacturing to the point that they now have 250 people 
that are currently employed at the facility, which is only four 
miles from home, and also four years ago entered into a 
relationship with Väderstad, a direct seeding manufacturer out 
of Sweden who this past year bought out and became the major 
stakeholders in the plant. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve seen that plant grow, the current 
ownership are looking to expand the employment or number of 
people working at the plant from 250 currently to, in the near 
future, to some 400 people. And that’s just one small 
manufacturing plant here in Saskatchewan. It happens to be in 
the constituency of Moosomin. But that speaks of what’s 
happening across the province, and I think that speaks to what 
this budget means to a lot of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When we talk about balancing the budget, controlling spending, 
and putting forward a budget that speaks about growth, it tells 
the investment community that Saskatchewan is a place to 
invest your funds, your resources. And we’re looking forward 
to continuing to see this province grow. 
 
This past weekend I noticed in my own local community, I was 
amazed as I was driving around the community, a number of for 
sale signs on housing, all of sudden they’re not there. And one 
person said to me at an event I was at, did you notice that’s an 
Ontario plate sitting in the driveway? I think what we’re seeing, 
Mr. Speaker, is we’re seeing people not only from outside of 
the country but even within our country, Eastern Canada, are 
looking at Saskatchewan as a place to invest in, as a place to 
find job opportunities and raise their families. 
 
Not only was this budget balanced, Mr. Speaker, but the 
Minister of Finance presented a budget that is showing the 
summary financial statements as the Provincial Auditor has 
been calling for for years. I think, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 
Auditor says, “Our office strongly supports these changes. They 
will eliminate confusion and help legislators and the public 
better understand the government’s finances.” 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I think you’ll find that people still 
relate more closely to the general revenue pool because it’s 
much like having a chequing account. You know what’s 
coming in; you know what’s going out. The money’s going into 
health. It’s going into education. It’s going into policing. It’s 
going into our parks and renewable resources, Mr. Speaker. 
And then people also understand what the Crown corporations 
do. They understand the fact that Crown corporations need 
money to invest in infrastructure to continue to provide the 
services, but they don’t necessarily look at them as one specific 
line. 
 
However, given the fact that the auditor has been asking for 
this, this budget has been presented in that format of summary 
financial statements. And it’s a budget that is balanced and 
showing steady growth for the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, let me just, in speaking about this budget of steady 
growth, I just want to offer a few comments that we’ve seen this 
past week from individuals and groups. The Leader-Post 
editorial for example on March 20th said “Overall then, 
Krawetz has crafted a steady, solid managerial plan that deals 
with the reality of slower growth.” 
 
Moose Jaw Times-Herald, the article said, “Good governance is 
generally more about progress and less about perfection, and in 
that respect, Saskatchewan’s government is doing a decent job.” 
 
Lanny McInnes of the Retail Council of Canada says, 
“Consumers can feel comfortable that this budget is not going 
to hit them in the pocketbook and it’s going to help grow the 
economy.” 
 
And Marilyn Braun-Pollon says this: “We commend the 
province for not taking the easy way out, but instead controlling 
their spending by making some tough decisions.” 
 
And as the Minister of Finance said, yes, it wasn’t the easiest 
budget to put forward. But as my colleague earlier mentioned, a 
number of the members on this side of the House sat with the 
Finance minister and his officials as they went through the 
budget line by line and looked at places where they could 
streamline in order to ensure that there was money available to 
put into programs and meeting the needs of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And I think one of the biggest areas, Mr. Speaker, that we will 
see people speaking about, is that we’ve been putting money 
into people. Seniors for example will be seeing increase in the 
seniors’ income supplement, Mr. Speaker. That’s something for 
a lot of seniors who are living on the basic, bottom-line pension 
plans. That seniors’ income supplement has certainly become 
an advantage in this province. We also have increased the 
amount of money that we’re putting into the pockets of seniors 
who are living in private care homes. And that again, Mr. 
Speaker, speaks to the fact that we are committed to meeting 
the needs of people across this province and our seniors. 
 
And it certainly is well spoken of within this budget — the fact 
that people appreciate the fact that this budget, while trying to 
be fiscally responsible, is also looking at reaching out to those 
who have specific needs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This budget as well has also shown a strong support for people 
with disabilities. And over the years, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the 
pleasure of seeing how, even in the constituency of Moosomin, 
we have Kin-Ability centres that have sprung up. We’ve got 
SARC [Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres] 
locations where people with disabilities have had the 
opportunity to feel like they are members of the community. 
Rather than put away in institutions, they are now involved in 
the community. 
 
And as you go through some of the communities in my 
constituency to speak to people with disabilities and walk into 
the SARC locations or meet them in fact in the coffee shop — 
they’re not afraid to go to the coffee shop — and sit down with 
people. And they’re always pleased to see — I’m sure other 
MLAs find this as well — they’re pleased to see their MLAs 
walk in and come over and say hi to them and see how they’re 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4833 

doing, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think government can go wrong 
when it shows that it’s willing to meet the needs of those who 
are the least amongst us, Mr. Speaker. And I’m pleased to see 
that this Finance minister and our government is thinking of 
people, not just money. We’re thinking of people and putting 
the money to help people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency there’s a couple of projects 
that are ongoing. One that has been a long time coming — and I 
commend the member for Cypress Hills, for he actually 
initiated the project — is completing the construction of 
Highway 48 between Kipling and No. 9 Highway. And this 
year if the things, if the weather co-operates, I would assume by 
the time the July 1st weekend rolls around, we’re going to have 
that project completed. And I anticipate we’re going to see 
trailers rolling down that highway as they move down to 
Kenosee Park. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, as I was talking to people following the 
budget at the tea, there was a young lady came up to me and she 
said, you know, we really enjoy going down to Kenosee Park to 
spend some time down there. Have there been any 
improvements done to Highway 48? It’s the closest, most direct 
way. And I was happy to inform her that I’m sure by the time 
they get on — even right now, they can travel down that road 
— but by the time they get to tourism season, that highway is 
going to be well travelled, as it will be completed from White 
City right through to the Manitoba border with a good paved 
and constructed highway. And I’m pleased to see that we’ve 
moved forward on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also talked about funding going into 
current heavy care facilities in the province. And I have a 
facility that’s moving forward, in fact it’s basically closed in 
now — the integrated health care facility in the community of 
Kipling. A few people were asking me the other day, whatever 
happened? Was there no mention of Kipling, no funding for the 
Kipling project? Well I was able to point people out to the fact 
that the Minister of Finance actually pointed out, Kipling was 
one of the five facilities that there’s money in the budget going 
towards the ongoing progress of the capital expenditures as 
these communities move forward with their construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many, so many other areas that we 
could speak about as well. One of the things this budget did as 
well is we expanded the expenditures in highway construction. 
People in that Wolseley-Grenfell corridor are going to see an 
improvement to the Highway No. 1 as resurfacing will take 
place this year. And it’s not just Highway No. 1. But my 
colleagues sitting here in the legislature in this Assembly will 
be speaking about highway construction, maintenance, and 
repair that would be going on in these areas, their areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to speak about how this government 
has learned to work with people in developing ongoing not only 
communication but finding ways of how we can address some 
of the needs and the requests out there. Most recently I had the 
pleasure of joining with the Minister of Central Services as we 
gathered with people in the community of Wolseley. Now for 
those who may not be familiar, Wolseley is a community along 
the highway, No. 1 Highway, a community that has done an 
elaborate job or a very commendable job in preserving some of 
the historic buildings within the community. 

For example if you haven’t seen the opera house, you may want 
to take a moment to drive off the highway and just look at the 
beautiful community centre, the old opera house that has been 
refurbished. Or maybe you want to take a moment to just walk 
across the swinging bridge that was refurbished in the 
community of Wolseley. 
 
And then most recently, in 1894-1895 there was a courthouse 
built in that community, and it’s been sitting vacant for a 
number of years. And they’ve been asking me, is there anything 
that can be done to see this courthouse being utilized rather than 
letting it fall apart? And back last, I believe it was last summer 
with the minister of government Central Services, we met with 
the community. And we asked them to put forward a proposal 
as to how they . . . what could be done. And sitting down with 
the minister, the minister indicated that it cost the government a 
pile of money every year, even though it’s a building that’s just 
sitting there not being utilized. 
 
And so the community put forward a proposal. And a week ago 
we handed them the keys, turned the building over to them. 
We’re going to put some money into addressing some of the 
structural needs. The building will be refurbished, and it’s going 
to be the new town offices will be operating out of that 
building. And the people of Wolseley couldn’t be any happier 
than to see that that building wasn’t just going to be dismantled, 
but now it’s another landmark that they can have to sell their 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see ongoing construction on the PotashCorp 
expansion at Rocanville. There again, the service . . . As the 
expansion is moving forward more job opportunities are 
opening up for the people of the Moosomin constituency and, I 
will add, the surrounding area because people travel from north 
of the Qu’Appelle Valley or the Melville-Saltcoats area to work 
at the mine at Rocanville. We see a major expansion in oil 
development in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, overall this budget, as we have noted by many 
players, is certainly a budget that is balanced. It’s speaking to 
steady growth in the province of Saskatchewan. And this 
government is committed to continuing to move the province 
forward. And we’re looking forward with great anticipation to 
what this province can and will be. 
 
We’re a resource-based province with a lot of potential, a lot of 
opportunities. Yes, our resources are under pressure right now. 
But I anticipate, Mr. Speaker, that these resources, these 
valuable resources will pay big dividends in the future as we 
continue to grow as a province. 
 
I’d just like to close, Mr. Speaker, about speaking to the 
commitment this province has made to the agricultural 
community here in the province of Saskatchewan. When we 
first met for spring session, the big question on people’s minds 
was getting last year’s bumper crop to market. And one of the 
first debates we had in this Legislative Assembly was 
endeavouring to address that issue. 
 
And following that debate, we’ve seen the federal government 
move in a number of areas. But also, the warmer weather right 
now, I’m beginning to see trains pulling up to the 
grain-handling system in our constituency and across this 



4834 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

province, starting to move that commodity, the grain, to market. 
And as that commodity moves to market, it opens up the doors 
for the agricultural producers of my area and across this 
province to get the cash flow to begin the process of planning 
for the spring as well as meeting the financial requirements that 
they have entered into. So, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
shown its commitment to the agricultural community. 
 
[15:15] 
 
One other area I would like to speak to is the new livestock 
insurance program. I had the pleasure of attending the southeast 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association meeting and dinner 
on Friday evening in Wawota, and that was the first thing 
people were asking me about. What does it mean? How are we 
going to have the opportunity to be involved? And I was 
fortunate actually to learn more about it myself because they 
had invited a representative from crop insurance, a young lady 
who just did a superb job. 
 
By the time the evening was over, every producer there was 
pleased to hear how the province is moving forward, some of 
the opportunities that will be offered to them, the fact that they 
can insure their livestock as they have been able to do with their 
grain, opportunities. And they were, the comments were 
nothing but positive, Mr. Speaker. People were just pleased to 
see how our government has moved to build this province and 
include the people of the province in our decision making. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m standing here today fully supportive of the 
budget presented by the member for Canora, the Finance 
minister of this province, and will be voting against the 
amendment placed by the opposition. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to stand and speak in favour of the budget today that 
the Finance minister brought down last week. I’d just like to 
thank my wife and my staff back in Biggar in the MLA office 
and the staff here in Regina for all the good work that they do. 
 
I just want to touch on some of the highlights of the budget. 
Obviously as Minister of Rural and Remote Health, a keen 
interest in the Health budget. You know, Saskatchewan will 
invest nearly $5 billion in health care in the upcoming fiscal 
year. Funding is $144 million or 3 per cent increase over 
2013-14 and the budget includes investments in reduced 
surgical wait times and emergency department waits. That’s key 
capital projects. Developed additional collaborative emergency 
centres or CECs — which I’ll like to speak on more in depth 
later — and improved services for seniors and support the rural 
physician workforce. 
 
Capital investments in the upcoming year total $95 million. 
Funding for ongoing projects include 16 million to complete the 
new hospital in Moose Jaw; 27 million to continue construction 
of the long-term care facilities in Biggar, Kelvington, Kipling, 
Maple Creek, and Prince Albert. I’m very honoured to have the 
long-term care home being built in Biggar. It’s due to be 
opened late this spring or early this summer. And it’s a fabulous 
facility that’s going to be opened for our seniors in Biggar. 

And some of the other very important parts in the Health budget 
in the coming year is hot-spotting, the pilot program that will 
begin in Saskatoon and Regina to identify and assist these 
high-cost, high-use patients, helping them receive the care they 
need. Other priority investments include an additional 3.4 
million for improved primary health care and collaborative 
emergency centres, with an increase of 2.6 million to continue 
incentives that encourage physicians to work in rural 
communities and provide locum physician relief for those who 
are temporarily away from their home. 
 
Regional health authorities will use $3.25 billion, an increase of 
107.5 million, to provide services through its cancer services in 
Regina and Saskatoon, offer prevention and early detection 
programs, and conduct research. This represents a 4.9 million or 
a 3.3 per cent increase over last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some very innovative supports for seniors. The 
budget makes a number of improvements to improve the quality 
of life for our Saskatchewan seniors. Highlights include 27.3 
million to continue construction of the five previously 
announced long-term care facilities that I just mentioned. 4.5 
million, a 2.5 million increase for the Home First/Quick 
Response pilot program to provide innovative home care 
supports to better serve seniors. 3.7 million for Urgent Issues 
Action Fund to continue to improve services in long-term care 
facilities. 800,000 for a new seniors’ house call pilot program to 
develop an innovative mobile outreach team to provide 
intensive home care supports to seniors with complex health 
issues, and funding to plan replacement of long-term care 
facilities in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, and a plan for 
more long-term care beds in La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also a $10 per month increase in the benefit under 
the seniors’ income plan in July 2014 to a maximum of $260 
for senior citizens and $225 per month for each member of a 
married couple. Next year the single benefit will increase to 
$270 per month and triple what it was in 2007. Nearly 15,000 
Saskatchewan seniors receive the seniors’ income plan benefit 
each month. Seniors receiving the SIP [seniors’ income plan] 
benefits are also entitled to additional health benefits such as 
free eye care, examinations every 12 months, chiropractic 
services to a maximum of 12 services per year, a reduced 
prescription drug plan semi-annual deductible, a home care 
subsidy, and an exemption from many of the charges under the 
Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living program are just 
some of the things in the budget. 
 
More focused on the rural health, in the last two years I visited 
80 communities in Saskatchewan, in remote and rural 
Saskatchewan. It’s been a great honour and a privilege, quite 
frankly, to be able to travel to these communities, both in the 
North and around rural Saskatchewan, listening to all the 
stakeholders. We would meet with the staff and sit and have 
coffee with them or a meeting and ask them their opinion on 
what needs to be improved in their facility or in health care in 
particular. It’s interesting that the debate about lean is going on 
now, and without an exception all the health care providers in 
the facilities that I visited thought the lean initiative and 
strategy was well worth it. They see the improvements and they 
really appreciated having an input into any changes that may be 
needed in their facility. So it’s certainly good, when you talk to 
the staff one-on-one or in groups, that they are quite happy with 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4835 

it. So I think the opposition is really off base in their concerns. 
It’s improving health care, improving safety. It’s better care for 
patients but also for staff as well, and there’s many examples of 
improvements and innovation because of the lean strategy in 
our facilities. 
 
We also would meet with physicians and nurse practitioners and 
we would always have a meeting with community leaders 
separately to discuss the issues in their community, health care 
in particular in the facility. As I had mentioned before, the 19.5 
overall investment in rural health services and primary health 
care, 13.1 for primary health, that’s a 3.4 million increase from 
last year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, collaborative emergency centres, or CECs, 
are up and running. We have one operating in Maidstone and 
Shaunavon and we will have three more running — well, not 
only by the end of the year, hopefully in the next few months — 
in Canora, Wakaw, Spiritwood. And the communities and the 
staff and the physicians are working together to get these 
facilities up. A collaborative emergency centre is a form of 
primary health care which has a nighttime model and a daytime 
model. 
 
The nighttime model is staffed by a registered nurse and an 
advanced paramedic in contact with a STARS [Shock Trauma 
Air Rescue Society] emergency physician. And patients that 
come into the . . . So the nighttime model generally starts about 
8 p.m. and runs to 8 a.m. People that come in for care are 
triaged. Some are treated, released. Others are told to come 
back for a same-day or next-day appointment. And the true 
emergencies are either sent by ground, ambulance, or STARS to 
an emergency centre to be looked after quickly. 
 
The daytime model is made up of physicians and nurse 
practitioners, the full arena primary health care staff. And that’s 
what’s innovative about this. This takes the pressure off 
physicians being on call at night. That’s certainly a recruitment 
and retention vehicle for physicians in rural Saskatchewan. And 
from the patient’s point of view, they know they can come in 
and get same-day or next-day appointments. So they don’t need 
to go to emergency just to see a doctor for simple things like 
getting prescriptions and minor ailments. And so they’re 
working very well in those two communities and we’re going to 
open more in the future. And this is going to spread across the 
province, giving very good emergency service to many 
communities across Saskatchewan. 
 
Of course the other important innovative emergency service in 
rural Saskatchewan is STARS. Everything but the patient 
actually arriving in Saskatoon or Regina at the hospitals there is 
a rural emergency health care, and STARS is very well received 
and are saving many, many lives and giving very good health 
care to people across rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re continuing to work on innovation sites. There’s eight 
sites in rural Saskatchewan: Leader, Meadow Lake, Whitecap, 
Fort Qu’Appelle, Lestock. There’s urban in Moose Jaw, 
Yorkton, Regina, and Lloydminster. 
 
In the budget, Mr. Speaker, $5.2 million for rural locums. 
That’s a 2.2 million increase from last year. Each region can 
recruit two regional-based locums, 12 positions fully funded 

towards a commitment of 20 locums over four years. 
 
Another important innovation is funding of $685,000 for the 
rural physician recruitment incentive, a $435,000 increase, and 
we anticipate that 30 doctors per year will realize the program 
in this year. 
 
As announced, $500,000 for the planning towards a new 
long-term care home in La Ronge is a very exciting 
development, and the people of northern Saskatchewan are very 
happy to see that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move on to some of the agriculture 
highlights and the budget for agriculture of $371.6 million to 
ensure farmers and ranchers get support they need, highlighted 
by $79 million for strategic initiatives such as research market 
development, an increase of 7.5 million from the previous year. 
The budget also includes the new western livestock price 
insurance program and enhancements to the crop insurance 
program. 
 
I think it’s not in the budget, but it’s worth noting and thanking 
the Minister of Agriculture has been working on this file. The 
file that I’m referring to is the slow movement of grain and 
farm commodities in the last few months. Our government and 
our Agriculture minister has recognized deficiencies and been 
working towards it since last May quite frankly. This is an 
ongoing situation. This didn’t happen just overnight. It’s been 
exacerbated by a record crop but slow movement of grain and 
commodities in the winter months has been a problem for a 
long time. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture’s worked on it for many months 
starting last May, and again very . . . highlighted the issue again 
to cabinet and to caucus last fall. And the Premier has had an 
active role in getting the stakeholders together to improve rail 
transportation. A delegation headed by the Minister of 
Agriculture, Minister of Economy, Minister of Highways, and 
the Legislative Secretary to Agriculture has done great work. 
And quite frankly I believe they’re also working of course with 
the federal government and have a lot of input with the federal 
government on how to improve the rail transportation system 
for agriculture commodities. And they’ve been, you know, 
working with all the stakeholders — grain companies, railway 
companies, and the federal government — to increase the 
number of cars that are used and get more grain to the ports 
mainly in British Columbia. 
 
So I’d really like to thank our team that has done a fabulous job 
in improving the transportation of grain. I think that with the 
warmer weather we’re already starting to see much improved 
transportation of grain, and this is much needed. And it’s not 
only just this year, but we are going to continue to have bumper 
crops or excellent . . . I think the norm is going to be a high 
record number of bushels and tonnes produced in 
Saskatchewan. So we need to continue to improve our rail 
system. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Just want to touch on some other areas in education. 
Saskatchewan students will benefit from $815,000 in new 
funding to implement Saskatchewan’s action plan to address 



4836 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

bullying and cyberbullying, 588,000 in new funding to expand 
English as an additional language, 200,000 in new funding to 
provide alternate format and materials for students with 
disabilities, $2 million increase for CommunityNet bandwidth, 
$6 million in funding — double the amount provided last year 
— for the continued response to recommendations from the 
joint task force on improving First Nations and Métis education 
and employment outcomes in Saskatchewan. 
 
Highways and infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, so vital . . . our 
infrastructure deficit that we were left with as a government 
after 16 years of NDP rule. And we continue to make headway 
in improving the infrastructure in the province. So the highways 
and infrastructure budget includes $664.5 million to operate and 
maintain Saskatchewan’s highways and transportation system. 
 
Some of the things that we are doing in this year’s budget 
includes major projects that fulfill that objective, including 
pre-construction work on the Regina bypass project; twinning 
Highway 16 from Saskatoon to Clavet; pre-construction work 
for future passing lanes on Highway 7 between Rosetown and 
Delisle, with part of that goes to the Biggar constituency; and 
the two pilot projects to upgrade obsolete thin membrane 
surface primary highways to primary weight super grids. I think 
that holds a lot of promise in the future and that it’s going to 
take many years and a lot of investment, but I think this is the 
way to deal with the thin membranes to improve transportation 
in the more rural parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
$118 million worth of rural highway upgrades across the 
province, 95 million to repave about 300 kilometres of 
highways, and 37.6 million to renew bridges and culverts are 
some of where the money is going to be spent in Highways. 
 
And also our government always has been a government that 
cares for people that have disadvantages in society, and it’s no 
different in this budget. The province will increase investment 
in Saskatchewan child and family agenda by $8.7 million to 
meet the needs of children, the youth, and families at risk. In 
total the province has committed $62.5 million in new funding 
to the agenda since it was created in 2011. That’s a sign of a 
caring government. 
 
Other initiatives are the Ministry of Health is leading the work 
of the mental health and addictions action plan, other plans to 
help keep families together and prevent children from coming 
into care. Social Services, increasing intensive family supports 
for after-hours services to families. Also as part of the building 
partnerships to reduce crime initiative, two additional centres of 
responsibility will be implemented in 2014. 
 
Five hundred additional licensed child care spaces will be 
created to meet the unprecedented demand for child care and to 
support positive child development. 
 
And again, both in a health sense and just with seniors in 
particular, we continue to have unprecedented supported for 
people with disabilities and with the seniors. 
 
Highlights in this budget — 9.9 million of funding to the 
Ministry of Economy is employment assistance for people with 
disabilities. Ministry of Health will spend $7.6 million for 
autism intervention and 4.2 million for intensive fetal alcohol 

disorder. 
 
And the Ministry of Social Services will invest $5.1 million in 
the upcoming year under the Saskatchewan assured income 
disability or SAID program for the third year in a row by $20 a 
month for those in residential care. 
 
Social Services budget will also see an increase of 20.4 million 
or 14 per cent more for community-based organizations that 
provide residential spaces and programs for people with 
intellectual disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very, a very good budget. There’s never 
enough money to go around to everything we want, naturally, in 
one year. But this government has year after year, budget after 
budget, have had number one, a balanced budget. We’ve 
reduced debt and we have increased funding to areas that we 
need right across the spectrum of the province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I will be supporting this budget and I will not be 
supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Okay, enough of that. It’s my honour to rise 
today in response to the budget. But before I begin I’d be remiss 
if I didn’t thank some very important people. First, the 
constituents of Regina Coronation Park. I’m proud to serve as 
their representative in this Assembly and I want to thank them 
for being a community that embodies the best of Saskatchewan. 
Coronation Park is a diverse community of hard-working 
families from all over the world. I want to thank them for 
sharing their experiences and their traditions with me. 
 
I’d also like to thank my family: my mother, my brother, 
sister-in-law, nephews, and nieces. Thanks to my friends, both 
old and new. Thanks to Lisa for embarking on our many new 
adventures and thanks for putting up with me . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, it is kind of tough. Also I want to thank 
my constituency assistant, Kristy Shaw. This has been Kristy’s 
first year as my CA [constituency assistant] and she’s doing a 
bang-up job helping to make sure the people of Coronation Park 
are well served by their government. 
 
This government is all about serving the people of 
Saskatchewan. One of the best ways any government can serve 
the people it represents is by being faithful, sensible stewards of 
the public purse. I want to thank and congratulate the Minister 
of Finance for shouldering that challenge on behalf of this 
government. Under his stewardship, the Premier’s leadership, 
we’ve yet again brought in a budget that is balanced both 
fiscally and in terms of making investments where they matter 
most. 
 
Fiscally, the budget is balanced, with a surplus. And for the first 
time it is reported on a summary basis. In terms of investment, 
this budget addresses the needs of Saskatchewan’s most 
vulnerable citizens while also addressing key infrastructure 
needs, many of which we inherited from the members opposite. 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4837 

Speaking of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to 
point out that I’m beginning to get a bit worried. Not worried 
about what they might do because they clearly have no idea 
what they would do themselves. No, Mr. Speaker, I’m worried 
about the state of their memory. They constantly call on our 
government to maintain a balanced budget, but in the same 
breath call for unrealistically high spending. It’s almost as if 
they’ve forgotten the importance of living within one’s means, 
especially when it’s not your own money that you’re spending. 
These aren’t our dollars. They belong to the men and women 
who are keeping our economy strong: workers, small-business 
owners, investors, families. But to listen to the opposition, one 
would almost think that they want us to squander those dollars 
and then go in debt on top of it like a big orange credit card, as 
the Premier put it. So that’s worrisome. 
 
You know what else worries me about their memory? The fact 
that they so easily seem to have forgotten how we ended up 
with so many infrastructure needs. Yes, our economic growth 
has created some new challenges, but the biggest challenge of 
all are the ones inherited from them. They are the ones who 
closed long-term care facilities, hospitals, and schools. They are 
the ones who let roads fall into disrepair. They are the ones who 
made this mess, Mr. Speaker. We are the ones who’ve been 
working since 2007 to clean it up. They didn’t agree with or 
applaud anything in this budget, Mr. Speaker, except for one 
solitary thing — our move to summary financial statements. 
Really, Mr. Speaker? They want us to believe and the people of 
Saskatchewan to believe that there’s nothing else in this budget 
worthy of their support and appreciation. Really? 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t you think that the NDP, 
who constantly remind us how important it is for First Nations 
and Métis people to benefit from the same economic growth 
and opportunities that non-Aboriginal people do, would say 
thank you for the 700 new adult basic education seats created in 
this year’s budget? That brings the total number of adult basic 
education seats up to 8,580, Mr. Speaker, many of which will 
be filled by First Nations and Métis residents wanting to 
improve their skills to take advantage of this province’s growth. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, sadly the members opposite have not 
thanked us. But I think we’ll take the opportunity to say you’re 
welcome anyways. 
 
You know what else surprises me, Mr. Speaker? The fact that 
even though the members opposite, particularly their leader and 
their Education and Finance critic, have spent so much time and 
energy decrying the state of education, they don’t seem too 
keen on our continued investments in Saskatchewan’s education 
system. They petition daily for our government to invest in a 
new gym for Sacred Heart School here in Regina. Well guess 
what, Mr. Speaker? We’re not just investing in a gym. We’re 
investing in a whole new school, and not just one, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re investing in a second new school for Regina to replace 
Connaught and in two major renovation projects for St. Brieux 
and Sacred Heart School in Moose Jaw. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP have been oddly quiet about these investments so we’ll 
help them out. You’re welcome. 
 
And not just once have we heard a happy word from the 
naysayers opposite about the joint-use schools for Regina, 
Saskatoon, Warman, and Martensville. 
 

Well that was bad enough, especially considering that the 
Leader of the Opposition almost daily tabled petitions calling 
for a new school for Hampton Village. We gave him one. They 
didn’t even bother to show up for the announcement to 
congratulate the people of Hampton Village for their new 
school or thank the government for its support. So I’ll say it for 
him. Thank you and you’re welcome. 
 
And since we’re talking about P3s, Mr. Speaker, maybe we’ve 
stumbled across the reason why they’re anti-P3. It can’t be 
because P3s don’t work, because they do. It can’t be because 
these schools aren’t needed, because they are. Maybe it’s 
because the concept of P3s remind them of their own 
shortcomings. Mr. Speaker, we have P3s but they have no Ps of 
their own. No plan, no policy, and certainly no platform. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, of course they’re anti-P3. Because instead of 
actually standing for something, they’re hoping that if they 
criticize us enough, no one will notice that today’s NDP appear 
to stand for nothing more or less than just opposing everything 
our government is proud to stand for. We stand for progress. 
We stand for prosperity. And most of all we stand for people, 
the great people of Saskatchewan. 
 
How do we stand for progress? We aren’t afraid of new ideas if 
those new ideas will make our community stronger and the 
lives of the people we serve better. 
 
How do we stand for prosperity? By creating an environment 
where investments in Saskatchewan are growing, where jobs 
are being created, and where communities are growing. And for 
all that, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, you’re welcome. 
 
The most important thing we stand for is the people of this 
province. How do we stand for people, Mr. Speaker? By 
making investments that make lives better, investments like 
over a half million dollars new funding to expand English as an 
additional language support, $200,000 in new funding to 
provide alternate-format materials for students with disabilities. 
 
And speaking of making lives better, Mr. Speaker, this budget 
includes $815,000 in new funding to implement 
Saskatchewan’s action plan to address bullying and 
cyberbullying, again a subject the members opposite used to 
talk about. Why the member for Saskatoon Centre used to table 
petitions every day for the government to take action on 
anti-bullying and cyberbullying, and we did. We came up with 
an action plan and backed it up with dollars. But nothing from 
the members opposite. So again, Mr. Speaker, you’re welcome. 
 
I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, but I think I’ve spent 
enough time focusing on the silence of the members opposite. 
I’d like to turn my attention to some of the budget initiatives 
nearest and dearest to my heart as the Legislative Secretary of 
disability issues, supports to citizens with disabilities. 
 
This budget includes over $446 million in funding for people 
with disabilities, an increase of more than $84 million over last 
year and more than double the funding provided in 2007-2008. 
That’s right. More than double. It includes $9.9 million to the 
employability assistance for people with disabilities program to 
help adults with disabilities prepare for, find, and maintain 
employment. And that employment isn’t just about the wages 



4838 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

and the salary earned. It’s about the dignity of a job, about 
taking pride in and contributing to the economy, about helping 
build Saskatchewan into an even stronger province by viewing 
people as abled, not disabled. That’s what those jobs are about, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget includes $7.6 million for autism interventions, $4.2 
million for intensive fetal alcohol spectrum disorder prevention 
programming, $43 million for Saskatchewan Aids to 
Independent Living to maintain benefits for people with 
long-term disabilities or illnesses, and $3.5 million for capital 
and operative funding for transit assistance for people with 
disabilities. 
 
[15:45] 
 
This budget also includes $5.1 million to increase benefits 
under the Saskatchewan assured income for disability program 
or SAID. This is the third year in a row we’ve increased 
benefits under SAID and that’s a record I couldn’t be more 
proud of. This year SAID benefits will increase by $20 a month 
for people in residential care, $50 a month for individuals, $55 a 
month for couples. SAID, designed in collaboration with the 
disability community, is a landmark income security program 
for people with disabilities and a significant part of our 
government’s commitment to make Saskatchewan the best 
place to live in Canada for people with disabilities. 
 
And these are some of the responses to the budget from the 
disability community, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I’m encouraged with the direction government has taken in 
addressing the education and employment gaps for First 
Nations and Métis people, developing a mental health and 
addictions action plan, and adding more pre-kindergarten 
and child care spaces, positive parenting programs, and 
other services for families. 
 

That’s a quote from Bob Pringle, the Advocate for Children and 
Youth. Here’s another quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We thank the Government of Saskatchewan for honouring 
their election promise to increase SAID benefit rates to $20 
a month for individuals in residential care, $50 a month for 
individuals living independently, and $50 a month for 
couples living independently. SAID enrolment has 
exceeded our expectations. We are grateful that over 
11,000 individuals have been able to benefit from this. 
 

And that’s Judy Hannah, SACL [Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living] project coordinator. 
 
Here’s another one, Mr. Speaker: “Thank you to the 
Government of Saskatchewan for making persons with 
disabilities one of the priorities in the 2014-15 budget.” Gloria 
Mahussier, the SACL president. 
 
Well here’s another one, Mr. Speaker. “We’re a leader in the 
country, if not North America and the world, in supports for 
people with disabilities. And it’s something the Saskatchewan 
Party should be very proud of.” Amy McNeil, executive 
director of SARC. Here’s another quote from SARC: 
 

. . . the 2014-15 Provincial Budget Address included 
important funding increases dedicated to making 
Saskatchewan the best place for people with disabilities to 
live. These investments are part of a positive, multi-year 
approach. Since 2008, [who was in power in 2008? Oh, the 
Sask Party] the government has significantly increased 
funding targeted towards improving the lives of people 
with disabilities. This began with a commitment from 
Government that people with disabilities would no longer 
have extensive waits for residential and community-based 
day programs. 

 
Again another quote from SARC and our disability community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another big part of that commitment is the 
development of a provincial disability strategy. And I’m proud 
to have spent the past year working with members of the citizen 
consultation team for leading the development of that strategy. 
After a winter of hard work behind the scenes, the team is 
getting ready to embark on public consultations this spring. 
 
And I’d like to thank the 15 citizen consultation team members, 
the government officials, the Minister of Social Services for all 
their work so far and for the exciting work still ahead. And so 
thank you to all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’d like to end my comments by saying that 
I’m proud to support the motion in favour of this budget. I 
thank the Premier and the Finance minister for their leadership 
in providing the people of Saskatchewan with yet again another 
balanced budget. And I thank the people of Saskatchewan for 
the continued trust in our government, and I will be voting 
against the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very happy to 
stand up today and enter this debate on our budget on steady 
growth. But before I get into that, I want to take the time that 
most of our members do to thank the people that are most 
important to us. And I need to start with my wife. She’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Your much better half. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Yes, much better half. She’s the one that 
allows me to do this job to the full extent I can. She keeps the 
lights on at home, making sure that everything’s okay there. 
And so when we do have some time, we get to spend it with our 
grandkid. So I really want to thank my wife for that. 
 
And talking about grandkids, I still . . . I have three wonderful 
boys. They’re all in the . . . Well actually I’ve got one away at 
school in Manitoba right now, but he works here in 
Saskatchewan. He’s doing his apprenticeship, 10 weeks’ 
training out in Manitoba. So he comes back and forth every 
weekend. And he’s working to be an aircraft mechanic. He’s 
already a pilot. He helped me quite a bit on the campaign, as my 
other two boys. That would be Ryan that’s just out right now. 
Geoff’s still in university. He tells me he may graduate this 
year. I’m hoping he’ll graduate this year. I think this is year five 
or six. I’ve kind of lost track, but he’s working hard in 
university right here. And then Dylan. Dylan — my kids 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4839 

compete quite a bit — Dylan got married last year, and now 
we’re grandparents. And so the way the kids keep score is he’s 
winning right now in the way they keep score.  
 
But my grandson, Jordison trumps all. So actually he’s not 
winning any more; it’s my grandson. However, to continue with 
our steady growth platform, he has told me that they’re 
expecting another one. So we have another grandbaby on the 
way. So he’s going to be like him and his brother. They’re only 
a year apart. So Jordison and his younger sibling are going to be 
just over a year apart. We’re looking forward to that this 
summer. And also I want to mention my daughter-in-law, 
Kayleigh, because she’s the one that takes care of my grandkid 
and does a great job. So we’re looking really forward to that. So 
my family’s grown just like the province has grown over the 
last year. 
 
And you know, so your family is your most important thing, but 
I would be very remiss if I didn’t talk about Laurie, my CA 
back in the office. We all have CAs here that allow us to be 
here and take care of all the things that go on in the office in 
Moose Jaw. And when I get back Thursday afternoon or Friday, 
it depends what’s going on, she gives me my list of constituents 
that I get to actually contact, call back, touch base with then and 
see how we’re doing with the issues they brought forward to the 
office. So I want to thank Laurie Kosior for the great job that 
she does back in my office. 
 
Now I also want to thank the constituents of Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. They’re the ones that gave me the honour to be able 
to stand here today and do this reply to the budget, our seventh 
consecutive balanced budget. So I don’t know if that’s lucky 
seven or not, but we’re going to have a surplus of $71 million 
on a budget of expenses of just over $14 billion. 
 
And talking to the people that support me back home, they said, 
stay away from the numbers because the numbers are the 
numbers, but it’s . . . Talk about the people. So I really want to 
talk about the people, but we have to touch on the numbers just 
a little bit and how it affects the people. 
 
We’ll talk about the $16 million to finish off the brand new 
hospital that is going to serve Five Hills Health Region. So 
we’re going to finish off that new hospital in Moose Jaw and 
the money is there to do it. This government, as opposed to 
some other governments, actually does what it says it’s going to 
do. We say we are going to build a hospital; we build a hospital. 
We say we are going to provide the funding for the hospital; we 
provide the funding for the hospital. So it’s there this year. 
We’re going to finish it off. 
 
We also want to talk about some of the schools. Sacred Heart is 
actually just down the street and around the corner from where I 
live, and it’s slated as one of the four schools that are up for a 
major renovation. So we have money there for that. So talking 
to the folks in the riding, they’re very happy that that money is 
there to upgrade Sacred Heart. 
 
And if you take a drive around Moose Jaw Wakamow now, 
you’ll see that it’s almost fortuitous because we have the 
Westheath subdivision. It’s basically exploding. South Hill is 
growing at a very rapid pace. And then just about four blocks 
south of where I live, there’s this new apartment complex going 

up that’s being built as well as some single-family dwelling 
units there and some condos that are being developed. And it’s 
being done by the private sector. They’re seeing the potential of 
our province, the province of Saskatchewan growing. They’re 
not going to the government, you’ve got to build this for us. 
They are coming ahead and going ahead and doing that. So they 
see the growth there. 
 
One of the things I want to talk about, just a little bit on the 
other side of the coin, is our members opposite. You know, I 
don’t know if the N actually stands for new anymore. I’m pretty 
sure it stands for negative because, you know, they come and 
they ask, and we say, okay, we’re going to give them a new 
school in Regina Elphinstone-Centre. So does that mean they’re 
going to vote for the budget? We’re going to give them a new 
school in Regina Lakeview. Does that mean that MLA is going 
to vote for the budget? 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about the Elphinstone one? 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Well I already said the Elphinstone one. 
And we’re going to build a seniors’ home in La Ronge. So they 
come and they come forward and they say, okay, we need this. 
We need this. And we sit back, and we go through the budget. 
So instead of going, no, we’re not going to do that because 
that’s an NDP riding, we help all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We don’t go and close down rural hospitals like somebody else 
did. We don’t go down and close schools. We talk about 
rebuilding schools, building new schools — nine new joint-use 
schools, two new schools here in Regina on top of that. And 
what do the members do? They stand up, and they’re very 
negative about it. According to them, there’s nothing good in 
this budget except that it’s a summary budget. You would think 
if, you know, if my riding was getting a brand new school, I 
would be standing up cheering. Mine gets a whole new 
renovation on the school. I’m very happy. If we were getting a 
brand new school, it would be yes. How can we say no to this 
budget? 
 
When we talk about a seniors’ home, we don’t close down 
seniors’ homes. We don’t close down seniors’ beds. We open 
them. What do they do? They close them. We opened one in 
one of their ridings, and I don’t think I’ve seen anybody look 
that angry. I’m going to steal a quote from one of our other 
members that . . . looked so angry when we announced that 
seniors’ home in La Ronge that I’m going to wonder how 
they’re going to explain to their constituents when they vote 
against new schools in their riding, new seniors’ homes in their 
riding. How are they going to be able to stand there on the door 
when it’s time to campaign next time and go, yes, we voted 
against that budget for our new school? Yes, we voted against 
that seniors’ home because it was the wrong idea. We don’t 
need that. Well actually yes, they do. That’s why we’re 
providing that. 
 
And it’s not just schools and hospitals that we’re providing 
money for infrastructure. I grew up down in Estevan. I was in 
the oil field for a long time. And that highway was busy back in 
the ’80s. That’s Highway 39. And we set aside money to look at 
twinning Highway 39, to twin Highway 39 and Highway 6 
coming into Regina. We listened to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We get out. We talk to them. We do that 



4840 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

year-round. We don’t do that just election year. 
 
We get out, I was out door knocking last summer, talking to 
constituents. And they’re like, is there an election? And I’m 
like, no, there’s no election. Well what are you doing here? 
Well we just want to touch base with you and see how we’re 
doing as a government, see how everything’s going. And the 
constituents are, you know, you were here before the last 
election and now you’re here now, but we hadn’t seen anybody 
on our doorstep that was a politician for, you know, 10 or 12 
years before that. And I’m not sure who was out there before 
me. Well actually I’m pretty sure who was out there. But I got 
out and talked to as many folks as I can, and not talk to them, 
listen to what they have to say. 
 
[16:00] 
 
One of the things when I’m listening to constituents is I say 
sometimes politicians talk too much, and we need to listen 
more. And the people go, really that’s the first politician that’s 
ever said that to me. So I really try and listen to what the folks 
have to say. 
 
So you know, we talk about steady growth. We do this again. 
How we did that this year to balance this budget is controlled 
spending. I’m sure the members have a fundamental problem 
with that controlled spending because in their last platform their 
spending was projected at an extra $5 billion, an extra $5 
billion. 
 
So when you go to their party website and their caucus website 
and go, okay, so what’s their platform? It’s not found. They 
don’t have a platform on their website. So it becomes, okay, I 
understand the idea behind being the opposition. But when 
you’re opposing new schools in your own riding, when you’re 
opposing seniors’ homes in your own riding that you’ve stood 
up here and talked about and asked for, and the government 
goes, yes, we need to do that because it’s the right thing to do 
for the people of Saskatchewan . . .  
 
And it doesn’t matter which political stripe your MLA is. You 
need a new school; we’re going to do our best to get you that 
new school. So you know, it was mentioned before. When we 
announced the new schools in Hampton Village, the Leader of 
the Opposition didn’t even show up. He stood up here over and 
over and over again, asked for that new school. So we go, okay. 
Fifty-one times he stood up and asked for that new school. And 
when we say, okay, we’re going to give you a new school. You 
want to come to the announcement? It’s like, uh, uh, uh, no. 
You know, you’d think he would be happy, but no. He’s against 
a new school in his own riding, yes, the negative nine. I think 
they really need to take a look at renaming their party or 
rebranding it and incorporating negative into that name. 
 
So I was talking about Highway 39 earlier. And the reason I 
brought that up is because I have a whole bunch of family 
members that use that highway just about every day. I’ve got 
brothers and sisters, uncles, cousins, my dad. They’re still all 
active in the oil field down in that Estevan-Weyburn area. So 
working on twinning that highway is something that makes me 
very happy because that’s one of the economic drivers of our 
province, is the oil field. So getting that going is really kind of 
important and close to my heart. 

We talk about record funding in health care. So we’re 
increasing the funding to meet the three-month wait-list. We’re 
putting in support for primary care centres and collaborative 
emergency centres. We’ve also introduced programs to reduce 
ER [emergency room] wait times and improve patient flow. 
 
You know, over and over and over again we talk about the 
growth in the province, but it’s most apparent in some of our K 
to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] schools. So we’re moving 
forward with that. And I’d like to know, and I’ve heard the 
question asked from our side before, is it the new schools 
they’re against or is it just the principle of P3 that they’re 
against? And they’ve never really come out and said whether or 
not they’re for the new schools or if it’s just the funding 
process, the funding model that we’re probably going to use to 
fund these schools. What do they say? They sit there and they 
won’t answer. They won’t put it on their website.  
 
You know, when our Premier took over as leader, it wasn’t long 
before we had our new growth platform — one year. One year, 
we had our new growth platform up there for everybody to see. 
And they laughed at it and said it was nonsensical and those 
numbers could never, never be hit. 
 
So we’re a year into the Leader of the Opposition’s mandate as 
Leader of the Opposition, and what’s on their website? Nothing. 
It’s just not there. So you know, to oppose everything just for 
the sake of opposing it, I don’t know if that’s the right thing to 
do. Actually I’m pretty sure that’s the wrong thing to do, 
especially with no reason. It’s just when you say you’re wrong, 
you should probably back that up with something other than 
you’re just wrong and sit down and throw a pout because you’re 
not winning. You know, it’s time to actually stand up and say 
why we’re wrong, not just, you know, sit back and go, you’re 
wrong. You actually should back that up with an argument.  
 
So when we look at this, we talk about a balanced budget. They 
talked about it being hard on families. Well we have no tax 
increases. We have controlled spending. We have huge 
investments in infrastructure and huge investments in people. 
That’s why there’s 48 of us over here and nine over there 
because we actually listen to what the people have to say. We 
take time to go out, talk to folks, take their ideas, bring them 
back, bring them into caucus, bring them into our caucus 
members, have that discussion. And you know, it shows up.  
 
So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to thank everybody 
for giving me the time to stand up, thank my constituents, my 
family, my CA. I also want to say that I will be supporting the 
budget, and I will not be supporting the opposition’s 
amendment. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 
from Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it gives me 
great pleasure to stand up here and discuss the budget, this great 
budget that we just came down with here last week. Mr. 
Speaker, as usual, we have to do some thank yous, and I want to 
thank the people of Carrot River Valley for giving me the 
honour and the privilege to represent them for the past six years 
in this House, and it’s been great. 
 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4841 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I plan on throwing my hat 
in the ring again and to run again for the next election because I 
believe that this government is a government that’s moving 
forward. Besides that, Mr. Speaker, when I brought that up to 
my wife, she was ecstatic also because she said, you’re not 
ready to retire because if you retire, you know, within two 
weeks around our house there’d be one of us dead, and it could 
be me. So, Mr. Speaker, I hope to be able to continue to 
represent the people of Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my constituency assistants, 
Cindy Warner and Shelley Meyer and Charlene Enns. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much help do you need? 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well they haven’t killed me yet, but 
sometimes they would like to. But they do a fantastic job of 
running our office at home, Mr. Speaker. They do the, as 
everybody here in the legislature knows, our constituency 
assistants do the yeoman work. And you know, we’re kind of 
the ones out in the public’s eye but, Mr. Speaker, they do great 
work. And I will say that it’s really nice to have people like that 
helping us out within our constituency, and I know I’m not the 
only one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk . . . Obviously what I’m up here 
doing is talking about the budget. First off, it’s a balanced 
budget again, Mr. Speaker. This party’s done a great job on 
balancing the budget. And not only do we balance the budget 
but, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t got any tax increases this time 
around. This is important. This is important to help grow the 
economy. You know, Saskatchewan used to be known as a very 
high-tax province. It’s kind of kept the economy down. But that 
was back years ago when the NDP was in power. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we also know it’s a very tight budget. We 
have to control our spending. We have to invest in 
infrastructure, but we have to do it carefully. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a well-known fact on our infrastructure that we’ve had to do 
a lot of backfilling on it because of 16 years of the previous 
administration running the infrastructure in the ground. And 
they were far willing, rather than fix the infrastructure, they just 
shut it down. You know, they talked about education. They shut 
down — what? — 176 schools, shut down 52 rural hospitals. 
They didn’t think of investing in infrastructure. 
 
And you take a look in the Carrot River Valley constituency 
alone. We’re getting a brand new school in Hudson Bay, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s being built as we speak. When you take a look at 
the roads that have been improved in the Carrot River Valley 
constituency, and not just in Carrot River Valley constituency, 
Mr. Speaker, but all over the province, our Minister of 
Highways has done a fantastic job of fixing up the mess that 
this government was left to look after, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course in rural Saskatchewan, one thing we always talk 
about besides how much snow we have and what the weather’s 
doing to our crops, but one thing we have in common, we 
always talk about health. Now under the NDP the health system 
was, you know, I hate to say it this way but it was basically the 
laughingstock of Canada. It wasn’t a laughing matter, Mr. 
Speaker. Our health system had the longest wait times in all of 
Canada, the longest wait times in all of Canada. 

Now we’re moving forward. And yet every single day, what 
does the Opposition Leader do? He stands up and criticizes us 
for moving forward on our health initiatives. Mr. Speaker, boy, 
they’ve got short memories. They were criticized all across the 
country for the way that they ran the health system here in 
Saskatchewan, which was the birthplace of medicare, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now you take a look at this side of the House. Not only, not 
only do we have a Health minister, but we have a Rural Health 
minister also. You know, under Roy’s revenge, they forgot 
about rural Saskatchewan. They just went out there and closed 
all the hospitals down. But yet we have a Rural Health minister 
who goes out and visits all of our communities, Mr. Speaker. 
He went out and has been around to 80 different rural 
communities looking at their health systems, trying to figure out 
a way how we can improve the health system for our people in 
rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these are fundamental things 
that the NDP never ever thought about. 
 
I’ll go back to them closing those 52 hospitals. We’re building 
new hospitals, Mr. Speaker. Some of them were announced by 
the NDP but they just never got around to building them. What 
an amazing thing. They like to do that on schools also. So, Mr. 
Speaker, when you look at that end of it, this budget continues 
with what we started in 2007 and moving things forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could talk about agriculture, very important in 
Saskatchewan. Now the NDP, all they can do is sit back and 
criticize on the ag end of it. But when we ran into grain 
transportation problems, our Minister of Agriculture 
immediately — immediately — started working on it way back, 
actually way back last spring, and continued all the way 
through. We have a Premier that has gone and met with our 
counterparts in Ottawa on various different occasions. We’ve 
had the minister, his delegation going down there and meeting 
with them. And now we’re getting action on the transportation 
of grain which is so vitally important to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to the people of Carrot River Valley. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing we have is we had the opposition 
sitting there chastising, kind of laughing, saying, well the 
backbenchers never do anything, talking about northern 
Saskatchewan, saying the backbenchers never did anything. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how they used to . . . 
Well I guess I know how they used to run it. It was kind of a 
mess over there. But in this government, everybody gets a say. 
It goes through caucus. Every man and woman has a chance to 
say what they think in caucus and to go along. And just because 
you’re a minister doesn’t mean that you’re a higher priority in 
getting everything. No, Mr. Speaker, it works all the way across 
the board. Everybody has a say, and that’s the way our caucus 
operates — much different than the caucus from across the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you want to talk about northern Saskatchewan. 
And my counterpart from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton 
mentioned it, how all of us, including that line across the North, 
are representing the North very well. We’ve got major things 
going on. Up there we have forestry, and I know my counterpart 
from Saskatchewan Rivers just had a mill start up, going up in 
Big River. Mr. Speaker, under the NDP the mills were all 



4842 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

shutting down. Why? Well part of it was economics, but part of 
it was a convoluted system that they had in their forest 
management practices. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, take a look at what’s happened since this 
government’s gotten in power. We have the Weyerhaeuser mill 
restarted in Hudson Bay. We have Edgewood lumber that got 
restarted in Carrot River. We have Carrier lumber that got 
started up in Big River. The mills are doing well, and the people 
are doing well. And under this government business likes to 
thrive, unlike the members opposite who at one time used to 
chase people out of the province. 
 
You know, I can still remember the old saying that, well we’ll 
just leave that oil in the ground because it’ll be there later on. 
Well I’ve got news for you. If you leave it there too long, 
you’re not going to have the employment. You’re not going to 
have a growing province, and you’re not to be moving the 
province forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government sees things in a far different 
way. We like to see people working. We like to see the 
province growing. We don’t like shutting down schools. We 
like a good health system. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s moving our 
province forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if on this budget I didn’t give 
credit to treasury board. These people have put in yeoman work 
along with our Finance minister and his staff. They’ve done a 
fantastic job of coming forward with a balanced budget in 
relatively tight times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s face it. Saskatchewan, they didn’t completely miss the 
recession, but they came pretty close. Saskatchewan now is a 
place to be, not a place to be from, Mr. Speaker, because in 
Saskatchewan we have jobs. We have people that are going out 
there, working, getting good wages. I believe we are actually 
the third-highest weekly wage in Canada at the present time, 
Mr. Speaker, a far cry from when the NDP were in power. And 
you know, the kids would come out of school, and what would 
they do? They would take their suitcase and head to Alberta or 
British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my how things have changed in the last seven 
years. How this province has pulled together is . . . This is an 
optimistic province now. You know, you walk around the 
province back in 2000, and people were walking around, and 
everybody had a frown on their face. Now you know 
something, Mr. Speaker? They’re all walking around smiling. 
Saskatchewan’s known throughout not just Canada but 
throughout North America as a place, as a place to be, a place to 
work, a place to raise your family, and I’m very proud that both 
of my children are working right here in Saskatchewan now. 
That means when they eventually, and when I say eventually, 
but when they eventually get married and have grandchildren, 
they won’t have very far to come and see grandpa and I won’t 
have very far to return them either. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know the things that we have done in this 
province, we as a government, and I guess I can say we as the 
people of Saskatchewan, when you take a look at what we’ve 
done with the tax situation, the NDP were just up complaining 
today about the minimum wage. Well what good does it do you 

if you raise the minimum wage and then you tax it all back? 
 
This government has taken 114,000 people off of the tax rolls. 
That’s how we’re helping the low-income earners in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. They are not having to pay tax. Before, 
under the old NDP system, yes, you could raise the minimum 
wage, which they basically never did, but they said they 
would’ve, you know, had they been here. Yes, right. But the 
catch is, is they would have just taxed it all back anyway. We 
took 114,000 people off of that tax roll. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget continues on. The NDP always sits 
back and claims that they wanted to help the seniors. So what 
did they do by helping the seniors? They closed a bunch of 
beds, didn’t build any seniors’ homes. Oh that reminds me, Mr. 
Speaker, we are getting a brand new long-term care facility 
being built in Tisdale. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, so what have we got now? Let’s start 
adding it up. Under this government, Carrot River Valley, we’re 
getting better roads by a long shot. We’re having our mills 
reopen. We’re having our agriculture producers paying way less 
tax on their land than what they were before. We’re actually 
funding crop insurance, unlike the negative nine across the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I said the roads, the hospitals, the health 
system. We’re improving our health system. We’re getting 
more docs up in our area than what we had before, Mr. Speaker. 
The member from Biggar, the Minister of Rural Health, has 
made sure that we are getting more docs in the province and 
we’re getting more nurses in the province to be able to help 
move rural Saskatchewan forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the one thing, like I said on the financing, it 
had to be tight. And although we’re not going to get everything, 
and everybody isn’t going to get everything, this government is 
committed to bringing as much as what we can forward to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I forgot about one more thing. We were 
talking about education. And I know I’d use up a little bit extra 
of your time here, but Cumberland College just built a brand 
new facility in Nipawin, Mr. Speaker. Now that Cumberland 
College facility is used a lot by our First Nations people up 
there. So we’re getting people coming from Cumberland House, 
Shoal Lake, and Red Earth who are attending there, whether to 
upgrade their education, whether to look at getting trades. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, this is an untapped resource that we can use within 
this province. And this government stands behind our 
education, our education to help these people along to be able to 
move this province forward in that respect also, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with these few odds and ends in my short little 
bit of time of standing up here speaking, Mr. Speaker, I have to 
say that I will certainly be supporting this budget, and I will not 
be supporting the amendment put forth by the NDP. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 
from Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, the theme of the 2014-15 balanced 
budget will keep Saskatchewan on a path of steady growth. 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4843 

Saskatchewan’s population grew 20,000 people — second 
highest in Canada only behind Alberta — in 2013 to an all-time 
high of 1,117,503 people. Mr. Speaker, the budget is balanced. 
There are no tax increases. It controls spending, investment, and 
infrastructure. And there are investments in people that will 
ensure a better quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe the member from Rosemont 
wouldn’t stand up and support a budget that is going to replace 
Sacred Heart School and is based on a summary focus, 
something that he’s been talking about for months and months 
and months. 
 
The members opposite got up and stood when the Finance 
minister announced the summary focus for the budget, but I was 
quite surprised that they wouldn’t stay on their feet for the rest 
of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I continue on, I would like to take the 
opportunity to thank some people. Firstly, Mr. Speaker, thank 
you to my colleagues at treasury board for their knowledge and 
guidance during this budget process. As a member of treasury 
board, I was very impressed with the presentations of all the 
ministries. I would like to thank the Finance ministry and the 
Finance minister for all the support and resources needed to 
obtain a balanced budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank all the third parties for their 
presentations and future plans. This includes universities, 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology], health regions, and school divisions. Mr. Speaker, 
I would also like to thank my constituency assistants, Cheryl 
Hume and Maureen Paron, for their dedication to the 
constituents of Cut Knife-Turtleford while I spent extra time on 
this budget process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is our government’s seventh consecutive 
balanced budget. As I said, our population grew by 20,000 
people in 2013 to an all-time high of 1,117,503 people 
according to Stats Canada. Saskatchewan’s population grew at a 
rate of 1.83 per cent in 2013, the second-highest growth rate 
among the 10 provinces, only behind Alberta. Saskatchewan 
and Alberta were also the only two provinces to enjoy net 
interprovincial in-migration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about how this 2014-15 budget 
supports municipal growth in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan’s 
municipalities are receiving $394.6 million in direct provincial 
support in this year’s provincial balanced budget to build 
communities and enhance quality of life for their residents. 
That’s up 32.8 million or 9.1 per cent from the 2013-14 budget, 
and it’s up 152 million or 63.1 per cent from the 2007-08 
budget. Overall municipal revenue sharing is more than doubled 
what it was in 2007, up 129.7 million from the 2007-08 budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, urban revenue sharing for all cities, towns, 
villages, and resort villages will amount to 165.2 million in 
2014-15. Revenue sharing for rural municipalities, which 
includes organized hamlets, will total 72.6 million, and northern 
municipalities will receive 19.2 million in revenue sharing in 
the coming fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through municipal revenue sharing, SaskBuilds 

and a future federal-provincial municipal infrastructure 
agreement, the Government of Saskatchewan will assist 
municipalities with infrastructure investments to meet the 
opportunities and challenge of growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s balanced budget avoids tax increases 
by controlling government spending. This year’s budget also 
sees the government moving to a summary focus as 
recommended by the Provincial Auditor. A budget surplus of 
71 million is forecasted, taking into account all government 
business enterprises including commercial Crown corporations 
and government service organizations which include ministries, 
boards of education, health regions, among others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s balanced budget invests in 
infrastructure and people, aligning the goals and priorities of the 
Saskatchewan plan for growth. Government has also chosen to 
maintain the current provincial tax provisions for credit unions, 
including the special income tax reduction and the exemption 
from paying the provincial capital tax, recognizing the restraints 
credit unions face related to raising capital as well as their 
important place in the economy of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2014-15 agriculture budget of 371.6 million 
will help to ensure farmers and ranchers have the support they 
need to keep the agriculture industry growing and strong after 
record production levels and exports in 2013. The budget, Mr. 
Speaker, is highlighted by nearly 79 million for strategic 
initiatives such as research and market development, an 
increase of 7.5 million from the previous year. The budget also 
includes the new western livestock price insurance program and 
enhancements to crop insurance programs. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, approximately 242 million or 65 per cent of the 
2014-15 budget will go toward fully funding business risk 
management programs including AgriStability, AgriInvest, and 
crop insurance. The Crop Insurance Corporation will deliver 
western livestock price insurance to Saskatchewan cattle and 
hog producers, providing them protection against unexpected 
market price declines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers harvested a record crop 
of 38.4 million tonnes in 2013, surpassing the 2020 growth plan 
target of 36 million tonnes. Saskatchewan also set a new record 
of $11.7 billion worth of agriculture exports in 2013, an 
increase of 83 per cent since 2007. The budget provides 
significant support to help producers continue to increase 
production and the growth plan export goal of $15 billion by 
2020. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will invest nearly 5 billion in health 
care in 2014-15 to continue health system’s patient-first 
transformation and support improved access to high-quality 
care for the province’s growing population. The funding is 144 
million or 3 per cent increase over 2013-14. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the highlights of the health budget are 
3.25 billion for regional health authorities; 155.7 million for 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to provide cancer care services; 8 
million for upgrades and repairs to Parkridge Centre in 
Saskatoon; 60.5 million for surgical wait-list initiative; 13.1 



4844 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

million to support innovative approaches that enhance access to 
primary health care, including additional collaborative 
emergency centres that are known as CECs to improve health 
services for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CECs are designed to increase access to 
high-quality, comprehensive primary health care that can deal 
with unexpected illness or injury in a timely fashion. The first 
CEC was established in Maidstone in the Cut Knife-Turtleford 
constituency, and this year’s funding will bring the total to five 
centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy with increasing 
investment in training programs and labour force development, 
regulatory modernization, and establishing the Saskatchewan 
manufacturing centre of excellence are the priorities of the 
2014-15 Minister of the Economy budget. The total value of 
Saskatchewan’s manufacturing shipments for 2013 was 
approximately $15.2 million, a new record for the province and 
up from 14.2 billion in 2012. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2014 budget also continues to invest more in 
training opportunities to address Saskatchewan’s labour market 
shortages, including a 1 million increase for the Saskatchewan 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission for 300 
additional training seats in 2014-15 for a total of 22.2 million 
and 6,700 seats; 500,000 increase for apprenticeship training 
allowance; 924,000 increase for provincial training allowance; 
and 2.1 million increase for 700 new adult basic education 
seats, totalling 8,580 seats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of the Economy has also introduced a 
new oil and gas well levy. Coming into effect April 1st, the new 
levy will streamline licensing and regulation by eliminating 10 
different licensing fees which amount for more than 20,000 
annual transactions. The new levy will require that industry pay 
90 per cent of the government’s oversight. Mr. Speaker, the 
new levy will help fund service improvements to eliminate the 
unnecessary paperwork to the regulatory process. In the coming 
year the government plans to move to a single window online 
system for licence applications that will significantly reduce the 
current administrative burden faced by industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to have one of the 
strongest economies in Canada, forecast to have the 
second-fastest growth this year. Mr. Speaker, the Cut 
Knife-Turtleford constituency has seen and is seeing even more 
growth with the recent Husky Energy announcements. Husky 
Energy’s approval of two new heavy oil thermal projects in the 
Edam East and the Vawn area are under construction now. Each 
plant when fully operational will create about 20 full-time jobs, 
and during the construction phase employment will peak at 
approximately 400 persons at each plant. The construction of 
the two facilities will be staggered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the two projects will each produce 10,000 barrels 
per day and both will sit on approximately 12 hectares with low 
NOx [nitrogen oxides] burners to minimize emissions. These 
two facilities will be added to the list of seven other thermal 
facilities that currently produce 37 barrels per day. Two other 
plants under construction — Sandall and Rush Lake just north 
of Paynton — will add another 33,500 barrels per day of new 
production over the next three years. 

Mr. Speaker, Husky’s focus or growing focus on thermal 
projects is guided by a rich portfolio of opportunities and a 
proven template of smaller, steam-assisted, gravity drainage 
better known as SAGD plants providing better access to heavy 
oil reservoirs. Husky also has a pipeline of additional thermal 
projects under evaluation for development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one would have to think because of seven 
consecutive balanced budgets and a government that welcomes 
business, maybe this is why now we see these types of 
investment. We’re also seeing investment by Altex and CN 
[Canadian National]. Altex is partnered with the RM [rural 
municipality] of Wilton and CN in construction of a major 
oil-loading facility at Lashburn and one at Unity. The Lashburn 
facility is currently loading 85 to 90 cars per day, moving to 
300 to 350 cars per day over the next 16 months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, company president Glen Perry said that the 
expansion of the energy and transportation sector in the Unity 
district “is vital to our growth and prosperity. We [both] look 
forward to the immediate spinoff and future job growth that will 
result from development of this Transload facility.” “The 
economic benefits for our community are evident with the 
development of this facility by Altex,” Mayor Sylvia Maljan 
had to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency 
there are oil haulers, vac trucks, welding rigs, and good jobs for 
many. Is it possible that seven consecutive balanced budgets, a 
government with a plan for growth, and a record investment in 
health care, infrastructure, and education may have something 
to do with that? I think so. It’s a much better attitude out there 
than the last 16 years of a non-productive NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I finish up I would like to address some of 
the comments made in the last couple of weeks by members 
opposite. Mr. Speaker, on March 4th, 2014, the member from 
Elphinstone-Centre in adjourned debates on Bill 129 had this to 
say . . . And maybe it’s one of these things where there is so 
much paperwork because there are so many legislative 
secretaries. 
 

I’ve known some legislative secretaries over the years that 
have done some good work. [He goes on also to say] I 
think it provides for a better engagement of backbenchers 
or people that are not in cabinet. 
 
. . . But the practice can descend into some pretty 
ridiculous depths. And I think at the end of the Devine 
government . . . if they weren’t in cabinet, they were a 
Legislative Secretary and they got pay in perquisite that 
came along with that. 

 
Mr. Speaker, is he impugning the character of our legislative 
secretaries? Mr. Speaker, the member from Elphinstone-Centre 
cannot continue to speak out of both sides of his mouth. On one 
hand, he speaks, he encourages engagement from members of 
the legislature but then stands and insinuates that our 
government’s legislative secretaries only engage for additional 
pay. This is something that he should apologize for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member also said: 
 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4845 

. . . there are currently backbench MLAs that serve on 
treasury board, do I understand that correctly? 
 
. . . I’ll be interested to get a more definite explanation in 
the terms of the whole appointing of non-cabinet members 
to treasury board and how that authority was arrived at . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, once again, is the member opposite against 
inclusive government, against the government that looks to 
maximize the talents of all members of its caucus, a government 
that ensures that the voices of private members and their 
constituents are heard at the treasury board level? 
 
Mr. Speaker, also the member from Saskatoon Centre on March 
12th during adjourned debates, he had this to say. Now stay 
with me because I don’t know where this goes. 
 

But now you see the backbench is being brought into [the] 
Executive Council. And I have a question about what does 
that really mean? . . . It’s kind of fuzzy, [yes, I guess] that 
backbenchers can be brought in and out. 
 
. . . The Financial Administration Act as being amended to 
eliminate the Investment Board, and provide the treasury 
board so it can have non-ministerial members. 

 
He also says: 
 

And maybe I’m wrong [I would agree there] because this 
hasn’t really been explained well to . . . you know, that 
they do have non-executive members, Executive Council 
members as part of the treasury board. And typically, you 
know, from what I understand, you have Executive 
Council, then you have the backbenchers, and the 
backbenchers are there to support Executive Council. 

 
Stay with me here because this even gets better: 
 

And that’s how our democracy kind of works [he says]. 
You have the backbenchers, while technically not part of 
the Executive Council, can sort of say, you know, we want 
to keep you in line. That’s how a caucus meeting goes, 
right? That you have to make sure your work that you 
present has the support of the backbench, and if it doesn’t, 
then you’ve got a problem. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what I don’t understand here is what is the 
member asking for. Does he want private members to be 
excluded from decision making or is this how they run their 
caucus? 
 
Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say . . . I’ve only got one more page 
of this and then we’ll move on to something real good. He also 
goes on to say: 
 

But many of the other legislative secretaries haven’t quite 
achieved the same level of profile in the public. And I 
think that it’s important that when we have people who are 
appointed legislative secretaries that they actually do get 
out there and create profile within the public and do some 
work on that. 

 
He also says: 

So I think there is a role for legislative secretaries, but they 
need to be much more active. And as I say, I think that 
very few of them actually do achieve that profile in the 
public, and so I wonder, why do you even have legislative 
secretaries [for]? Now you’re getting rid of the idea that 
you have to reappoint them. I mean I think it would be 
good for them to show up maybe once a year to get their 
new contract. That would be at least showing that they are 
interested in their role. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I hope for the sake of the constituents of 
Saskatoon Centre the member does not truly believe what he is 
saying. I would hope that the member doesn’t truly believe 
showing up once a year to renew a contract should be the 
baseline of interest and performance for elected officials. Mr. 
Speaker, this illustrates the difference between the two sides of 
the House. This side of the House is about action; that side, talk. 
 
The members opposite equate work with press clippings, photo 
ops, and public profiles. On this side of the House, we equate 
work with putting boots on the ground and meeting with 
concerned stakeholders. The members opposite talk about 
moving to a summary budget. Our government takes action on 
introducing a balanced summary budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope the member opposite will think for himself 
over there and vote to support this seventh consecutive balanced 
budget that he knows is a good thing, a budget that holds the 
line on spending, a budget that offers no tax increases, a budget 
that is balanced on a summary basis. Mr. Speaker, I will be 
supporting the motion and definitely not supporting the 
amendment. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I’m really pleased today to rise to respond to the 
’14-15 budget on behalf of the people from the 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency. I’m pleased to take some 
time to talk about the impact this budget had on the people of 
the province, not just the people that are here today but the 
people that will move into our province and continue to call 
Saskatchewan home. 
 
We all know that our neighbouring provinces, and perhaps 
some of the provinces right across the Dominion of Canada are 
watching us, and perhaps they’re even envying us in some 
cases. Some of them are probably thinking and wondering who 
this new Saskatchewan is. Where is the little, self-conscious, 
sad, timid province that used to have no self-esteem or no 
vision, the province that we used to know? Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, things have changed a lot. Saskatchewan is no longer a 
have-not province just trying to survive. We are a thriving 
province. And I know it’s the good people of Saskatchewan and 
our abundant resources that have allowed that to happen. But I 
am very proud to be part of a government that’s part of this 
growth. 
 
I’m also proud of the fact that we have a Premier, the most 
popular Premier in Canada who is visionary and a caring 
individual. I thank him for his energy. I also want to thank his 
family. I want to thank Tami and Faith and Megan and Colter 



4846 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

and his mom and dad for sharing him with us. I know he can do 
what he does so well because of the support that he has back 
home. So we thank them as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to my long-time friend and colleague, a 
man who is not only dedicated to his job and his family, but to 
his roots and his Ukrainian heritage, our Finance minister, the 
member from Canora-Pelly, I want to thank him on behalf of 
the citizens of Saskatchewan for being focused and detailed and 
strong, and just a little bit OC [obsessive-compulsive]. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The Finance minister’s staff and his officials from Finance have 
questioned and considered every dollar that we brought forward 
in this budget. Their drive and determination was infectious. 
The budget was built on the strong will of the Finance minister 
and the treasury board and the caucus of the Saskatchewan 
Party. And I think all of us should be thankful for working 
together. 
 
The Finance minister is just about as nice as the member from 
Walsh Acres. I’m saying just about, not quite though, because 
the member from Walsh Acres gave me his jacket last week and 
I was freezing in the cold. And the Minister of Finance just 
chastised me for not bringing a jacket. So I thank him; I thank 
the member from Walsh Acres. 
 
I want to thank the staff in my office here in Regina: Stacey 
Ferguson, my new chief of staff, and Megan Burns, Krista 
MacNeil, Sherry Rosenberg, Linda Holzer, and Ms. Black who 
just returned. Thank you for treating every issue like the clients, 
and every client like they’re your family. That’s a very 
important group that is around me. I want to thank Amanda 
Plummer who decided to go to greener pastures in 
Environment. 
 
For the officials in the ministry who work with all of us with the 
programs and the policies and the financial issues, and their job 
is to building better lives for vulnerable people, I want to tell 
them that I respect them. Linda and Anne in my office in 
Wadena — Linda’s been there for as long as I’ve been elected, 
and Anne is a new part-time assistant. And each time a phone 
call comes into the office, they tell me that they’re looking at it 
through my eyes and they try and be me, which isn’t always 
easy, but I thank them for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have five kids and eight grandchildren and every 
one of them makes a difference in my life. They’re very active 
young people that are living mostly outside of the province, but 
I wish they were closer, and that’s my goal is to have my family 
move home. And to my husband, Marty, a husband of 47 years, 
I thank him for his love and support and his ideas and 
sometimes his criticism, but mostly just for being himself. 
 
And for the people of Kelvington-Wadena, it’s an honour to 
represent them. Anybody who’s never been to that beautiful 
part of the province, I invite them to come to visit to 
Greenwater Park with one of the best golf courses in 
Saskatchewan, to the other resorts, Marean Lake and Barrier 
Lake and Fishing Lake, and to see the view, the thousands of 
acres of farm land and forestry and the cattle and the rodeo. 
And it’s a great part of the province to live in. 

I also have two First Nations — Yellow Quill and Fishing Lake 
First Nation — and I know that they work hard to achieve 
outcomes in educational opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just last week I had the pleasure of meeting with a 
group in Saskatoon called Upstream. With them was Ryan 
Meili, Alison Robertson, and Charles Plante. And they shared 
their ideas on the next steps to address affordability. I thank 
them for their time. I look forward to future discussions. But 
they reminded me of a quote that’s important to me and that I 
believe in, but I think that the members opposite haven’t really 
thought about it. The quote was, “A dream without a plan is a 
wish.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why the Premier presented the 
Saskatchewan plan for growth, growth with a purpose, to 
improve the lives of the people in Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there is . . . Out of the nearly $14 billion budget that 
we just brought down, nearly 1 billion of that is for people with 
disabilities; $446.2 million of that is for people with disabilities. 
I know that the Premier has said very often that his goal and the 
goal of our government is to make Saskatchewan the best place 
to live in Canada if you have a disability. And we’re working 
very hard, not just within government and across ministries, but 
with the community-based organizations to do just that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve spent in this budget $9.9 million in 
funding from the Ministry of the Economy for employment 
assistance for people for disabilities to assist adults with 
disabilities prepare for work and to maintain employment. 
 
In the Ministry of Health, we spent $7.6 million for autism 
intervention and 4.2 million for intensive fetal alcohol spectrum 
disorder prevention and programming. There’s also $43 million 
for Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living to maintain 
benefits for people with long-term disabilities, and in Finance, 
$15.8 million for the disability tax credit and the disability 
supplement. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, part of our plan in the last election, 
part of the platform was the investment for people that are on 
the SAID program. This year there’s an extra $5.1 million 
increase, or an increase of $5.1 million for people on SAID. 
That’s going to give them an extra $20 a month for those in 
residential care, $50 a month for individuals, and $55 a month 
for couples. This year we’re expecting to have more than 
12,000 households be on the SAID program, and we’re very 
proud of the opportunity to provide a program that provides 
respect and dignity. 
 
The budget also sees an increase of $20.4 million for 
community-based organizations and also support for the 
transition of residents from Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw 
to new homes in the communities right around the province. It’s 
going to contribute to further development of assessment and 
stabilization and crisis support, and there will be an additional 
support of $17.34 million to help CBOs address the recruitment 
and retention. 
 
One of the issues that’s very important to me and my colleagues 
in the Human Services Committee is the child and family 
agenda. This year in total the province will have committed 
nearly $62.5 million to the agenda since it was created in 2011. 



March 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4847 

This year the Ministry of Health introduced and is working on 
one of the most important issues that I believe we can be 
looking at as government, and that is the mental health and 
addictions action plan. During the consultations, there was more 
than 3,000 submissions received and over 300 individuals 
participated in 18 communities. 
 
To keep families together and prevent children from coming 
into care, the Ministry of Social Services is increasing the 
intensive family supports and after-hours . . . to support 
families. We’re also expanding the positive parenting program 
to give parents the skills and confidence they need to keep their 
children at home. 
 
And part of the building partnerships to reduce initiative, we 
have two additional centres of responsibility, and we’ll now 
have 10 hubs across our province, in Prince Albert, Yorkton, La 
Ronge, North Battleford, Moose Jaw, Estevan, Weyburn, 
Nipawin, Saskatoon, Lloydminster, and Swift Current. 
 
There will be an additional 500 licensed daycare spaces and 15 
new pre-kindergarten programs. 
 
The Minister of Education is leading the work on implementing 
the recommendations of the joint force on improved education 
and employment outcomes. 
 
And I’m really pleased with a news release that came from the 
provincial . . . from the child advocate talking about his support 
for the council for children’s office that will be established this 
year. Their program will roll out in ’15-16. 
 
One of the issues that the members opposite are talking about 
very often is the support for seniors, and I’m very pleased that 
this budget is recognizing and continues to recognize the needs. 
We have $27.3 million to continue the construction of five 
previously announced long-term care facilities. We have $4.5 
million for the Home First/Quick Response pilot project, money 
for urgent actions fund, for seniors’ house call programs, and to 
replace long-term care facilities in Qu’Appelle and plan for the 
long-term care in La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also during this budget, we have a budget for 
seniors of $10 a month increase in benefits for seniors under the 
seniors’ income plan. And next year the benefit will increase to 
$270 a month which is triple what it was in 2007. There’s 
nearly 15,000 Saskatchewan seniors receive the seniors’ income 
benefits. There’s also an increase in the monthly income for the 
personal care home benefit from $1,875 to $1,950 which will 
take place in July of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another one of the issues that’s been important to 
me and to the people of the province is our investment in 
affordable housing. The highlights of this budget includes 
money for the first of a five-year extension to the 
federal-provincial investment in affordable housing, more 
money for Habitat for Humanity, and an expansion of the life 
lease program to increase the number of affordable units. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was 18 years ago that I was first elected. 
The NDP focused . . . That’s when they began their focus of 
what I think was forgetting about rural Saskatchewan. During 
that time they closed 52 hospitals. They continued to have the 

highest education portion of property tax, I believe, in Canada. 
The roads crumbled and the RMs’ needs were ignored. 
 
And I remember sitting on the other side of the House and 
listening to the former premier, Roy Romanow, point at the 
nine of us of the Sask Party members saying, you’ll never be 
back. You’ll never get elected. And then in 2003, the next 
election, the NDP used fear to beat hope, and they won a 
minority election. They kept people submissive by scaring them 
with no plan and no vision. And then in 2007, hope did beat 
fear. Our kids started coming home again and staying home. 
Our population increased and people started smiling like we 
knew they could. 
 
And now we’re bringing down our seventh balanced budget. 
Not everybody watched the budget, but I know the effect of the 
budget is going to be felt by everyone. There’s new hospitals, 
new schools, new roads, and more help for people with 
disabilities, more housing. There’s a summary financial 
statement with positive affirmation from the Provincial 
Auditor’s office and people like the Children’s Advocate and 
from SARC. And I’m very pleased with the work that’s being 
done. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe in tomorrow. I believe in the 
people of our province, regardless of their abilities. I believe in 
the children of our province. I believe that we have an 
opportunity to be more than we’ve ever been. I believe I will 
not be supporting the amendment from the members opposite, 
and I know I will be supporting the budget. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 
for The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too 
am very pleased to have this opportunity to rise in this hallowed 
Chamber and lend my voice in support of this steady growth 
budget. 
 
But before I get into my discussion on this budget, I, like my 
colleagues, have some people I very much need to recognize 
today. Firstly, my thanks to the constituents of The Battlefords 
not only for having the faith in my ability to represent them but 
for all of their input, comments, and suggestions. That’s what 
makes for strong democratic government. 
 
Then I would like to thank two tremendous ladies, Lillian 
Robinson and Gail Heintz. They’re my two CAs back in the 
constituency office in The Battlefords. About a couple of weeks 
ago, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to have to man my 
office up there due to vacation leave and an illness. And I 
thought, how bad can that be? I should be able to handle it for a 
couple of days. I soon found out differently. I had two phone 
lines ringing and a constituent sitting in my office, and the 
whole thing was just coming unravelled in front of me. I gained 
a whole new appreciation for those two ladies and what they do 
on that time. They do their job very efficiently, with 
compassion, and with great concern for their constituents, and I 
thank them very much for what they do up there. 
 
Finally to my family for the patience they’ve shown with me for 
the times that I’m away from family functions and sometimes 
being extra tired when they are around, and of course especially 



4848 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2014 

to my wife, Linda. As we all know in this Chamber, this life can 
be a little hectic at times and very demanding. So the great 
support that I get from her allows me to meet the requirements 
of this job. I thank her for keeping me focused, keeping me 
motivated, keeping me grounded, and yes, sometimes even 
chilled out when I need to be, when I get a little overheated. 
 
This budget is exciting in many ways, but I would like to first 
just break it down into five components. Number one, this is a 
balanced budget, and it is a budget based on the summary 
financials only. This government has listened to our Provincial 
Auditor and changed the focus of our annual budget. To quote 
our Acting Provincial Auditor who says of this budget: “It will 
eliminate confusion and help legislators and the public better 
understand the government’s finances.” Mr. Speaker, this 
budget highlights $71 million surplus, total revenue of 14.07 
billion, and expense of 14 billion. 
 
Number two, we are pleased to report that no tax increases are 
included in this budget. Number three, we have controlled 
spending. And if you examine our core spending — the old 
GRF [General Revenue Fund] if you will, our chequebook — 
you will see $11.9 billion in revenue and $11.08 billion in 
expenses, leaving $105 million to contribute to the summary 
financials. 
 
By controlling our spending, Mr. Speaker, we will avoid 
increasing our government debt which, by the way, we have 
reduced by some 44 per cent since we formed government. 
Saskatchewan’s debt as a percentage of GDP [gross domestic 
product] is forecast to be 14.2 per cent at the end of March 
2015. That’s down a whopping 29 per cent from ’07-08 and 57 
per cent from 2000-2001. That’s something all Saskatchewan 
residents are thankful for, with accumulated interest savings of 
nearly $1 billion. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — It now being past 5 
p.m., this House now stands recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4817 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4817 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4817 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4817 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4817 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4818 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Spring Free From Racism 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4818 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4818 
 World Tuberculosis Day 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4818 
 Canadian Interuniversity Sport Men’s Hockey Championship 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4819 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4819 
 Headstart on a Home Program 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4819 
 Big River Saw Mill 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4819 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4820 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4820 
 Capital Funding for Schools 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4822 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4822 
 Minimum Wage 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4824 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4824 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4824 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4825 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4827 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4829 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4831 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4834 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4836 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4838 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4840 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4842 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4845 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4847 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


