




















































Hansard: October 23, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 2A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 23, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5461 

 October 23, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I would like to introduce some very special guests 

who have dedicated their lives to making life better for 

Saskatchewan’s children and youth. Joining us today in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, from the Saskatchewan Foster Families 

Association is the executive director, Deb Davies, and Kevin 

Harris who is the Chair of the board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this week we are celebrating our dedicated and 

caring foster families across the province during Foster Family 

Week. It also happens to be the year the Saskatchewan Foster 

Families Association is celebrating its 40th anniversary, an 

impressive milestone for such a wonderful organization. 

 

Foster families make a real difference in the lives of children 

and families they serve. In addition to meeting the everyday 

needs of the children they care for, they also provide the most 

important things of all, and that’s a family and a place to call 

home. So I want to thank Deb, Kevin, and all those wonderful 

foster families from across the province for the love and 

dedication they show to Saskatchewan’s children, youth, and 

families. So I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

outstanding citizens to their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to join in with the Minister of Social Services in 

recognizing Deb Davies as CEO [chief executive officer] of 

Foster Families here in Saskatchewan, and the Chair of the 

association as well. They do outstanding work here in 

Saskatchewan, really providing support and guidance and 

protection for vulnerable children. We on the opposition side, 

and both sides of the House, want to recognize the good work 

they do. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is an honour today to introduce a very special 

guest, seated in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to 

introduce Mr. Peter Fedynsky. Peter, if you can just rise please. 

Mr. Fedynsky is an American Ukrainian journalist who of 

course was born and now is back in the state of Ohio, has done 

tremendous work around the world. And today, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Fedynsky is touring Saskatchewan. He’s been in 

Saskatchewan now a couple of days, and he’s presenting his 

work in the celebration of the 200th anniversary of the birth of 

Taras Shevchenko. I’m going to speak a little bit more on his 

work shortly in this Assembly. But it’s an honour to welcome, 

and I ask all members to welcome Mr. Fedynsky. 

 

Also seated with Mr. Fedynsky are members of the Regina 

branch of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, leaders here within 

the city of Regina in the Ukrainian community. I’d like to 

introduce Holly Paluck, Vera Feduschak, Ken Mazur, and of 

course Orest Gawdyda. I’d ask all members to welcome these 

individuals, but especially Mr. Fedynsky, to the Saskatchewan 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the Deputy Premier in offering a word of welcome to Mr. 

Peter Fedynsky for the time that he’s spending here in 

Saskatchewan, the important work that he is doing, Mr. 

Speaker, and wish him all the best as he does that over the 

following days. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the Deputy Premier 

in welcoming members of the UCC [Ukrainian Canadian 

Congress] Regina branch, who do such a great job in our 

community in ensuring that the Ukrainian community is strong 

and vibrant. 

 

And I would like to note, Mr. Speaker, also as we’ve talked a 

great deal about the situation in Ukraine in this Assembly over 

the past months, I note yesterday I saw statements coming from 

the Ukrainian government offering words of solidarity and 

comfort to our country in a difficult time for us. And I 

recognize that solidarity that’s coming back to our country, 

seeing that we have also stood strong with Ukraine over the past 

year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I’d like to take the opportunity to introduce four 

members of the Al-Katib family. Mr. Speaker, all of us in this 

Chamber are familiar with the impressive and important work 

of the Al-Katib family, especially key members, as they relate 

to AGT Food and Ingredients. 

 

But there are a number of other members of that family that 

make real contributions to our community, especially in areas 

of diplomacy and in the arts. This morning I’m delighted to 

introduce four members of the Al-Katib family. I’ll start off by 

introducing Muveddet Al-Katib who is a fine Saskatchewan 

artist. In fact next week she’s going to be reviewing and 

celebrating her work that represents building bridges between 

Turkey and Canada. And she is the wife of Omer Al-Katib, 

Turkey’s honorary consul to Saskatchewan. He’s busy doing 

work today and so we’re delighted that Muveddet is able to be 

here. 

 

She’s joined by her delightful mother, Aliea, is here. She came 

to Canada in 2009 and she’s especially proud of her two 

grandsons. They are here as well. Kerem Al-Katib is here. He’s 

an AcTal student at Greystone Heights School right in the heart 

of Saskatoon Greystone. He is a remarkable parliamentarian 

already. He was awarded the top speaker for the 2014 

Saskatchewan Elocution Debate. He aims to be a constitutional 



5462 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

lawyer, as we can see, and in fact he looked very, very well this 

morning in photos with the Hon. John G. Diefenbaker as we 

were taking photos because I think there’s maybe a broader goal 

in mind. 

 

His brother Emre is also here. He attends school at Lakeview 

School in Saskatoon. He’s nine years old. He’s a star basketball 

player. He’s also just entered the debate team and he’s looking 

at options in sports and politics and maybe in business too. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

welcoming these four members of the Al-Katib family to their 

Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join just briefly with the member opposite and 

welcome the Al-Katib family to their legislature and to thank 

them for their efforts, their leadership within our province, 

economically, culturally, your efforts and leadership to improve 

and maintain international relations. Impressive story told about 

the young leaders that are up and coming within that family, 

and we look forward to all those contributions into the future. 

 

It was a pleasure as well to have Omer here yesterday as part of 

the Throne Speech, as part of the economic summit and some of 

the diplomatic relations that he maintains. Quite simply, we say 

thank you to your family for all you provide our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join in in welcoming 

the Al-Katib family, but I want to say a particular hello to 

Kerem. We had the pleasure of meeting at the Diefenbaker 

Centre over the summer at a democracy camp that was going 

on. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, this young man is wise 

beyond his years when it comes to awareness of politics, and 

good advice as well. I think he could give a lot of us in this 

Assembly a run for our money perhaps, or perhaps some day. 

So I wish him all the best as he finishes his studies and dreams 

about his future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I’d 

like to just take a moment to introduce, in the Speaker’s gallery, 

my wife of many, many years. Krista Moe is down for the day. 

And from the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook as well we 

have Ms. Sally Fitch down. 

 

My wife also brings with her and is meeting and spending the 

weekend with a couple of her aunts. First of all we have from 

Saskatoon, Ms. Connie McGrath, and as well from British 

Columbia, we have Donna Moffat. Now although growing up in 

Saskatchewan and now living in British Columbia, Donna — 

Auntie Donna — has a special connection still to the province 

and in particular to this legislature as her husband Glen served 

in the same troop at “F” Division as our present-day 

Sergeant-at-Arms. 

 

I would like all members to join me in welcoming them to this 

Legislative Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the legislature, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce three special guests in your gallery today. Today 

we’ve got Austin McNally who is a constituent of mine who 

attends Bethlehem High School. And Austin and I have had the 

opportunity to connect through a work education program 

through Bethlehem School. He’s got a huge interest in politics, 

so he’s spending a little bit of time with me in my office and 

had the opportunity to come down for the Throne Speech 

yesterday and today. And he is here today also with his 

grandmother, Dianne Winters, and his aunt, Tara Struck, who 

are also I hope enjoying their time. 

 

And I hope that these last two days for Austin, who has a huge 

interest in politics, that they’re more inspiring than the other 

direction, Mr. Speaker. So I hope — I think — it’s been a 

positive experience for him and his family so far, but hopefully 

it continues as he sees his first question period live. So with that 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming Austin, Tara, and 

Dianne. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

Saskatchewan citizens from developers defaulting on 

fixed-price contracts. 

 

And we, the undersigned, would like to provide some 

background: that we know in September 2014 this government 

walked away from a 48-unit affordable housing project in 

Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take control of 

and rent the units at full market price. And this allowed the 

government . . . the private developer to back out of a 

fixed-price contract without any penalty, setting a dangerous 

precedent for this type of default. 

 

And further, when asked to explain the government’s decision, 

the Minister of Social Services said, and I quote, “You’re 

assuming there’s desperate homeless people,” showing how 

disconnected this government is from the realities within our 

communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And a local political commentator wrote, and I quote, “It’s the 

latest indication that Premier Brad Wall seems unwilling to do 

anything to displease business . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — The member knows that he should not be 

using the names of members in the Assembly. I would ask him 

to get to the prayer. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 

in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5463 

now allowing private developers with whom the 

government has close relationships to default on 

fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 

People signing this petition come from the city of Humboldt 

and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions as it relates to the unacceptable danger on 

Dewdney Avenue, created by that government with poor 

planning and their failure to respond to take those dangerous 

heavy-haul trucks off of Dewdney Avenue and take people and 

property out of harm’s way, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased once again to stand up today to present a petition to 

build a second bridge for Prince Albert. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 

serves central and northern Saskatchewan, as well as the 

city of Prince Albert, will receive a firm commitment from 

senior governments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed this petition in relation to a 

second bridge for Prince Albert have come from all throughout 

the province, and this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily signed by people from the fine city of Moose Jaw. 

And I so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

present a petition today opposed to lucrative lean contracts. 

People who have signed this petition point out that there’s many 

aspects of health care and seniors’ care that are getting worse 

under this government instead of better — going the wrong 

direction, Mr. Speaker — whereas this government is failing to 

fix the basics in health care and seniors’ care, including 

rejecting $8.5 million in urgent requests from care facilities for 

desperately needed staffing, equipment, and repairs. There are 

many other points that the folks who signed this petition point 

out, but I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to cancel its lucrative contracts with 

out-of-country lean consultants and instead focus its 

resources on actually listening to front-line health care 

workers and fixing the basics in health care and seniors’ 

care. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from folks in Moose Jaw. I 

so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Recognition of Canadian Law Enforcement Professionals 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to take a moment to recognize the events that transpired 

in Ottawa yesterday and acknowledge the great impact it has 

had on all Canadians. There’s been an overwhelming amount of 

support from devastated Canadians nationwide. I know I speak 

for all members of this Assembly when saying our thoughts and 

prayers are with the family and friends of Corporal Nathan 

Frank Cirillo who was killed when standing guard at the 

National War Memorial in Ottawa. I’d also like to recognize 

Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent and his fellow soldier who 

were attacked in Quebec on Monday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we cannot say thank you enough to the women 

and men of the Canadian Armed Forces who willingly put their 

lives at risk to protect our democracy and freedoms. Closer to 

home, I’d like to recognize the work of the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police], Regina Police Service, and our own 

Sergeant-at-Arms who ensured that the Throne Speech 

proceedings were able to go forward safely and without 

incident. 

 

Though the events of this past week have threatened our 

democratic state and the freedoms that it provides, we must not 

let it shake the democratic ideals that peacefully run our great 

nation. That is why we will continue to stand here in the 

Legislative Assembly to represent the people of Saskatchewan. 

I ask that all members join me in thanking our Canadian Forces, 

the RCMP, police, and emergency services who ensure our 

safety daily. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we were shocked on Monday to 

learn that Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent was killed south of 



5464 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

Montreal. And yesterday we were horrified to watch as an act of 

brutality was carried out in our nation’s capital, an act that 

directly targeted the men and women of our armed forces as 

well as the parliamentarians and staff in the Parliament of 

Canada, and an act that killed Corporal Nathan Cirillo as he 

stood guard at a monument dedicated to the sacrifice of others 

who went before him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our thoughts and prayers are with the families and 

friends of Warrant Officer Vincent and Corporal Cirillo today. 

We are grateful to the brave men and women of law 

enforcement, the armed forces, the sergeant-at-arms offices for 

their determination, professionalism, and courage. 

 

And we are justifiably angry at those who seek to attack and 

terrorize, but we will never allow an act of hatred to drive us to 

hate, for we are better than that. We value democracy, freedom, 

and community. We respect differences and we look out for one 

another. 

 

I hope we cling to those core values in the days ahead, because I 

can think of no greater tribute to Warrant Officer Vincent and 

Corporal Cirillo than to stand strong and stay true to who we 

are as Canadians. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

200th Anniversary of Celebrated Ukrainian’s Birth 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, to commemorate the 

200th anniversary of the birth of Taras Shevchenko, poet, 

painter, and father of the modern Ukrainian language, the 

Regina branch of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress is hosting 

Ukrainian-American journalist Peter Fedynsky. Mr. Fedynsky 

has produced the first complete English translation of 

Shevchenko’s collection of famous poems, known as the 

Kobzar, resulting in his work being accessible to new 

generations in Canada and around the world. 

 

As a journalist, Peter personally witnessed the breakup of the 

Soviet Union and the birth of the modern Ukrainian state. The 

inspiration to translate the Kobzar came to Peter at the end of 

his assignment with the Voice of America in Moscow. Mr. 

Fedynsky is currently touring Saskatchewan to share his work 

and Shevchenko’s important messages of civil rights and social 

justice. On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I’m 

very honoured to have been presented a copy of the complete 

Kobzar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today as the citizens of Ukraine rise up in the 

name of democracy, freedom, and their right to 

self-determination, and as we deal with the shock of events in 

Ottawa, the words of Taras Shevchenko still remain close to our 

hearts. And I quote: 

 

Our faith can never cease in Thy strong, living Word: 

Justice and Liberty will rise, 

and unto Thee all tribes on Earth shall bend 

For ages without end. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Education Week 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize that this week is Education Week in Saskatchewan. 

I’m sure all of us can remember a time when we were 

encouraged to do our best, inspired or supported by our 

teachers. Like me, some members of this Assembly have had 

the privilege to work as educators and understand how fulfilling 

a career in education can be. I’m sure members for Saskatoon 

Centre, Nutana, Regina Douglas Park, Dewdney, Canora-Pelly 

would agree with me that teaching is hard work. But any 

teacher can tell you that the rewards, mostly intrinsic, are many. 

It’s all worth it when you witness success and growth of your 

students, a breakthrough, or meaningfully connect and engage 

with families and community. 

 

But education isn’t just about teachers. Administration, 

professional supports, education workers, support staff, along 

with students, parents, families, and community partners, all 

play a key role in ensuring all can reach their full potential. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they are working towards that every day in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

celebrating Education Week and applaud the fine work of so 

many across our province in the pursuit of educational 

excellence and a bright future for all. And may we in this 

Assembly do all we can to not just celebrate these efforts but, 

most importantly, support this critically important work. 

Students deserve nothing less. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

New Carbon Capture and Storage Project 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

excited to announce that at the beginning of October our 

government attended the official opening of a trail-blazing 

project at SaskPower’s Boundary dam power station in Estevan. 

 

The carbon capture and storage project is the world’s first 

commercial CCS [carbon capture and storage] process at a 

coal-fired power pant. Delegates from 20 countries attended a 

clean coal symposium in Regina and then travelled to Estevan 

to attend the official opening. Mr. Speaker, this is a very 

exciting time for Saskatchewan as we are the world leaders in 

this project. 

 

The CCS project, once it’s fully operational, will capture about 

1 million tonnes of carbon emission per year while still 

producing 110 to 115 megawatts of electrical power into the 

provincial grid. This is equivalent to taking 250,000 cars off the 

road. The carbon dioxide from the Boundary dam power station 

will be liquefied and stored in impermeable rock 3.4 kilometres 

under the earth’s surface. It will then be sold to Cenovus for 

their enhanced oil recovery operations. 

 

This project represents a major step forward for clean coal 

technology and responsible resource development. Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to congratulate SaskPower for their amazing work 

in making our province the world leaders in CCS. I ask that all 

members join me in celebrating the new carbon capture and 

storage project at the Boundary dam power station in Estevan. 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5465 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Foster Family Week 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

in the House today to recognize the dedicated and caring foster 

families across the province during Foster Family Week. I also 

want to congratulate the Saskatchewan foster families on 

providing 40 years of service to Saskatchewan’s vulnerable 

children and youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, foster parents provide so much more than food 

and shelter. They provide a home, a family, love, and security. 

They show children support and caring — the most important 

things of all. Mr. Speaker, being a foster parent is so much more 

than a job. It’s a calling. It’s a 24-hour, seven-day-a-week 

calling to care for our most vulnerable citizens. It is a calling to 

making a difference. I know this because I’m a foster parent 

myself. 

 

Caring for children whose lives have been disrupted by abuse, 

neglect, or abandonment is never easy. Yet foster families take 

these children into their homes, make them a part of their 

families, and provide them with unconditional love. It takes 

very special people with very big hearts to do what they do, and 

I want all foster families to know how much it means to this 

government. By pouring yourselves into the lives of these 

children and investing in their future, you’re also investing in 

the future of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Pasqua South Medical Centre Grand Opening 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It was an 

honour to attend the grand opening of the Pasqua South 

Medical Centre located right here in Regina. The opening of 

this new facility has always been a dream of Dr. Egware who 

herself is a University of Saskatchewan graduate. This is a 

welcoming and remarkable building that was specially designed 

with Dr. Egware’s patients in mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the scope of services that the Pasqua South 

Medical Centre provides is also quite impressive, from 

physician services, pharmacy, X-ray, lab services, 

physiotherapy, chiropractic, and naturopathy, just to name a 

few. This type of facility allows Dr. Egware and her associates’ 

patients to get all of their health care needs met under one roof. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government also shares the vision of having a 

patient-first approach to patient care. It is this type of approach 

that ensures the patients and clients will feel comfortable while 

their needs are being met. This is truly an example of how 

teamwork and a holistic approach to health care can help 

improve the patient services. And, Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating Dr. 

Egware on fulfilling her lifelong dream of opening the Pasqua 

South Medical Centre and providing top-level care that patients 

all across Saskatchewan deserve. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve obtained 

internal government documents that show senior health 

administrators have major problems with this government’s $40 

million lean consultant. 

 

Here’s what health administrators have to say about John Black 

and Associates: “Our experience with JBA has been one of lack 

of respect, tattling on leaders if they question, expecting rigid 

conformity in a militaristic style, gossiping, and undermining.” 

 

But despite the scathing criticism from senior health 

administrators, this government, Mr. Speaker, chose to renew 

the contract with John Black this summer. And despite some 

minor tweaks and shaving off just a few months, it will still 

spend, this government will spend nearly $40 million on this 

one US [United States] consultant. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why on earth did he 

renew the contract, the $40 million contract with the consultant, 

when senior health administrators have raised such scathing 

concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

thank the member opposite for the question. The reason we’re 

renewing, we’ve renewed the contract at a total now of 35, not 

$40 million — a reduction — is that it’s working, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve renewed it because the health regions, the boards of the 

health regions, want it to be renewed. We renewed it because 

lean is affording results in terms of improved outcomes for 

patients. Now a hard-cost savings of over $50 million, 

approximating $57 million, that’s what we’re going to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some other changes have been made as we have 

listened. We have listened to some who have concerns about 

this particular lean process, and even members of the 

opposition. For example, the first day of lean for those who 

participate is going to be adjusted. We now have Saskatchewan 

examples to use, Mr. Speaker. We don’t need them from other 

parts of the world. We don’t need them from Japan. We can 

change that first day of orientation and introduction. We’ve 

directed that that occur. We think that’s going to help this 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we’re absolutely going to continue with lean, not just in 

health, but in the economy where we’re reducing permitting 

times, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue with lean in 

ministries so long as there are results for Saskatchewan 

taxpayers, so long, Mr. Speaker, as we can deliver better service 

to the people that we serve. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Marlene Smadu is the VP 



5466 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

[vice-president] of quality and transformation in RQHR [Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region]. She was previously the assistant 

deputy minister of Health, the principal nursing advisor for the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and the associate dean of nursing 

at the University of Saskatchewan. She has also been certified 

by John Black as a lean leader. She wrote a briefing note, Mr. 

Speaker, that represents the concerns of senior administration in 

the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. And again this is a quote 

from the briefing that she provided: “Our experience with JBA 

has been one of lack of respect, tattling on leaders if they 

question, expecting rigid conformity in a militaristic style, 

gossiping, and undermining.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that description alone, that description alone 

should have been grounds to fire this US consultant. My 

question to the Premier: why did he choose to renew the 

contract this summer? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously we take the 

concerns of those who are on the front line, those who are in 

leadership in health very seriously. And that’s why there have 

been adjustments made to the contract, why it has been reduced, 

both in terms of the amount of time that we’re going to be 

engaging with the consultant and also in terms of the money. 

 

But it’s also important to emphasize here that we are garnering 

results for Saskatchewan people, for patients in the system, for 

the health care system itself. And we’re seeing savings, over 

$50 million worth of savings. There are a number of quotations 

we can read, and I’m sure we will in the weeks ahead, of health 

care workers, of those who are providers, of those who are in 

health care leadership who support this initiative, who 

understand that it is bringing results for the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, beyond this particular contract, we will have the 

capacity to continue with lean because, Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

ongoing process, and we intend to do that. We intend to bring 

the benefits of lean not just to the Ministry of Health, but right 

across government. Mr. Speaker, it’s a part of our plan, not only 

to deliver better service but to make sure we’re doing it in a 

cost-effective way, by a government that puts a priority, for 

example, on balanced budgets even as we provide top-quality 

services for Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government is not listening 

because this government is plowing ahead with its lean agenda, 

its pet project. And it is wasting millions, Mr. Speaker, on this 

contract with the US consultant. Dr. Smadu’s briefing note was 

prepared on behalf of the entire senior leadership team of the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. And the note was prepared 

on June 18th, about a month before this Premier renewed the 

contract with John Black. 

 

The senior health administrators, Mr. Speaker, they’re not only 

upset with John Black’s approach, that we saw with the tattling, 

with all the concerns that they raised, but they’re also concerned 

about the quality of training that’s occurring under this contract 

with the US consultant. They’re concerned about the quality, 

the lack of relevance, the focus on memorization, and 

“Activities that are not meaningful and in some cases are 

insulting, all of which are part of JBA’s approach, are not only 

not educationally sound but cause skepticism, alienation, and 

frustration.” That, Mr. Speaker, should be grounds to fire the 

consultant, yet this Premier, this government re-signs the 

contract, Mr. Speaker, spending more dollars on the US 

consultant. Why did this Premier, Mr. Speaker, renew the 

contract with John Black? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as the Premier has indicated, what we have done is 

embarked upon a multi-year strategy to deploy lean throughout 

the entire health care system here in Saskatchewan — 

unprecedented when you look across other jurisdictions who are 

implementing lean but in a much smaller fashion than we are in 

Saskatchewan. We have been preparing our health regions for 

the day when the reliance on outside consultants will be ending. 

Initially that was March of 2016, but what we have told our 

health regions is that will be ending sooner. It’ll be June of 

2015 that we will be fully exiting that contract with the external 

consultant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this, that I meet from time to time 

quite frequently during the year with board Chairs of health 

regions and with senior leaders from throughout this entire 

province. My most recent meeting with our board Chairs was 

just, I believe, two weeks ago, and at that time the message was 

pretty clear that we need to continue on the path of lean because 

we’re seeing results in this province. We’re seeing progress, 

and we’re seeing improved patient care for the patients of this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know members opposite do 

not listen to front-line health care workers. And now we know, 

Mr. Speaker, that they do not listen to senior administrators 

when they give very honest and very clear advice. This 

government does the exact opposite. 

 

The internal document shows, Mr. Speaker, that RQHR senior 

leadership don’t even like kanban training, and they especially 

don’t like, Mr. Speaker, the $3,500-per-day senseis. Here’s a 

quote: “The orientation to the kanban process within RQHR by 

the sensei had little added value.” These senior administrators, 

Mr. Speaker, are saying that the $3,500 per day spent on each 

sensei is not adding value, yet this government, Mr. Speaker, 

this government was still flying in senseis from Japan to 

Saskatchewan, paying them $3,500 per day. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why does this 

Premier insist on flying in senseis from Japan to Saskatchewan, 

forcing health care workers to take these programs that are 

offered, Mr. Speaker, and paying these senseis $3,500 per day? 

How does that make any sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5467 

we have made some changes to the way . . . for example how 

orientation will take place for new employees that are going 

through lean training. But, Mr. Speaker, I can say that why 

we’re doing this in Saskatchewan is because the results are 

pretty clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for surgery alone, here are some examples of how 

the process has improved and how it means it’s more, not only 

cost effective for us as a system, but also more patient focused. 

For example, there’s a 93 per cent reduction — from 113 

minutes pre-lean to seven minutes now — from a surgical case 

cart going from sterilization to being used in the operating 

room, which means we can actually do more surgeries in a 

given day. 

 

As well through lean processes, there has been a change in the 

way that transfers are done, for example with Sunrise Health 

Regions. When patients have their surgeries in Regina but their 

home region is Sunrise, there is a change that has been taken 

place which means that we have reduced the number of delayed 

transfers. Because in the past it used to be a last-minute type of 

deal, and now it’s three days in advance. There’s advance notice 

that’s given to ensure that there is actually a bed and a way to 

transfer that patient. Just two examples on how surgeries are 

now improved here in Saskatchewan because of lean. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve known for some time 

front-line health care workers don’t like the kanban training 

with the senseis. And now we know, Mr. Speaker, senior 

leadership of RQHR shares that sentiment, seeing that the 

kanban training is adding little value. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, was to the Premier, not the Health 

minister. My question to the Premier was, why, Mr. Speaker, is 

he supportive of the senseis coming from Japan and paying 

them $3,500 per day? I don’t know how much more, Mr. 

Speaker, this Premier will need to hear before he starts 

listening, listening to the concerns from senior health 

administrators. 

 

The concerns are listed very clearly in a briefing note by the VP 

of quality and transformation here in Regina, someone who has 

completed the lean leader training. Here’s a quote, Mr. Speaker, 

provided by senior leadership: “The presentation dogma is 

incompatible with the alleged encouragement of new analysis 

and improvement.” 

 

Senior administrators, Mr. Speaker, are saying the dogma 

through JBA, through this government’s lean pet project, is not 

actually improving things. That’s coming from the leadership, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s backed up by the Health Quality Council’s 

very own statistics. 

 

My question to the Premier: if it’s not bringing improvements, 

how on earth can he defend renewing this contract? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I would disagree 

with the premise of the Leader of the Opposition, that this in 

fact is bringing improvements to the health care system. For 

example, just in savings alone, as the Premier has mentioned, 

$57 million to date in dollar cost savings. That doesn’t include 

the work that frankly you can’t quantify, but that is in fact better 

for patient care. 

 

For example in Prairie North Health Region, an issue with 

missing information happened at 84 per cent of medication 

orders. Through mistake-proofing, which is a lean process, that 

has been reduced to zero — better for the patient, better for the 

system.  

 

Mr. Speaker, CIHI [Canadian Institute of Health Information] 

information, CIHI has pointed out to wait time reductions all 

across Canada. And in their own documents, CIHI points out to 

what other provinces are doing. For example, Health PEI 

[Prince Edward Island] has developed an advanced clinical 

access program under lean. Manitoba cancer patient journey 

initiative is using, and this is CIHI, “. . . using lean 

methodologies to increase efficiencies.” It’s happening in 

Manitoba. It’s happening in PEI. It’s happening in Ontario. It’s 

happening at the Mayo Clinic. Mr. Speaker, this is really 

something that is improving care for our patients. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, let’s review what this briefing 

note says about the approach of John Black and this 

government’s ongoing love affair, Mr. Speaker, with this US 

consultant, and the millions that they’re shovelling out the door. 

Senior health administrators, Mr. Speaker, say that John Black 

lacks respect and actually tattles on leaders if they question 

what is being done, Mr. Speaker. They say that training is 

irrelevant and that it is insulting. They say it’s a bunch of 

dogma, Mr. Speaker, that actually doesn’t even bring 

improvements. And they say, Mr. Speaker, flying in senseis, 

$3,500 per day per sensei, is a waste of money. So it’s no 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder that RQHR says this, and 

here’s the quote from the senior administration, Mr. Speaker: 

“Getting out of this will be an improvement.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, if senior health administrators are saying the 

contract with John Black is a problem, that this government has 

an unhealthy fascination with John Black and with its lean pet 

project, why on earth, Mr. Speaker, did this Premier choose to 

renew the contract this summer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we did renew the contract although we have indicated 

that the end of our contractual relationship with JBA will be 

ending sooner than was expected by the regional health 

authorities. We knew it all along, when this was first signed, 

that our intent was a four-year contract, but that at the end of 

that process that RHAs [regional health authority], because of 

the good work that we’ve seen done through the 

implementation of lean, that they would need to be able to 

transition away from the use of consultants and build that 

capacity within the system. That transition is going to take place 

sooner than we had first anticipated. It’ll be ending in June of 

next year. 

 

But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to point to a 



5468 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

number of good work that has been done through lean that is 

going straight to the heart of patient care, improving patient 

care, and providing efficiencies within the health care system — 

something that I think we all agree on, that we need to find 

efficiencies within health care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I do not know how this is not a 

huge wake-up call for this Premier and this government. I do 

not know it, Mr. Speaker, how this government could not 

change its course and how it could just plow ahead with its 

agenda. They’re using the same lines, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 

been on rinse and repeat for some time now, and they’re not 

actually listening to front-line health care workers. They’re not 

listening to senior administration who highlight concern after 

concern.  

 

This should be a wake-up call: a briefing note from senior 

administration of RQHR written by the VP of quality and 

transformation of RQHR, a former ADM [assistant deputy 

minister] of Health, a former principal nursing advisor for the 

provincial government, and former associate dean of the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] for nursing. The note says this, 

Mr. Speaker. Here’s a quote: “I think this offers an important 

opportunity to keep whatever benefits there may be from lean 

and be free of the rigidity of JBA.” 

 

But instead of seizing that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to end the 

contract, to stop wasting money, Mr. Speaker, this government 

did the opposite. This government, this summer, chose to renew 

the contract in the face of criticism coming from the front lines 

right up to the most senior administration in our health care 

system, a briefing note directly from senior leadership clearly 

being filtered out by the time that it gets to the speaking notes 

of the minister. 

 

My question to the Premier: why on earth did he renew the 

contract with John Black this summer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, if you want to talk about a wake-up call, Mr. Speaker, 

in 2004, when the health budget of this province increased by 

6.3 per cent, and despite that, the member from Lakeview had 

to close 90 beds and fire 160 employees, including 40 nurses, 

you would’ve thought that that would’ve been a wake-up call 

for health care in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have embarked upon a new direction in this 

province, patient-first, where we are putting the patient first. We 

are looking for efficiencies that will actually help to improve 

the patient outcome, Mr. Speaker. This is something that 

frankly other provinces are now looking to Saskatchewan to see 

what we have learned and to see the expertise that we’re 

developing in this province, something that leading 

organizations have already done in past, such as the Mayo 

Clinic, Mr. Speaker, which I’m happy to report has already 

signed on this year to our main fellowship program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I thought the Health minister was 

better than giving the type of answers we see from the federal 

Tories in question period, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a shame. It’s a 

shame that the Premier would make the Health minister give 

that kind of response to a very direct question to the Premier. 

 

The internal briefing note, Mr. Speaker, the internal briefing 

note might actually contain the answer about why this 

government chose to keep plowing ahead with its fat, cash cow 

contract with John Black. And here is what it says. Here’s a 

quote: “Biggest concern around an early exit of JBA is in the 

optics it would produce.” The biggest concern, Mr. Speaker, for 

getting out of this contract are the optics. That’s it. That’s the 

preoccupation by this government. 

 

The vast majority of doctors, the vast majority of front-line 

health care workers, the vast majority of nurses hate lean, Mr. 

Speaker. And we know the senior health administrators have 

major problems with this government’s approach to lean. But 

simply, Mr. Speaker, because of optics, this government is 

refusing to listen and it’s plowing ahead. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. What will it take 

for him to listen? What will it take for him to listen to front-line 

workers, to senior administrators and admit renewing the 

contract with John Black was a mistake? When will this 

government start fixing the basics in our hospitals and care 

facilities and stop the fat contract with John Black? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, while this government certainly . . . we look to 

implement lean as one tool to help to improve the health care 

system. But in terms of the basics of health care, surely hiring 

423 additional physicians in seven years points to the basics. 

Over 2,400 nursing positions, licensed physicians, people in 

those positions, speaks to the basics, Mr. Speaker. And record 

investments into our RHAs, into our budgets, speaks to getting 

to the basics of health care. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what lean has done as a tool, as 

one tool in our system, for example, Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region — and I know this will be one that is of interest to some 

members — but mental health and addictions reduced the 

number of cancelled appointments from 42 per cent a month 

cancelled appointments down to 4 per cent today, Mr. Speaker. 

That means that more people can get access to their programs. 

This is just one example of where lean has been a benefit to not 

only the system but more importantly to the patients of this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Smart Meter Program 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, two days ago a home here 

in Regina was demolished due to a fire that was caused by this 

government’s failed smart meter program. It’s a direct result of 

this government’s failure to undertake due diligence. And we 

know that during the trial period more than a year ago to test 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5469 

these meters, there were eight incidents. Eight times something 
went wrong. But the government concealed that and decided to 
plow ahead with its smart meter project anyway and put more 
than 100,000 of these dangerous smart meters on the homes of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
To the Premier: how can he possibly justify the decision to 
install smart meters on people’s homes using unqualified 
workers from a temp agency and using questionable technology 
that had failed eight times during its trial period? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to 
the smart meter program, clearly there was problems with it. 
The government has certainly taken steps to address it, and I’ll 
outline a number of them. 
 
Initially, after there was a number of incidents, the government 
immediately moved to instruct SaskPower to remove all of 
these meters, some 105,000 of them across our province. We 
have gone through, SaskPower has gone through about . . . 
Roughly 25 per cent of them so far have been removed. If 
people make a request to remove them, they are dealt with on a 
priority basis with respect to it. 
 
In addition to that, we immediately, the government 
immediately started negotiations through SaskPower officials 
with Sensus, the company involved in this, to recover the 
taxpayers’ dollars, which they did. 
 
In addition to that, the government then ordered a review of this 
whole process to see whether there were problems with the 
procurement around these smart meters. That review will be 
coming to light here very, very soon within the next few days. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that government did 
anything but act as had information come to it. They had eight 
incidents over a year ago in a trial period, and expert 
electricians with local knowledge of our electrical system 
warned that government about using unqualified workers. For 
some reason that government chose to ignore those warnings. 
And a simple Google search would have revealed to this 
government that the particular meter that that government was 
engaging into contract was involved in fires all across North 
America. But that government failed to do the even basic 
homework that you’d expect of a government, selling out 
Saskatchewan people, putting them at risk. 
 
To the Premier: whose idea was it to ignore concerns and ink a 
$200 million contract with an American contractor who would 
only then subcontract with unqualified workers through a temp 
agency? And whose idea was it to buy 500,000 meters from a 
company that had problems with fires, without doing any 
homework before signing the deal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, upon review of the eight 
incidents, the eight incidents that resulted in fires, five out of 
the eight incidents were installed by qualified journeyman 

technicians — five out of eight of them. 
 
In addition to that, as I have indicated earlier, the government 
took a number of steps, appropriate steps, I would believe, with 
respect to the removal of them. We’re partway through that 
process. We are now reviewing the whole process to see 
whether there was any problems in terms of the procurement 
around this incident, these incidents, Mr. Speaker. When the 
member opposite speaks about that this was an American 
company, it is American companies that are the only providers 
of these types of meters, I would indicate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, no answer to the question. 
We know that at least 10 of these fires were caused by the smart 
meter program, but we don’t know the total number of incidents 
reported. We know that Grid One trucks with Texas plates are 
all across our province, but we don’t know the details of that 
contract with America’s Grid One. We know the value of the 
Grid One contract was $200 million, but we don’t know how 
much has been paid to Grid One, and we don’t know if they’re 
still receiving money. 
 
There are many unanswered questions, and Saskatchewan 
people deserve an independent investigation. But this 
government is pretending to investigate itself, hiding from real 
answers and accountability. To the Premier: why won’t he 
simply step up and call in the Provincial Auditor to investigate 
his smart meter mess? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 
did indeed take action. We directed SaskPower to remove all of 
the smart meters. We recovered the taxpayers’ money from 
Sensus. We ordered a thorough review of this whole project. 
That information, Mr. Speaker, will be available in a few short 
days. That will indicate where the problems were with respect 
to that. We directed CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] to develop stronger project management 
policies. And in addition to that, there was a whole host of work 
done to remove these meters as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is in sharp contrast, in sharp contrast to the 
way the members of the NDP [New Democratic Party] used to 
handle problems. Let’s take for example, let’s take for example, 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company]. They covered it up. They covered it up for six long 
years, six long years, and then they only told the truth around 
this when it was dragged out of them in court. The company 
went bankrupt; $36 million of taxpayers’ money was gone for 
the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 
Services Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 



5470 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

Standing Committee on House Services to report that the 

committee has considered committee membership changes and 

is presenting its ninth report. I move: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of the 

House Services Committee: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave for a motion 

of condolence. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Wood River has asked for 

leave to do a motion of condolence. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Wood 

River. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Condolences 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

my colleagues. This is a motion of condolence, and it reads as 

follows: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan express 

its deepest condolences to the family and friends of 

Corporal Nathan Cirillo who lost his life on October 22nd, 

2014, while serving his country on honorary guard at the 

national war memorial. 

 

And further, that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan express its deepest condolences to the 

family and friends of Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent 

whose life was tragically taken on October 20th, 2014. 

 

In so doing, that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan records its own sense of loss and 

bereavement and express its most sincere gratitude to the 

members of the Ottawa Police Service, the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police, and to all those who serve in 

our Canadian Armed Forces. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 

River: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan express 

its deepest condolences to the family and friends of 

Corporal Nathan Cirillo who lost his life on October 22nd, 

2014, while serving his country on honorary guard at the 

national war memorial. 

 

And further, that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan express its deepest condolences to the 

family and friends of Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent 

whose life was tragically taken on October 20th, 2014. 

 

And in so doing, that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan record its own sense of loss and 

bereavement and express its most sincere gratitude to the 

members of the Ottawa Police Service, the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police, and to all those who serve in 

our Canadian Armed Forces. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Carried nemine contradicente. At 

this time I have a number of . . . I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave to send a transmittal motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a motion of transmittal. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

colleagues. I move: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit verbatim transcripts of the condolence motion just 

passed to Corporal Nathan Cirillo’s family, Warrant 

Officer Patrice Vincent’s family, to the House of 

Commons, and to all provincial and territorial legislatures. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit verbatim transcripts of the condolence motion just 

passed to Corporal Nathan Cirillo’s family, Warrant 

Officer Patrice Vincent’s family, to the House of 

Commons, and to all provincial and territorial legislatures. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5471 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave to move a motion regarding the Deputy Chair of 

Committees. 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion regarding the Deputy Chair of 

Committees. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

colleagues. By leave, I move: 

That the member for Batoche be appointed to preside as 

Deputy Chair of Committees of this Assembly. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

That the member for Batoche be appointed to preside as 

Deputy Chair of Committees of this Assembly. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

[11:00] 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

The Speaker: — I have a number of items to table, including 

one related to the last item that we’ll get to. 

Pursuant to section 67 of The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, I hereby inform the Assembly of 

the membership of the Board of Internal Economy 

effective June 5, 2014. 

[Interjections] 

The Speaker: — Order. 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont, Chair; Hon. Nancy Heppner, 

Executive Council nominee; Hon. Jeremy Harrison, MLA; 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff, MLA; Doreen Eagles, MLA; 

David Forbes, MLA; Warren McCall, MLA. 

Yours sincerely, Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant 

Governor, Province of Saskatchewan. 

And: 

In accordance with the Board of Internal Economy 

Directive #23, please find enclosed a copy of the 

following reports prepared by the Saskatchewan Party 

Caucus [in accordance] by the accounting firm MNP LPP: 

Audited financial statement for the year ended March 

31, 2014. 

I table. 

Pursuant to Board of Internal Economy Directive #23: 

Caucus Accountability and Disclosure, I hereby submit the 

audited Financial Statements for the 2013-2014 fiscal year, 

prepared for the NDP Caucus by the accounting firm of 

Mintz & Wallace. 

I so table. 

As per directive #22, Members’ Accountability and Disclosure, 

clause (1), I table the fiscal reports for the end of the year for 

the members’ accountability. 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

Resignation of Deputy Chair of Committees 

The Speaker: — We’ve dealt in part with this, but I wish to 

inform the Assembly of the following resignation: Mr. Corey 

Tochor as Deputy Chair of Committees of the Legislative 
Assembly, member for the constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be moving a 

motion at the conclusion of my comments. Last night I was able 

to FaceTime my wife and son. Jacob smiled, laughed, and 

babbled as an innocent 16-month-old should without having to 

know or try to understand yesterday’s events. We added a fallen 

hero’s family to our bedtime prayer. I’m so thankful for my 

family’s love and support. “All the great things are simple and 

may be expressed in a single word: freedom, justice, honour, 

duty, mercy, hope” — Winston Churchill. 

It’s an honour to serve the people of Eastview but the public 

service in this role is so insignificant compared to the public 

service we receive from the men and women who protect our 

country and fight overseas to protect our freedom. I stand today 

with the events of yesterday in Ottawa weighing heavy on me. 

The gratitude for those that stand on guard against the evil of 

the world. Their attempt to shake our beliefs will not succeed. 

Our thoughts and prayers are with the family and friends of 

fallen hero, Corporal Nathan Cirillo. We pray for the speedy 

recovery for those wounded from yesterday’s terrorist attacks. 

I’m honoured to be able to stand and move the Speech from the 

Throne. Yesterday we heard the priorities of the government for 

the upcoming year. In our democracy it’s an important day and 

everyone here today rejects the fear that others would spread. 

Democracy is what evil fears. Democracy represents freedom, 

Canada’s “True North strong and free.” The strength of this 

country will see us through these challenging times. 



5472 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

We need to thank our brave men and women that put their lives 

on the line so that Canada can stay a beacon to the world of 

hope and democracy. In this building we must thank our 

Sergeant-at-Arms, Pat Shaw, and his dedicated team in keeping 

this building open and safe. We will not back down; we will not 

run. Democracy will continue. This Assembly will continue. 

Today and for the days to follow, we will debate, present 

different views, deliver speeches, disagree, and hold important 

votes. We get to exercise our democracy because we live in the 

best country in the world. 

 

Our rights and freedoms was paid for by the heroes that gave all 

so that we get to settle our differences in a democratic, peaceful 

fashion. We get to exercise our democratic responsibilities in 

this Assembly because we live in a free country. There is a cost 

to this freedom, to stand on guard against the evils that 

challenge our beliefs, our freedom, our society, and our way of 

life. 

 

In the coming year we can continue to improve our province, 

fulfill the promises found in the Speech from the Throne. In the 

coming days in this Assembly and out in our communities, we 

will and should include vigorous debate on both sides of the 

Assembly. Both sides will present policies, debate their merits, 

compare records and ask for a mandate in the coming days from 

the people of this great province. It’s what freedom affords us. 

It is this context I would like to add my comments on the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

Living in a strong Saskatchewan affords us the opportunity to 

grow our economy and reinvest the dividends of growth into 

important programs in health and education. Because 

Saskatchewan has a strong economy, we’ve been able to add 

more than 400 more doctors and over 2,600 more nurses. Not 

that long ago we had the longest wait times in the country. 

We’ve been blessed by a strong economy that has allowed us 

the ability to decrease wait times for surgeries — 81 per cent 

reduction in patients waiting more than three months for 

surgery, Mr. Speaker. We welcome innovation and are using 

private surgery delivery to improve the health care in the 

province. 

 

In the old Saskatchewan, the province was closing 52 hospitals 

and 16 long-term care facilities. Today we are opening new 

hospitals and long-term care facilities, and there’s more work to 

be done. In this Assembly and communities across 

Saskatchewan, we can debate how and who should be building 

them but, Mr. Speaker, that debate is so much better and 

stronger to have compared to the negative debate on which 

community should be losing their health care and facilities. 

 

In a strong Saskatchewan, we’ll be debating how many new 

schools we’ll be building. Not that long ago in Saskatchewan, 

the debate was on which schools to be closed. Over the last 

seven years, we’ve spent more than $700 million on education 

infrastructure, a 268 per cent increase, with more work to be 

done. We will be using innovation and bundling of new schools 

where it makes sense. That’s what strength and leadership 

provides. 

 

A strong Saskatchewan means more students deciding to stay 

and start their career here. Over 50,000 students have chosen to 

stay here and strengthen our province with the help of the 

graduate retention program. 

 

Not that long ago, the economy was weak. Saskatchewan was 

in trouble, and many of our friends and family had to leave. 

Those days are behind us. Families are returning and our 

province is growing again. Our province is now at an all-time 

high of over 1,125,000. That’s what a strong province looks 

like. 

 

We are not a wee, little province anymore with a wee, little 

economy, Mr. Speaker. Our economy is growing, providing a 

record 577,000 jobs. We have a very diversified economy that 

helps Saskatchewan keep and make Saskatchewan strong in a 

challenging world economy. Of the over 70,000 new jobs 

created, fewer than 10 per cent are in the resource sector. The 

mass majority are found in the ever-growing diversified 

economy. To help keep Saskatchewan strong, we’ll be 

introducing a growth tax initiative for manufacturers who create 

new jobs and for head office jobs. 

 

Saskatchewan has the lowest poverty rate in Canada, but we can 

and will do better. By recognizing true leadership in the area of 

poverty reduction, we’ll be working with individuals like 

Alison Robertson, Dr. Ryan Meili, and Dr. Cory Neudorf. 

That’s how you build a strong, healthy Saskatchewan for all. 

 

A strong Saskatchewan means lower taxes for everyone. Since 

2007 our government has reduced taxes and have saved the 

taxpayers more than $2.8 billion. The best use of this money is 

in the hands of the taxpayer who earned it, not the government. 

Today, no one in the province pays Saskatchewan income tax 

on the first $18,650 that they earn. This tax reduction has 

helped low-income earners and has removed over 100,000 

people from having, paying any income tax in the province. 

 

We have increased opportunities for low-income families to 

own their own home through Habitat for Humanity. This work 

will continue along with Headstart on a Home, a program that 

helps people get into home ownership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll increase the scope of services that can be 

provided by pharmacists. These highly educated professionals 

. . . [inaudible] . . . to help meet some of the challenges in health 

care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll also be expanding the Hub crime reduction 

model to other communities in Saskatchewan. I had the 

opportunity to meet with and hear success stories of this 

program in Saskatoon. It’s not the expansion of new services 

but the coordination of existing help that is making a difference. 

We are leading with this innovative program and other 

provinces are following our lead: Alberta, Manitoba, and now 

Nova Scotia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will champion the reduction of trade barriers 

and aggressively promote a strong Saskatchewan to the world. 

We have what the world needs: food, fuel, and fertilizer. We 

ought to act like the leaders that we are and challenge the 

doubters and be proud of a strong Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will not spend one more dollar building new 

liquor stores in Saskatchewan. There are way too many 

hospitals and schools to be built. We’ll be presenting an option 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5473 

paper and public consultation process on private liquor stores in 

Saskatchewan. We welcome the debate. We welcome the 

feedback on the direction of what the people of Saskatchewan 

want. 

 

A balanced budget is at the heart of a strong Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, with the challenges we face in the ever-changing 

world economy, this government will manage the finances of 

the province with caution and prudence. We need to remember, 

every ask for increased spending from the opposition will be 

paid for by taxpayers in higher debt or higher taxes. That is the 

reality the public must weigh when we hear the countless 

demands for more spending from the NDP. 

 

I was elected to keep my word and live within our means. We 

must find efficiencies. We must seek out innovation. The 

government will adapt to meet the challenges and opportunity. 

Weakness is the inability to adapt to change. A strong 

Saskatchewan can adapt to anything. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

confident that this government will be as strong as the people of 

Saskatchewan and rise to that challenge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are blessed in Saskatchewan. We live in a 

country that is protected by the bravest and strongest men in 

uniform. We are indebted for their services, and anything we 

can do to honour them will find support on both sides of the 

Assembly. It is why this government introduced the 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour, the scholarship to 

returning military personnel and the spouses and children of 

Canadian Armed Forces members killed or permanently 

disabled in the service to their country. This fall we will be 

introducing a special licence plate available to loved ones of our 

fallen heroes. 

 

Of the Canadian Armed Forces, we cannot say thank you 

enough to show our appreciation and gratitude. I’m thankful we 

live in a country like ours, and a province as strong as its 

people. All the great things are simple and may be expressed in 

a single word — freedom, justice, honour, duty, mercy, hope. 

Mr. Speaker, I think we need to add gratitude and strength to 

that list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the following motion, seconded 

by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects of the 

Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan in 

the session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

I so move. 

 

[11:15] 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects of the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

honoured to stand here and second the motion for the Speech 

from the Throne. Before I get into the meat and potatoes of this 

speech though, I’d like to take some time to thank some people. 

First and foremost, I would like to thank the people of Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. Just about three years ago, they chose me, little 

old me, well more than little, to represent them here in this 

legislature, and I’ve been very honoured to do that. 

 

It’s been a very good summer in Moose Jaw, and I was able to 

get out to a lot of events and out on the doorsteps actually 

listening to what the people of Moose Jaw Wakamow had to 

say. And I must say they’re pretty happy with the way the 

government’s going right now. 

 

Next I would like to thank the people back home that I work 

with in my office. And that’s Laurie who’s been there with me 

since the start. She’s done a wonderful job. And now we’ve 

added Evelyn Marcil who fills in when Laurie can’t be there. 

We all know and hear the great work our constituency assistants 

do back home while we’re here that enable us to come here and 

do the job we have to do here. I’m probably a little biased, but 

I’m pretty sure that they’re the best ones out there. 

 

Last, but certainly not least, I need to thank my family. My 

mom and my dad who have given me my work ethic. Wow. 

Dad, who is now 66 years old — 66 years young — and is still 

moving rigs in the oil field down in the southeast. And he tells 

me that retirement would be too boring, so he’s just going to 

keep going. And my mom who still works in the office with my 

dad. 

 

My kids, who are still in this province because this province is 

doing well, doing strong, moving forward. Two of my boys 

who are working, one as an apprentice aircraft mechanic or 

technician or engineer. He says that the name changed 

constantly. So he’s there. One that’s working right here in the 

city of Regina, and one who is still in university. He tells me he 

may graduate this year, hopefully at Christmas, but I think he’s 

enjoying the university life. So hopefully he’ll graduate and 

stay here. 



5474 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

And also I now have a daughter-in-law who’s taking care of my 

two grandsons. My family’s added to the growing of the 1.25 

million people here in the province, so we’re doing our part to 

keep the province growing. So now I have Jordison and Jaxton 

added to the family. 

 

And my boys, they’ve been there all along through the thick 

and the thin. They helped me during the campaign, so I want to 

extend my thanks to them. 

 

And last but certainly not least is my wonderful wife and 

partner, Marjorie. She was there at the start. She’s still there, 

sticks by my side through the thick and the thin, and at times it 

gets pretty thick. 

 

Two more names I’d really like to add after the happenings in 

the last week is Corporal Nathan Cirillo and Warrant Officer 

Patrice Vincent, who both lost their lives in cowardly, cowardly 

attacks in the last while. Cowardly. And as much as we don’t 

want our nation to be changed, I think it’s given us a wake-up 

call. 

 

I’ve spoken to friends . . . And being from Moose Jaw, we’ve 

got 15 Wing right outside of town, a big part of our community, 

a huge part, as most bases are with the towns they’re in. I spoke 

to some friends that have moved out east and they’ve been 

advised that, don’t tell people that your families are Armed 

Forces. And that’s a sad day for our nation. So I want to extend 

a tremendous thanks to our Armed Forces. Not only are they 

doing great work around the world, they’re doing tremendous 

work here in our nation. And they shouldn’t have to be afraid. 

 

Now let’s get to this Throne Speech. Our theme is, keeping 

Saskatchewan strong. And members opposite seem to have a 

different thought of what keeping Saskatchewan strong means. 

It comes down to some pretty basic stuff. If we don’t have a 

strong economy, we can’t provide for those who need our help. 

And through that strong economy it allows us to provide 

housing. In the Saskatchewan plan for growth we’ve committed 

$344 million to boost the supply of housing in this province for 

our low- and moderate-income families. Right in Moose Jaw 

we have 145 housing starts on the go or in the process of 

moving forward. That’s huge. That’s helping those people that 

need it most. 

 

If we don’t have a strong economy . . . This is what I really get 

concerned about from the opposition. In the last election they 

had the tree book, and it must have been a money tree because 

if you don’t have a strong economy, how are you going to get 

the money to help those that need the help the most? To do that, 

we need people coming into the province. So you take a look at 

the unprecedented growth that our province has right now — 

125,000 people over the last seven years coming, coming to this 

province — not leaving. That’s 70,000-plus new jobs, 70,400 

new jobs since 2007. 

 

So I grew up in a town down in the Southeast called Estevan. 

We’ve got our member from Estevan; she knows that’s where 

most of my family is and, you know, huge supporters of our 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Estevan, and 

that’s seven Estevans that have been created in job growth here 

in this province. Two Moose Jaws, two Moose Jaws of new 

jobs created in the province. So, you know, that’s huge. That’s 

huge. 

 

And when the opposition, they put out all these points of what 

they want to see in the Throne Speech and then they kind of 

ignore what those points actually are. One of the things that 

they said that we need is stop ignoring urgent needs in care 

facilities for front-line staff, equipment, and repairs. Well they 

seem to set aside that we provided $10 million to the health 

region for specific initiatives, an additional $3.7 million for 

ongoing programs. This funding is used to purchase 700 pieces 

of equipment, hire additional staff, and support staff training. 

Of those 70,000 jobs I was talking about earlier, in health care 

— which is the government’s responsibility — there was 

10,700 health care jobs created, 10,700. So when they talk 

about us ignoring those needs, I wonder if they’re really looking 

at what’s going on here. 

 

With regards to our First Nations, moving swiftly to solve the 

unacceptable inequities in education for First Nations children, 

we’ve moved on those fronts. Aboriginal enrolment in 

post-secondary education is increasing. Our government will 

continue to support the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies, the First Nations University of Canada — close 

to my heart, being Métis — Gabriel Dumont Institute, and all 

post-secondary institutions to ensure that our First Nations and 

Métis students have the support they require to continue their 

studies. 

 

So I met a young man in Saskatoon a few years ago at one of 

the Métis legislative assemblies and that was Max FineDay. So 

what he tweeted out yesterday, because it’s not just us touting 

what we’re doing, Max FineDay tweeted out, “Supports for 

#Aboriginal students, commitment for a poverty reduction plan, 

& support for #USask all good things from the Throne Speech. 

#skpoli.” So we have Aboriginal young people paying attention 

to what we’re doing, providing funding for that. 

 

Those aren’t the only positive reactions that have been out 

there. We’ve introduced a comprehensive poverty reduction 

plan or, or . . . and starting that process. And Ryan Meili who 

I’m sure some of the opposition is quite familiar with, I’ll quote 

his tweet: “My government announcing the development of a 

poverty reduction strategy. Would like to thank organization 

@PovertyCosts @Premier . . . [and we’re not supposed to say 

the name] #skpoli.” So when we have somebody who actually 

ran for the leadership of the opposition thanking the 

government for the work that we’re doing, I think we’re 

listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nice to see some leadership from them. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Yes. Poverty Costs themselves, they’ve 

said. And it hits close to home, because this week in Moose Jaw 

they’re actually . . . A bunch of students have got together and 

some other folks in town are doing a Poverty Costs challenge. 

So they’re actually spending this week living like it would be 

living in poverty. So it hits close to home. It’s teaching us . . . 

These are people I chat with lots. Dr. Meili’s actually in Moose 

Jaw, I’m not sure if it’s today or tomorrow, to actually talk on 

this. And Poverty Costs have said, “Here we go! Big mention 

for the team in the Throne speech #skpoli and the commitment 

to a poverty reduction strategy #WeDidIt.” 

 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5475 

So this thought that we don’t listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan is a misnomer. We listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It’s obvious we listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan and have been listening to them all along. If you 

can do simple math, it shows just with the number in the House, 

with the nine on that side and the 48 over here. Just specially 

for the teachers that are out there and teach us math, that 9 to 48 

should be glaringly right there. 

 

[11:30] 

 

So one of the other things that we’ve moved forward with is 

Habitat for Humanity. And actually there’s a groundbreaking; 

they’ve been working on it in Moose Jaw already over the 

summer. And there’s another groundbreaking just down the 

street from my office. Actually down the alley from my office 

there’s another groundbreaking for Habitat for Humanity. 

 

So you take a look at what we’ve done with Habitat for 

Humanity, and what Habitat for Humanity has done just in this 

year’s budget, an extra $750,000 through the Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation to build an additional 12 new Habitat for 

Humanity homes throughout Saskatchewan. And for those 

people that are out there and they don’t really know what that 

program’s about, you need to check it out. We’re not giving 

these people a home. These people have to apply, get a 

mortgage through the Habitat for Humanity. And on top of 

qualifying for that mortgage through Habitat for Humanity, they 

literally put in thousands of hours of work on those homes. 

Those homes are built by volunteers, volunteers that have time. 

They’re sponsored by corporations and companies here in this 

province. And if we didn’t have a strong economy, if we didn’t 

have a strong Saskatchewan, we couldn’t do that. 

 

I know the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t like numbers and 

stats; he said as much for yesterday. But it shows in the stats 

that Habitat for Humanity provided, Habitat For Humanity 

changes lives. Seventy-eight per cent of families rated their 

health and the health of their families improved. Fifty-eight per 

cent are better off financially. Twenty-one and a half upgraded 

job skills or learned a new trade. And over 17 per cent returned 

back to school. 

 

So we’re out there. We’re helping the people. And you can’t do 

that without a strong Saskatchewan. A strong Saskatchewan 

means we need a strong economy. That strong economy is what 

provides for those who can’t provide for themselves. And when 

it comes to parents that have issues, it’s close to my heart, being 

a foster parent, dealing with some of these folks. Some of them 

were single moms. So what we’ve done earlier this year, our 

government was pleased to announce the opening of Sweet 

Dreams home in Saskatoon. 

 

Now Sweet Dreams, if you’ll remember, will provide at-risk 

single mothers with affordable housing and support while they 

complete their education and learn life and parenting skills. 

There’s nothing closer to being family for the people than that. 

And the fact that that’s not supported because of the funding 

model is beyond me. I really don’t, I don’t get where they get 

this from. 

 

“This program gives at-risk mothers and children a better 

chance at life and will ultimately support the entire fabric of our 

community.” And that was a quote from Colleen Mah. 

 

I’d like to quote one of the moms, and I’ve quoted her before, 

earlier this year: 

 

It gave me a safe roof over my head, a support system that 

would take me to school and pick me up. I was able to 

make it to school every day. I always had food, money for 

clothes so I wouldn’t have to worry about those things. 

 

That was Chantal McLaren. And she was previously couch 

surfing with a one-year-old son. 

 

So we funded that project . . . Or the project was actually made 

possible through a social impact bond funding model, so we 

actually didn’t fund it upfront. The first of its kind in Canada. 

The first implemented in its kind in Canada. 

 

So we have to look outside the box that the opposition seems to 

want to stay stuck in and not take a look at how we can do 

things better, how we can do things differently. You know, 

Saskatchewan’s moving forward, and it doesn’t appear that 

they’ve caught on to that, that Saskatchewan is moving forward 

and actually leaving them in the dust. I’m just, you know . . . 

And I want to quote the Leader of the Opposition from the 

Moose Jaw Times-Herald from yesterday. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Don’t do that. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Oh I have to, because this goes to exactly 

what I was talking about earlier. And start quote: “Politics can’t 

just be about helping the province do well. It has to be about 

helping the people do well.” 

 

So if the province isn’t doing well . . . I’d like to pose a 

question. If the province isn’t doing well, how are we supposed 

to help the people? How are we supposed to help the people? 

You know, it is about the stats. 

 

Sometimes I really wonder if they read the Throne Speech, read 

the budget, and understand what it really has to say. One of 

their questions asked was, stop cutting climate change programs 

and environmental assessment and protection, and start 

investing in more clean, renewable power. So what do we do? 

Well, I believe the member from Estevan did a member’s 

statement on this. Earlier this month people from around the 

world gathered at Boundary dam power station. And again, I 

just happened to work there for a while back in the day when I 

was in Estevan. I’m quite, quite familiar with them. 

 

SaskPower opened the first commercial power plant in the 

world with a fully integrated post-combustion carbon capture 

system. More than 90 per cent of the carbon dioxide emitted at 

Boundary dam 3 will be captured and stored for enhanced oil 

recovery in mature oil fields. That’s the equivalent of taking 

more than 250,000 vehicles off the roads here in Saskatchewan 

every year. That’s huge. And it’s not just for Saskatchewan. 

The world was there to take a look at the innovation that’s here 

in the new Saskatchewan, moving this province forward. 

 

You know, it’s huge. That in itself is a game changer. When 

you take a look at countries like China with the amount of 

power plants that go up, with the United States with the amount 



5476 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

of coal-fired power plants they have in the United States that’ll 

be able to adapt this technology to their existing infrastructure, 

it doesn’t just help Saskatchewan. It helps the world. 

 

It’s tough to know really where the opposition is coming from, 

how they can miss the point that we’re moving the province 

forward, that the province is moving forward and the 

government’s not in the way. You know, exports have increased 

by 63 per cent, while manufacturing shipments have climbed 

more than 50 per cent. You know, it’s pretty straightforward. 

People are actually moving here because they want to, because 

the jobs are here, the works are here, the work’s here. They can 

build a life. They can build a family. My kids are part of a new 

generation that don’t have to move away. So those of you in the 

opposition with new, young kids, if we keep moving forward 

they won’t have to move away 20 years from now either. If we 

slide back, go back to the way things were in the ’90s, they may 

have to change and move on to Alberta. 

 

You know, I’ve talked to lots of grandparents that still have 

their kids in Alberta. And it becomes a struggle going to visit 

their kids in Alberta. It just . . . It’s a hassle. So if my kids don’t 

have to move to Alberta to get a job and build a life, that’s good 

for me. However, for every other family out there in this 

province that their kids don’t have to leave to get a job, it is 

great. It’s good for them. They can build their families here and 

that’s what it’s about. That’s why we have to keep 

Saskatchewan strong. 

 

So again I really don’t know why the opposition is so afraid of 

even talking about new ideas. We said there will be no liquor 

stores built, new liquor stores built in Saskatchewan with 

taxpayers’ dollars. They don’t like that idea. They would rather 

spend money on liquor board stores, building new liquor board 

stores, than building hospitals and schools. That boggles my 

mind. Why do you want to build liquor stores and not hospitals 

and schools? That’s the question. And one of the ones is in 

Saskatoon, is a Co-op. So any of the Saskatoon members from 

over there that are Co-op members, you’re actually part owners 

of a private liquor store. So just saying. 

 

So with that, I actually want to leave some stuff for my 

colleagues to point out about some of the opposition’s ideas 

where we’ve actually moved forward. We’re beyond that. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that I’m very happy to second the 

motion for the speech to the throne. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Just maybe I’ll just . . . I’ll beg the indulgence of members just 

for the front end. I wanted to just touch on the brutal and 

cowardly attacks that have certainly shook all of us and shaken 

our province, our entire nation. And certainly it’s with heavy 

heart that we all think of the families of all those impacted and, 

most specifically, Corporal Nathan Cirillo and Warrant Officer 

Patrice Vincent who have lost their lives, who were killed in, as 

I say, brutal and cowardly actions here this week. 

 

Both those members of the Canadian Armed Forces should 

have been home with their families each night this week. 

Instead their families are planning funerals, mourning their loss. 

And it’s important for them to know that we too as a nation, we 

too as a province, we as every member in this Assembly mourn 

those members. And so our thoughts and prayers, and our heavy 

hearts are with all those that have been impacted. And those 

thoughts and prayers are also with all Canadians and our 

members of the Canadian Forces particularly to ensure safety 

and protection for all. 

 

It’s events like this that can’t often be described that also 

display great heroics. And certainly I want to provide the 

greatest thanks to the Sergeant-at-Arms in Ottawa, in 

legislatures across Canada, in our legislature here, and as well 

the law enforcement officers, our regional police, municipal 

police, the RCMP for their response, and of course the 

Canadian Forces. 

 

I have members that serve in the Canadian Forces that have 

served abroad and are currently members of the Canadian 

Forces, and I know that this shakes those families. And I know 

they’re strong and their resolve is strong, and I know we too as 

a nation and a people are strong. And it’s a time for us all to 

stand together to respect and care for one another. And for us, 

as we remain strong to ensure that we don’t let this shake the 

ideals and values that we cherish, that we work for as a 

province and a nation, Mr. Speaker. So I wanted to weigh in 

with some initial remarks before entering into my response to 

the Throne Speech that was delivered yesterday. 

 

My initial focus on the Throne Speech, I’d like to sort of have a 

local perspective from our constituency on what people were 

looking for, what the pressures are that people are facing, and 

what was or wasn’t in the Throne Speech. So that will be my 

focus. 

 

But before getting into that, certainly as many other members 

do, I’d like to thank our families that support us to serve, that 

contribute to that service, and that to give back to our 

communities. And importantly in my life, I’d like to recognize 

Stephanie, my beautiful, intelligent wife who is a smart, 

hard-working educator who contributes to our community in so 

many ways. I’d like to recognize her. She also always has very 

good advice, is a very good forum to discuss matters that come 

before this Assembly and the people of our province. 

 

[11:45] 

 

I’d also like to . . . I’m thinking of our new addition, our first 

addition, the best thing in our life, William, who is now near six 

months old and who has sort of flipped our priorities upside 

right. And although he may cause us to have little sleep on 

certain days, as all parents would know — standing here today, 

I needed a little extra coffee — he’s an incredible young man 

who we cherish and look forward to every step of the way with 

him and his role within the service as well. 

 

I also want to recognize Gloria Patrick. She serves as the 

constituency assistant for Rosemont. And we have some casual 

constituency assistants I’d also like to thank. But these are in 

many ways the unsung heroes in each of our ridings. And I 

know each and every one of us as members value and thank 

those constituency assistants. In the case of Gloria, she’s an 

exceptional individual. She has a mind to the community. She 

comes at things in a common sense way, and she has a deep 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5477 

sense of compassion in dealing with matters in a professional 

way, in a way that can best advocate for our constituents. And 

it’s just a pleasure to work together with Gloria for the 

betterment of others. 

 

And you know, a lot of times the public perceives the political 

process to be simply an adversarial one or to be what they see 

on the evening news with ten seconds of one side, ten seconds 

of another, and they take it simply as that. But many that 

engage in our office are aware of the literally hundreds of 

families that connect within our offices and for which you work 

with in a constructive fashion as members of the opposition, 

and hopefully government as well, to advocate for their needs 

and see constructive resolution of their challenges. 

 

Of course there’s an important place in our parliamentary 

democracy for that role of advocacy on the floor of this 

Assembly as well and for the role of an opposition to oppose 

and yes to propose. And we’re certainly proud to do our best to 

fulfill that role. And all I can say is I work with great people, 

and I work for great people. 

 

When I think of what really makes a difference in the life of a 

province, in the life of a community, in the life of a city, and I 

think of our own riding, it’s the leaders within those 

communities that make a difference every day. It’s those in the 

schools that are providing the next generation the opportunity 

they so deserve. It’s those in our community associations that 

are ensuring programs and extending supports and addressing 

local community need. It’s those coaching sports and that are 

supporting programs that make a difference, whether it’s in a 

kid’s life or whether it’s in the life of seniors. 

 

And I can think of so many, Mr. Speaker, within our 

constituencies. Those in our churches that support and bring a 

place for people and families to come together in a place of 

faith and to extend that family. It’s those working in our 

seniors’ homes and in all aspects of public service. It’s those 

creating jobs, the entrepreneurs who are a very important driver 

within this economy. The families, the workers, the 

entrepreneurs — I can think of so many right across our riding 

that make a tremendous difference in our province and within 

our community. 

 

So it’s thinking of all of those people. It’s drawing upon the 

discussions on doorsteps when listening to constituents. It’s the 

conversation at the hockey rink or the grocery store, the gas bar, 

with people that I use to inform some of these conversations. 

And of course it’s the critical casework that comes into our 

offices that informs the remarks that I offer here today. 

 

And in looking at the Throne Speech, there will be 

disappointment for many if they break it down and look at the 

real pressures that they are facing within their life. It seemed 

evident to me that this Throne Speech cemented that this 

government just doesn’t get the realities of affordability, the 

cost-of-living pressures that everyday families are facing in this 

province. It’s almost comical, but it frustrates and in some ways 

angers many, Mr. Speaker, to see their own tax dollars going to 

run ads to have a government boast and try to pretend that 

somehow that government is making life more affordable for 

Saskatchewan people when Saskatchewan people know full 

well nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

And the reality of this, when you have an environment where 

families are stressed by cost of living and not seeing some relief 

on those fronts, is it comes directly out of quality of life, Mr. 

Speaker, families making tough choices with household 

priorities and, in many cases, needs. And that’s where this 

Throne Speech, and this is where this government has been off 

track in its record. And it’s a tad rich, it’s certainly a tad too 

sweet, Mr. Speaker, for a government that has presided over 

great opportunity but failed to address the affordability 

pressures, and in fact has jacked up the cost of living on 

families across Saskatchewan, to now come out with an ad 

campaign at the expense of Saskatchewan people and families, 

to try to pretend that somehow they’re making life more 

affordable. 

 

What I’d expect, Mr. Speaker, on an area like this is less boast, 

less boast from government, less pretending, a little bit more 

understanding of the realities families are facing, and then some 

practical and real solutions that make a difference for 

Saskatchewan people and my constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If I’m looking at some of the local needs and pressures that 

need to be addressed within our constituency, you know, it just 

stands out — and I’ve raised in this Assembly I know before, 

Mr. Speaker, and advocated — is that very important facility, 

Pioneer Village, and the care that it provides Saskatchewan 

people, many Saskatchewan seniors, many Saskatchewan 

people. The families and the people that are supported through 

Pioneer Village through all levels of care come from across 

Saskatchewan. Every single one of these members, I would 

suspect, have had or have constituents or family members that 

have been supported at Pioneer Village. And the staff, the team 

are doing everything they can with the resources they have to 

provide the care that’s so critical to those that we love, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the facility, Mr. Speaker, is past its useful lifespan, needs to 

be replaced. And what they don’t need is empty mentions from 

government about possibly doing this. What they’re looking for 

is a timeline, an allocation of resources, and a plan that makes 

sense for the quality of care that reflects best practice of care 

moving forward, Mr. Speaker. So I advocate for that important, 

important facility to be restored — well, to be replaced, Mr. 

Speaker; it’s past its useful lifespan — and to make sure that 

there’s care for those that are there. 

 

When I think of the health services, and we know and we hear 

often from so many across Saskatchewan about the shortage of 

specialists in important areas, I think of Jacqui Cameron and her 

son Rylan in my constituency, her son who’s lived with 

epilepsy for so many years — a real hero, a real champion, the 

biggest Rider fan, Mr. Speaker, in this province, I would argue 

to say — but a young man that needs to be supported by 

pediatric neurologists. And it’s just not good enough to not have 

the complement of pediatric neurologists for people like Rylan 

or for many others that we know that require these services. 

 

We also see it through the home care, Mr. Speaker, the 

important needs. And I can think of constituent after constituent 

that requires support. These are meaningful supports. They can 

foster and allow dignity, independence, and support, and they’re 

rather affordable and economic, Mr. Speaker. And government 

needs to do a much better job of extending home care, not 



5478 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

reducing home care for those that rely on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of the emergency room waits, Mr. Speaker, that are 

absolutely unacceptable, that are leaving far too many 

languishing at a time of need and crisis. I think of the debacle 

last year managed by this government where the Pasqua 

emergency room was basically at crisis and potentially closing 

down. That’s not what Saskatchewan people need in a growing 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. What they expect is that in a 

growing Saskatchewan with unprecedented opportunity that the 

government can get the basics right that matter to all 

Saskatchewan people and matter certainly to my constituents. 

 

I can think of the challenge of access to family doctors. That is 

a challenge in many communities and certainly a challenge, yes, 

Mr. Speaker, in Regina and northwest Regina as well, and 

we’re looking for practical, meaningful actions on that front. I 

didn’t see anything in the Throne Speech to address that. These 

are the local concerns, the local lens that I’m applying to this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also think of our schools and classrooms and an area that this 

government has really been an abject failure on as a 

government, Mr. Speaker, failing students in the next 

generation, failing to get it right, cutting educational assistants 

across Saskatchewan, filling classrooms with larger class sizes 

at a time where we have greater complexity to those classrooms 

than ever before, Mr. Speaker, and failing to provide the 

supports that are, yes, needed for students, most importantly 

needed for students, Mr. Speaker. And for me, when I see a 

province like ours doing as well as it is on so many fronts, it’s 

an abject failure of this government to fail the next generation, 

to fail students, Mr. Speaker, and of course the continued poor 

treatment of the hard-working, incredible, fine educators of this 

province. These matter to my constituents. They matter to the 

constituents of the member from Saskatoon Centre. I suspect 

they matter to every single member’s constituents in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also think on a local perspective we have vibrant schools. We 

have the new Martin Academy, Mr. Speaker, that’s bringing a 

new life and future to that facility and an important facility and 

school to our community, Mr. Speaker. These are important 

things, but they need to be supported every step of the way by 

government. 

 

I think of the closure of Dieppe School caused by the 

inadequate funding of this government, Mr. Speaker, Dieppe, a 

school that’s so vital to a community, that is actually quality 

infrastructure that serves people as not just a school, which is 

critical, but as a community hub that was closed because of 

inadequate funding by this government. And I urge this 

government to find solutions, and there could be very common 

sense, practical solutions to work directly with the school board 

to ensure the reopening or to cause the reopening of Dieppe 

School, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll continue to push for that on the 

floor of this Assembly, for that government to reach out and 

work directly with the board to make that happen, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s something that’s critically important. 

 

I know another aspect that I raise on the floor of this Assembly 

almost every chance I have, almost every day that I’m in here, 

Mr. Speaker. And we’ve rallied as a community. We have a 

community petition drive that we’ve engaged. We’ve had the 

issue brought to the attention of community leaders that have 

assisted in bringing the issue to the attention of the broader 

public, but something that’s totally unacceptable by way of the 

response of this government, and that’s their response to 

causing the heavy-haul truck traffic and danger on Dewdney 

Avenue. 

 

You know this, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t stuff that is not solvable, 

Mr. Speaker. These are some of the simple things that a 

government should simply take care of. And for that 

government to create the hub but not think of the safe traffic 

flow and the impacts back to residents and communities, Mr. 

Speaker, is absolutely unacceptable. And it’s intolerable, Mr. 

Speaker, to continue to see this government delay its actions to 

get those dangerous heavy-haul trucks off of Dewdney Avenue, 

ensure safety and peace of mind for the residents of Dewdney 

Avenue, the users of Dewdney Avenue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course that’s many. It’s the families that are accessing 

work. It’s the families that are accessing schools. It’s those that 

are coming to Pioneer Village, Mr. Speaker, from all across this 

province to see loved ones. It’s those that are visiting great 

heritage sites like the RCMP Heritage Centre or depot itself or 

Government House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is an issue that needs to be resolved, and my frustration 

with this government is high on this front because it’s been 

brought to their attention. It’s easily resolved, and the 

unwillingness and stubbornness of this government isn’t good 

enough. The long-term west bypass is an important part to 

ensure that occurs, but there needs to be interim measures to 

address it. And we’ve brought forward proposals to government 

that have been rejected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are some of the aspects that are important to my 

constituents, Mr. Speaker, as I talk about. It’s the failure of that 

government to make life better when it comes to affordability. 

The concern, Mr. Speaker, of a government that really doesn’t 

get the realities of everyday households across Saskatchewan is 

certainly important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:00] 

 

There are some things in the Throne Speech for which I can 

speak positively to. And you know, the amending of The Health 

Information Protection Act is a good thing. Protecting patient 

safety, this is critically important. 

 

The needs of communities are many right now, and the failure 

of governments and the provincial and federal governments to 

support the growth of this province is falling heavily on 

property tax payers of this province, falling heavily onto 

communities, the property taxes of families and businesses, Mr. 

Speaker, who continue to see their property taxes increasing, 

Mr. Speaker. And what we’ve been calling is for better support 

for our municipalities. And certainly the SIGI, the 

Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative being 

reintroduced is a good thing, but that’s simply supporting 

borrowing, Mr. Speaker, lending of municipalities. What we 

need, Mr. Speaker, are real solutions when it comes to 

dedicated infrastructure funding that will allow communities to 

plan for the growth they’re experiencing and to take the 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5479 

pressure off of families and businesses who simply can’t afford 

the big tax increases this government is imposing upon them. 

 

We also support the expansion of adult basic education. I’ve 

some experience with this in my life as an educator before 

entering into this House. This is critically important. And it’s 

absolutely unacceptable to have any wait-list for adult basic 

education in this province, and certainly we’re pleased to see 

some progress there. 

 

And so those are some of the things, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 

focusing on. But when we look at this in general, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think of the entire province, this Throne Speech is focused 

on a select few, Mr. Speaker, instead of all the people of this 

province. And as our leader, the Leader of the Opposition often 

says, it can’t just be about the province doing well. It has to be 

about people doing well, Mr. Speaker, which is why we’re 

going to continue to stand up for Saskatchewan people, why 

we’re going to work and propose ideas to work with the 

tremendous opportunity, the hard work of Saskatchewan 

people, to better this proud province of ours, Mr. Speaker, and 

to challenge government when it’s off track. 

 

And clearly, Mr. Speaker, this government’s off track in areas. 

When we see the untold millions, tens of millions of dollars, 

Mr. Speaker, being doled out to American contractors for this 

lean debacle that we’ve experienced, Mr. Speaker, the kinds of 

questions that were placed in question period today are the valid 

ones. Instead of spending tens of millions of dollars to an 

American contractor, Mr. Speaker, who’s making things worse, 

who’s not respected, who’s not appreciated by the health sector, 

they should be putting those dollars to where they make a direct 

difference in the lives of Saskatchewan people — directly into 

seniors’ care, directly into health care. 

 

I’ve spoken about the concerns around education, Mr. Speaker. 

This is a government that — given incredible opportunity and 

exceptional revenues — this is a government that has failed 

students in the next generation, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 

disrespected and dismissed teachers, ignoring their very 

important voice, failing to provide the supports that they know 

are important to students, Mr. Speaker, and a government that 

rams forward with its own agenda without listening, tinkering 

around with school days, tinkering around with calendars, 

monkeying around with things for which they didn’t even 

understand the practical implications of doing so, which are 

now causing some challenges, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we’re calling for on this front is it’s a time to focus 

back on the basics, to make sure that government can reduce 

class size. Let’s make sure those supports are there. Let’s 

respect our teachers. And let’s make sure that, most 

importantly, that we get it right because we have one shot when 

it comes to the education of young people.  

 

It’s different . . . I know these guys get caught up, Mr. Speaker, 

in this Toyota lean American-Japanese project that they are 

engaged in, Mr. Speaker. But unlike a Toyota car, Mr. Speaker, 

that can be recalled after its gone through that lean process, we 

have one chance to get it right with the students of this 

province, and it’s a failure of all of us if we don’t provide the 

supports that are important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before closing, Mr. Speaker, the one last area I’d like to touch 

on is that we see a government that’s focused on selling out 

Saskatchewan opportunity on too many fronts. We have such 

tremendous opportunity and resources and people and 

businesses in this province. This government is all too willing 

to sell out Saskatchewan’s opportunity. We see it in this debacle 

where this government entered into a contract — $200 million 

if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker — with an American 

contractor to send Texas plates up to Saskatchewan who then 

subcontracts that work through a temp agency to put 

unqualified workers into our province to create safety risks, 

cause fires here throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, and 

failing to provide the good jobs and opportunity that 

Saskatchewan people deserve. 

 

We see it in the outsourcing and privatization in many other 

areas, whether it’s the important work of corrections workers in 

this province who are now . . . a government who thinks 

somehow that that should be a job that’s outsourced and 

privatized to some company that’s going to put lower paid 

workers into those roles, threatening the integrity of that system 

and taking away good, important jobs within our communities, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it couldn’t be more evident, Mr. Speaker, than the P3 

[public-private partnership] rent-a-school scheme that we see of 

this government, and we see it in other areas as well, but where 

a government rejects any accountability, any transparency, 

rejects the economics of the decisions they’re entering into, 

rejects to learn from neighbouring provinces like Alberta that 

are shelving this wrong-headed approach to building 

infrastructure. You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s just an example of a 

government that’s grown stubborn, a government that’s grown 

ignorant, and a government that’s not tending to Saskatchewan 

people the way they should and in fact are selling Saskatchewan 

people out. 

 

It’s a concern to me that the P3 rent-a-school scheme of this 

government will cost Saskatchewan people more — taxpayers. 

It’s a concern that it will delay construction. It’s a concern that 

it’ll forfeit local control of the school boards and the 

community groups that need those schools to be hubs, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s a big concern, Mr. Speaker, that the way this 

government’s going at it, it will shut out Saskatchewan 

companies from the participation in building the schools that 

they should. 

 

And these are the companies, Mr. Speaker, who have skin in the 

game, who have stuck through more challenging times within 

this province, who deserve, who deserve to be part of the 

projects right now, with workers, Mr. Speaker, who own 

homes, pay taxes, and send kids to school. Which is also why, 

Mr. Speaker, on this idea, this focus that we have, we want to 

build on Saskatchewan opportunity that extends to the young 

child that’s going into school this year that also extends to the 

businesses of this province so we can build on that opportunity. 

 

Something that I’m very proud of that was proposed by the 

Leader of the Opposition and our team is the sophisticated and 

modernized improvements to procurement in this province that 

we’re calling for, Mr. Speaker. That government ignores, that 

government ignores the benefits that are derived in making sure 

there’s at least an equal footing for Saskatchewan companies. It 



5480 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

doesn’t make any sense to have steel manufacturers, Mr. 

Speaker, and contractors not being able to engage in an equal 

way with the procurement in this province. And that’s about . . . 

again another example of this government not looking to build 

on Saskatchewan opportunity but selling that opportunity out. 

And of course we see that in our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, on so 

many fronts. 

 

I’m cognizant that I’ve gone a few minutes past my allotted 

speaking time within our allocation here today, but I wanted to 

touch on those important points. What I want, what I want to 

express is that it’s an honour to work for my constituents. It’s 

an honour to work and represent the issues that are important to 

all Saskatchewan people. 

 

We’re going to be here to propose better ways forward. We’re 

going to be there to point out to aspects we can support as 

we’ve done here today, but most importantly we’re going to 

work tirelessly to make sure that we make life better and 

address the real challenges that Saskatchewan families are 

facing. Too often from the current government it’s about 

boasting and back-patting, sort of all about them and all their 

partisan interests. We believe it should be more about 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s a lot of opportunity in this province. People are 

working hard. We want to play our part and are willing to play 

that part to work with Saskatchewan people to make this great 

province an even better place. 

 

With that being said, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving an 

amendment, seconded by the member of Athabasca, which 

reads as follows. I won’t be supporting the Throne Speech. I’ll 

be, as I say, moving this amendment: 

 

And that this Assembly condemns this government for 

primarily working to benefit a select few while dismissing 

the most important things Saskatchewan families want and 

need, especially in the areas of health care, education, and 

the rising cost of living. 

 

I so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved the motion, seconded by the member from 

Athabasca: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 

 

And that this Assembly condemns this government for 

primarily working to the benefit of a select few while 

dismissing the most important things Saskatchewan 

families want and need, especially in the areas of health 

care, education, and the rising cost of living. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today in my place to second the motion as 

presented by my colleague in relation to our response to the 

Throne Speech. 

 

Obviously we see a lot of gaps. And I want to emphasize the 

point that my colleague raised, that despite this government 

having received probably the greatest gift any new incoming 

government could receive in 2007, which was money in the 

bank, a booming economy, population growing, optimism 

abound, a great CFL [Canadian Football League] team, 

Saskatchewan Roughrider team, and they won the Grey Cup 

that year — all these stars were aligned for them, Mr. Speaker; 

they were all aligned for them. 

 

And today, seven years later, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 

Throne Speech, we see a tired, old government that simply has 

not done anything significant for the people of Saskatchewan. 

They have not done anything tremendous for the people of 

Saskatchewan to take notice. All they have done is simply 

caretake the work of the previous NDP government and the 

people of Saskatchewan to make sure they don’t mess up the 

economy and the direction that Saskatchewan was finally going, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the member from Kindersley, the Minister of the 

Economy, he sits there in his place — and the economy’s doing 

great so he doesn’t get a lot of questions, Mr. Speaker — but 

one of the things that he has really, I want to point out, that he’s 

really made a mistake on is the whole area of agriculture. When 

we had the grain transportation crisis, Mr. Speaker, being a 

northern MLA, I don’t know a lot about agriculture, but 

throughout my years here I’ve learned a bit. And all I know is 

that the minister who was based in rural Saskatchewan, who’s 

part of the economic brain trust of that particular party . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well isn’t the safe movement of 

goods and services part of the economy? And on the grain 

transportation questions that happened last year, Mr. Speaker, 

where farmers lost billions of dollars, billions of dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, because the rail companies could not move their grain, 

what happened to our Minister of the Economy? He sat on his 

hands, didn’t say a word, and actually told many of the people 

in the organizations that should be speaking up, he muzzled 

them, Mr. Speaker. And that’s our point. 

 

As a result today, the point that I’m raising today is that this is 

what people of Saskatchewan expected and it’s a huge 

disappointment for us on this side of the Assembly, and it’s a 

huge disappointment for many people throughout 

Saskatchewan. Despite given a huge surplus, that government 

getting a huge surplus, a booming economy, and a growing 

population, Mr. Speaker, they can’t figure out where they’re at, 

what they’re going to present to the people of Saskatchewan. 

And the Throne Speech is a good example of how they’ve 

failed miserably, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, optimism is 

growing. Optimism is growing. We’re certainly going to 

continue working hard. We’re going to continue working hard. 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, we know as a result of their lack of 

vision that clearly one-third of them have indicated they’re 

going to quit. They’re going to quit politics. They’re leaving 

politics, Mr. Speaker. Now the other third are confused as to 

what to do and the other third, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

work very hard to go after their seats, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the vast majority of them, the vast majority of them are 

quitting. You know why they’re quitting, Mr. Speaker? Because 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5481 

they have failed miserably and they know in their hearts that 

they have not risen to the occasion that the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve. They know it and we know it, and that’s 

why on this side of the Assembly there’s a lot of optimism. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are going to come back and are 

going to show the people of Saskatchewan what they’re made 

of come next election, Mr. Speaker. There’s great confidence, 

great optimism on this side of the House because they have 

dropped the ball, Mr. Speaker. No vision, no plan, Mr. Speaker. 

And it gets pretty sad. It gets pretty sad, Mr. Speaker, when 

they’ve got to go back eight years to find any examples that 

they can argue about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the lack of leadership is very apparent from that 

government, Mr. Speaker, and now even suggests that the front 

row, the cabinet, there’s already half of them quitting, and the 

other half probably will last maybe 20, maybe 20, 30 per cent 

left in their political shelf life, so to speak, and then they’re off 

to greener pastures. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And that’s why it’s important for the people of Saskatchewan to 

pay attention to the Throne Speech to see what’s being planned, 

what vision is being implemented, and where they’re planning 

on going. And, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech was a huge, 

huge disappointment — no vision, no plan, nothing to articulate 

and to emphasize growth for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to point out here as well, for 

northwestern Saskatchewan, the constituency of Athabasca, we 

know about how they’ve wasted millions of dollars hiring 

consultants. We know about the smart meter problems. We 

know about the fact that they’ve decimated many programs in 

the Aboriginal community. They’ve worked hard to get rid of a 

lot of teachers. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re working hard to get 

rid of a lot of working men and women in our union movement. 

We all know what this government’s all about. 

 

So what do you do when you really have nothing to worry 

about when it comes to continue to build the economy? You go 

back to your principles of trying to put privatized health care in 

place. You go back to your principle of trying to sell off the 

Crowns, and the Information Services Corporation’s a good 

example. And then you ignore certain sectors. And then people 

in northern Saskatchewan see all this, and they ask questions of, 

why aren’t they addressing the agricultural issues? Because 

they know that the farm community’s important to our 

economy. People in northern Saskatchewan know that. We tell 

them, go and ask them because they’ve dropped the ball on that 

front. 

 

So we know all of these issues. A lot of the provincial 

information that we get and a lot of issues that we learn about, 

Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan people see what’s going 

on. They’re concerned, but they also want to make sure that 

they know that they appreciate the work that many of the 

agricultural producers contribute to the province of 

Saskatchewan. I think that’s a really key message that northern 

Saskatchewan people want to share. That being said, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t want to diminish the needs and certainly the 

issues of southern Saskatchewan. 

 

We want to talk a bit about what Athabasca’s all about because 

that’s primarily one of the reasons why I’m here. And one of 

the things that I looked at when we looked at the Throne 

Speech, nothing on highways for northern Saskatchewan. 

Nothing on health care for northern Saskatchewan. Nothing, 

Mr. Speaker, on housing, Mr. Speaker. Nothing on education. 

Absolutely nothing for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to talk about highways. The Minister of Highways 

is chirping from her chair, Mr. Speaker. She’s chirping from her 

chair. And I want to share with her a headline, a headline, Mr. 

Speaker, that came across on October 21st, 2014, Northern 

Pride, Meadow Lake Northern Pride. The headline says, “Dore 

Lake residents threaten highway blockade.” That’s the headline. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s important for the 

Minister of Highways to know is that one of the quotes of a 

councillor for Dore Lake, and the councillor’s name is Jonathon 

Fonos, and this is what Mr. Fonos said in that particular article 

from this past couple of days. And the quote was, “I’d much 

rather be put in handcuffs than have to bury one of my kids.” 

And the reason he was saying that, Mr. Speaker, when he 

threatened a blockade, they threatened to put handcuffs on him. 

And his response was, and again I quote, “I’d much rather be 

put in handcuffs than have to bury one of my kids.” That’s a 

message from Mr. Fonos to this particular government and to 

that particular minister that’s chirping from her chair. 

 

And while she’s busy chirping from her chair, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to point out that they’re going to have a fairly significant 

meeting in Dore Lake and Sled Lake. There’s a lot of cabins in 

that particular area because it’s a beautiful part of our province. 

Now what happens is the people of Sled Lake and Dore Lake 

and those cabin owners are having a big meeting October 28th, 

1 p.m. at the Dore Lake community hall. I’m going to ask the 

Minister of Highways, will she be attending that meeting? Are 

the concerns of the Dore Lake, Sled Lake, and cabin owners of 

that particular area, are they legitimate enough to demand that 

she be there on October 21st at the Dore Lake community hall, 

1 p.m.? I’m going to ask the minister, will she attend that 

meeting, yes or no? Will she attend that meeting? 

 

And she’s chirping from her chair, Mr. Speaker. Again to point 

out that there was no leadership from her part. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what’s really galling about this particular 

government. They talk a good game, but they can’t deliver 

anything, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the other point I would point out is that Mr. Fonos went on 

to say, and this is again a direct quote from the article: 

 

Fonos said, “This is a far cry from the discussions held in 

2005 at which time the ministry claimed it would address 

the issues to rebuild the highway.” A change in 

government, however, is what the councillor believes led 

the project to eventually fall by the wayside. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there was commitments made. This 

government stopped those commitments. They stopped those 

commitments. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the problem that we 

have on this side of the Assembly, is that this government 

doesn’t care about certain regions, about certain concerns, about 

certain people. And that’s a shame because you govern for all, 



5482 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And some of the points I want to raise as well is the people are 

rallying in Dore Lake. They’re trying to pressure this 

government and this minister to attend that meeting. They’re 

trying to get her to be there to answer questions, Mr. Speaker, 

why that project was cancelled. 

 

And according to Joel Cherry, again a direct quote from the 

article, “According to Joel Cherry, a communications consultant 

with the Ministry of Highways . . .” Now I don’t know what 

that means, a communication consultant. Was he working for 

Highways before? Is this a new way of putting employees under 

a consultant title? Are we letting go of a lot of the workers 

within the Highways department? These are some of the 

questions we had. So is he a communication consultant with 

Highways or is he an employee? Well Mr. Cherry is basically 

saying that Dore Lake and Sled Lake are not on the capital lists 

for the next five years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Dore Lake are putting their 

lives at risk, their children’s lives at risk. And the problem is 

they see 200 trucks going through that road, hauling out what? 

A northern resource called timber. They’re hauling out 200 

loads of forestry product for the mills in Meadow Lake. Now I 

think Dore Lake, Sled Lake, and the people that own cabins 

there, they appreciate that they have to do their part for the 

economy. But as you’re pulling the resources out of northern 

Saskatchewan, should you not put something back for safe 

highways and to ensure that people’s lives are not threatened? 

Should you not put some of that money back? 

 

We on this side of the Assembly believe that it’s a good balance 

to invest in infrastructure, to develop the resources which 

strengthens the economy overall and respects people of the 

region. That’s our vision, Mr. Speaker. Nothing in this Throne 

Speech says anything remotely about that particular vision, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now look at the other argument about Highway 302 outside of 

Prince Albert. My colleague, the member from Cumberland, 

joined me and we had a tour of Highway 302. It took them — 

what? — six months to replace a culvert. Six months and 

almost $2 million to replace one culvert, Mr. Speaker. Never 

mind the cost of the economy and the cost of people travelling 

around. Highway 302 was washed out for almost six months. 

Cost over close to $2 million to repair that, never mind the cost 

of the people going around. That cost must have been 

incredible. 

 

Now you look at . . . Those are some of the examples though. 

When the minister talks about $1 billion towards highways, I 

wonder how many $2 million culverts are involved with that 

figure. Two million dollars to replace a culvert. Come on, 

you’ve got to get things figured out better on that side of the 

Assembly. And that’s why the NDP are feeling optimistic and 

we know we’re going to work very hard to improve our seat 

count, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other point I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is New North 

issued a press release. New North issued a press release and 

every mayor and councillor in northern Saskatchewan are 

telling the provincial government, it’s time for you to start 

putting money back into our northern roads. Enough of this 

hauling out resources and, as you’re hauling out our resources, 

you bang up our highways. You’ve got to put something back. 

So every northern mayor here has said they want to see action. 

And any northern mayor who does not follow the directive of 

New North isn’t worth his salt, isn’t worth his salt if he’s 

defending the government’s spending on highways in northern 

Saskatchewan, because the government is not spending 

anything to improve highway situations in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And again to point out to the Minister of Finance, chirping from 

his chair again, you were left with billions in the bank. Share 

the wealth. Give something to the North as well. But no, Mr. 

Speaker, his priorities do not include certain sectors, and 

northern Saskatchewan highways is one of those sectors that he 

has completely ignored and will continue to ignore, Mr. 

Speaker, for years to come. 

 

So Mr. Fonos and many people that he sits with and talks with 

has a message to this government: get our roads fixed because 

they’re dangerous. And as you’re hauling out the resources, at 

least have the courtesy and respect to put some of that money 

back so his kids can travel safe, and the people that access the 

cabins can travel safe. You’ve got to get that message on and 

make sure that message is loud and clear today in the Assembly 

to the Saskatchewan Party government. And I would encourage 

the people of Dore Lake and Sled Lake and the cabin owners, 

send letters, sign petitions. Let’s fight this together. And I can 

guarantee you that they will stubbornly dismiss your concerns 

and they will not resolve the issue because this government has 

no vision for the North and no plans to help out Sled Lake nor 

Dore Lake. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I want to ask the minister a second time, 

the meeting on the, I think it’s this Tuesday, 1 o’clock at the 

Dore Lake community hall, will she attend? And she sits there 

laughing in her chair as if it’s not important. It is important. 

You should be there because they’re asking you to be there, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re asking the Minister of Highways to be there to 

answer some of these questions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to look at the other aspect of the 

Throne Speech which also had some concerns for me. And a 

good example, Mr. Speaker, is the hunting issue, when they 

talked about a one-year ban for hunting if you’re caught out of 

season or poaching. Then they spoke about a two-year ban and 

then they spoke about a three-year ban. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a lot of questions about those hunting issues as it relates to 

First Nations and Métis hunting rights. We need to have clarity 

from this government to ensure that the COs [conservation 

officer] out there know exactly how to handle certain situations 

and that they’re consistent when they handle these particular 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that people in our area, Métis people, have been given 

warning tickets when they’re out hunting. They’ve been given 

warning tickets. There are court cases that say they’re allowed 

to hunt in their area, and that’s for sustenance for their families 

and so on and so forth. So the courts, the highest courts 

recognize that they’ve got the right to hunt and gather and fish 

and trap as they’ve done for centuries, Mr. Speaker. The First 

Nations also have that right firmly entrenched. So now they 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5483 

come along with this Throne Speech and they’re saying, well if 

anybody’s caught with a hunting violation, you have a one-year 

ban. You’re caught again, you have a two-year ban. Then 

you’re caught again, you have a lifetime ban. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that our resource 

officers, the conservation officers out there have very good 

information, have consistent practice in implementing the need 

to conserve our resources well. And I can tell you right now, 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of confusion out there. There’s a lot 

of confusion and I’m telling the Saskatchewan Party 

Government, you’d better provide leadership on there. 

Otherwise there’ll be a lot of people in court, and there’ll be a 

lot of fights that the government’s involved with, all because 

you couldn’t lead your way out of a wet paper bag when it 

comes to issues of hunting rights and privileges that the people 

of Saskatchewan enjoy. We know, we know, Mr. Speaker, that 

there should be more hunting. We know a lot of people aren’t 

hunting as much as they should. We hear that from the Wildlife 

Federation. We hear that from a lot of people, that hunting is 

really starting to decline in the province of Saskatchewan, that 

we have to do more to stimulate that kind of activity because 

it’s a natural part of who we are as Saskatchewan people. 

 

So we need to look, we need to look, Mr. Speaker, at ways in 

which yes, you manage the resource. Yes, you encourage 

people to be self sustaining, whether they’re Aboriginal or not. 

You know, we all have the same kind of motto that, what good 

is the right to hunt if there’s nothing left to hunt? So I think it’s 

important that we share the responsibility of maintaining the 

resources and the wildlife to ensure that hunting continues on 

for years and years. 

 

But this confusion as a result of their Throne Speech needs to 

be addressed at the outset because what you don’t want to do is 

have COs that are uncertain and don’t have some good directive 

and good directions and leadership from this government to 

make sure that they’re consistent in their practice, that they 

educate and work with the Aboriginal community and the 

non-Aboriginal community to ensure that this one-year ban or 

two- year ban or lifetime ban doesn’t create problems for the 

people of Saskatchewan where we have to needlessly go to 

court to settle this difference that had been settled 10 times over 

already, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I know I’ve been going on for a bit, but I wanted to quickly 

touch on education. You look at the challenge addressed by my 

colleague, Mr. Speaker, and we in the opposition know one 

thing is that you’ve got to engage the Aboriginal community in 

this economy. And the key to get them to this economy, Mr. 

Speaker, is education. It’s a $90 billion opportunity for the 

people of Saskatchewan. We understand that on this side of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. But while this government announced 

a $3 million task force on Aboriginal education, well all this 

time they were gutting the Aboriginal department within the 

Ministry of Education. They were gutting programs and key 

people that were making a difference to make sure we brought 

the Aboriginal community to the opportunity and education and 

trades and skills training, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So how is it you announce a $3 million fund on one hand, then 

you cut 20 or 30 key positions and a whole department, a whole 

department that’s leading us in terms of trying to provide 

educational opportunity and resource development 

opportunities for First Nations and Métis people? It just does 

not fit, Mr. Speaker. Their actions and basically what they have 

committed to, there’s just a huge disjointing, Mr. Speaker, 

between what they proposed in their Throne Speech and what is 

happening out there in Saskatchewanland. 

 

[12:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the other points that I would 

raise. We see a huge waste in the lean pet project: $40 million is 

what it’s costing the people of Saskatchewan. This government 

stubbornly refuses to recognize that mistake, Mr. Speaker. They 

continue signing these contracts and sending money off to the 

States to these American consultants when we have the solution 

here. Well you give us 10 million bucks; we’ll show you how to 

save 80 million. We’ll not be . . . Price tag you’re paying to 

Black and Associates down by 30 million, so you can claim that 

you save another 30 million. So give us 10 instead of giving 

them 40, and we’ll consult with the managers and the front-line 

workers on how to make the necessary changes so our services 

are top quality, so that our hospitals are kept very clean and 

orderly, Mr. Speaker. We’ll get advice from them, and guess 

what? We’ll only charge you a quarter of what you’re paying 

that consultant from the States. How is that for a deal, Mr. 

Speaker, $10 million to save you 80 million? I think that’s a 

better deal than Black and Associates saying, give us 40 

million; we’ll show you how to save 50 million. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the type of government that people 

have seen. They have time and time again failed, failed to 

provide that necessary vision. Everything from reducing 

poverty to a strategy that really works, that’s really effective, 

they have no plans to do. They just simply chirp about it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They have no plans to help certain regions of the economy that 

needs help. And I keep talking about the P.A. [Prince Albert] 

bridge, Mr. Speaker. We need to have that as an integral part of 

the northwest economy. But does this government . . . in the 

northeast economy. Does this government care about P.A.? 

Absolutely not. Absolutely not. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, I’ve gone on for a bit. We’re going to 

continue to hold this government to account. There’s great 

confidence. There’s great confidence on this side of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, because we know exactly what this 

government’s failing to do. They know what they’re failing to 

do. One-third of their caucus is done. They’ve quit. We’re not 

going to run anymore; we’re out of here. They’ve lost one 

member from Lloydminster already and maybe another 

two-thirds, they’re ready to go out in the next two or three 

years. So they’re 80, 90 per cent done on the other side of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this Speech from the Throne is evidence of that because 

there’s no energy, no vision. There is a half-hearted effort to try 

and recognize accomplishments that they had nothing to do 

with, Mr. Speaker. And I say this because nowhere in the 

history of this country, and I will say of this continent, that a 

government has come into a place in a province or a territory 

with billions in the bank, a booming economy, and a growing 

population. The Saskatchewan Party inherited that from the 



5484 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

NDP, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, we see now that they 

don’t know how to handle the growth and we see now they 

don’t have the vision to continue that growth. 

 

And I can assure the people of Saskatchewan on this side of the 

Assembly, we are waiting for an opportunity to prove to 

Saskatchewan people that we can build a great, bold, new 

Saskatchewan that involves the teachers, that involves the 

Aboriginal community, that involves regions in the North, that 

involves all sectors of our province, big or small. We will do it 

all, Mr. Speaker, because this party, this party is concerned 

about the people of Saskatchewan, not just elite friends of the 

Sask Party seem to be lining their pockets with our 

Saskatchewan money. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, mark my words, mark my words. One-third of 

them quit already; another third looking for an easy exit. 

They’re looking for that exit and, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan sense that. We know that and that gives us great 

confidence on this side of the Assembly. That’s why we’re 

going to fight this session and the next session, and that’s why I 

support the amendment to the Throne Speech. And I encourage 

the people of Saskatchewan to watch carefully what this 

government cannot do and then certainly act accordingly come 

the next election. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

again to stand in this House and to be able to take part in the 

debate involving the Speech from the Throne. Again we see 

strong leadership, a strong vision from Executive Council, from 

the ministers on this side of the floor in developing a speech, a 

document that shows the people of this province continued 

strength and initiative moving forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But before I get into my speech in too much depth, I want to 

take some time and I want to be able to identify, like many of 

the members already have acknowledged, the hard work and the 

tragic loss of a member of the Armed Forces. As people know, 

my mom and dad were both in the military, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I understand that the extended family of the 

military from all the different sectors are feeling the pain today 

in that tragic loss. 

 

One thing I want to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is in fact 

the legal community, the actual law enforcement community, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again I say as in a time of great stress and 

turmoil, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when people run away from a 

situation, who do you see running into the situation? You see 

women and men in law enforcement and emergency services 

running into the situation to deal with it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And as a former member of our tactical unit in Prince Albert, 

with the Prince Albert Police Service, I understand the amount 

of training these men and women took to prepare for that 

unfortunate circumstance yesterday, as well as the men and 

women who work on the Hill in security. They train on a 

regular basis, as well as the tactical units for these kind of 

circumstances. 

 

And it’s because of the good work of the law enforcement 

community, and in fact the Sergeant-at-Arms in the House, an 

ex-RCMP officer, amazingly jumped into action after being 

retired. And from what we understand, he was the individual 

who shot and killed the assailant yesterday. And I want to say 

that as a member of the law enforcement community, as a 

police officer, it’s a proud moment for me to say that and to 

acknowledge that training always comes to the forefront time 

and time again. And I want to thank all the men and women 

yesterday from the law enforcement community who put their 

lives on the line to save those involved with this that were just 

in the area at the wrong time when this cowardly act took place. 

That’s important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we get to talk about what the member from Athabasca just 

went on a tirade about, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Thank you. You know, it’s interesting. A little 

while ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thought I’d be toned down, 

calm, talk about the great things in the Throne Speech, and take 

a different demeanour than I usually take. But you know what, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? We have a member opposite who spends 

his time on his feet berating a government and ministers of the 

Crown and the Ministry of Highways and the Premier for what 

he claims is inaction. Well you know what, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? We have had an announcement by our Premier just 

recently in August talking about how we will in fact be there if 

the Prince Albert City Council wishes to go forward with a new 

bridge in a P3 concept. So we’ve already said that. 

 

And this is a quote from the member from Athabasca from 

some time ago. He says, “We can’t leave money on the table.” 

You know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? He says that. We have 

now had an announcement from the Premier, we’re going to 

partner with the city if they so choose to look at a P3 model. 

 

And he now is ranting from his seat, on his feet sometimes as 

well, that we are not in fact working hard enough for the city of 

Prince Albert to support or look at another bridge. Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, he says one thing, says something else. Today 

he gets up again and he berates the government for not being 

there to support the citizens of Prince Albert for a second bridge 

when clearly we have on record the Premier saying that yes, we 

will be there. And the talks have taken place, and they’ll 

continue to take place on a P3 for a bridge. 

 

Now having said that, there is much more from the Speech from 

the Throne that I want to talk about. But you know, when the 

member from Athabasca focuses on what he believes is 

inaction, it’s only incumbent upon us as members on this side 

of the House to bring up on a regular basis, whereby he is 

mostly grandstanding for no apparent reason. He has to keep the 

facts straight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And you know, the things that he talks about, how we 

mismanage the public purse, how we aren’t doing enough for 

the citizens of this province, well clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we see a province that has grown to the point where we have 

the highest population ever. Our families are seeing children 

staying in this province, starting careers here. We see 

opportunities like nowhere in the time before because, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, not because of what the government solely 

does, I’ve said this time and time again, it’s because of the men 

and women out there who are supporting the economy, hiring 

the people in this province that drive the local economies, the 

goods and services that are bought and sold in this province. 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5485 

People in this province believe in this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Our government’s listened to those individuals, and 

we have set the table to expand for other opportunities. And 

yes, we give tax incentives when the time is right, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And we see in the Speech from the Throne that we 

have in fact, or will be doing that for the certain sector of this 

province that seems to be driving the economy at this time and 

hopes to be sustainable moving forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s important for us to look at that. 

 

You know, we don’t ever want to stand in the way of growth 

and keeping Saskatchewan strong. But to keep Saskatchewan 

strong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it involves a lot of hard work of 

everyone in this province. Everyone in this province today is 

pulling their weight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are people in 

this province who are reinvesting in their businesses and hiring 

young men and women to start up in this province and giving 

them careers, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

 

That’s an important thing to think about when this particular 

Speech from the Throne was scripted, I’m sure, and when the 

ministers did such a great job in bringing forth initiatives that 

they prepare to move forward with in this next session, and with 

the leadership of our Premier. We’re looking at all these 

opportunities, and we’re going to move this file forward. Every 

minister has great incentives to bring more to the table and 

more enthusiasm to see their particular portfolios expand to 

support the economy and to support the men and women in this 

province, still, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not forgetting about those 

who still need our help because there are some people in this 

province who still need a hand-up as opposed to a handout. 

 

And you know, we look at the Speech from the Throne and 

different things that we’re doing in all those initiatives. And you 

know, we talk about housing in this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And you know, I’ve been lucky in my term, two terms 

now, to see Habitat for Humanity build homes in Prince Albert, 

along with my colleague from Northcote. We’ve had some 

other housing announcements as well. And you know, we have 

to look at the simple plan for growth where we committed $344 

million to boost the supply of housing in the province, 

particularly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, particularly for those who are 

low- and moderate-income families. 

 

You know what? We’ve decreased the waiting list for those 

families in need of housing as well, and we’ve increased 

supports for the homeless. So we have a government, today we 

have a government that recognizes that yes, we are strong, but 

we still are supporting those individuals who, for whatever their 

reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, still need the assistance of 

ministries. 

 

And you know, sometimes having been part of some of these 

announcements for Habitat for Humanity, along with some 

other home housing developments in Prince Albert, you know 

what the families tell me? That it’s the security of having a 

home that they can get themselves a strong foundation. They 

can put their feet down, give their families security, and then 

from there secure employment and provide for their families. 

And again, they are providing to the local economies as well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And you know, we also see that, in some cases, tenants in the 

housing communities in Prince Albert have actually purchased 

the homes that they were living in. That tells you something, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these people are hard-working women 

and men who are providing for their families and who in fact 

understand there’s an opportunity to stay in that home as they 

have. And you know what? Unlike no other time in this 

province, people are taking the simple fact that homeownership 

means security. And they don’t want to always be having their 

hand out. They want to be able to make and establish a 

foundation for their families. And that’s a good thing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

You know, as we keep moving forward, we have to look at 

what’s happening in the province as we keep our Saskatchewan 

— you know, people, the economy, the province — strong. You 

know, Moody’s recently upgraded us to a AAA rating, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. That’s the highest possible rating that anyone 

could ever get. And you know, that talks about the fiscal 

stewardship of our province, under again the Premier and the 

ministers and the treasury board members that do the budgets 

every year, along with the ministries who provide their input. 

 

Everybody’s working together, pulling in the same direction 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, working within balanced budgets but 

still providing the necessities for this province to stay strong 

and to provide the necessities for those individuals such as our 

students in university with the graduate retention program, 

opportunities for not just . . . for every post-secondary 

education, not just the universities but all the post-secondary 

sectors to engage those students, to have them learn in this 

province, to stay in this province, to re-engage in the local 

economy upon graduation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s an 

important thing that this government believes in. 

 

And you know, when we talk about that tax incentives, I mean, 

we want businesses to thrive in this province. And I hate to say 

it, but for some reason the opposition believes that’s a bad 

thing. They believe it’s a bad thing to see industry and 

employers and businesses thrive in this province, for some 

reason. 

 

And I just can’t understand that because that’s who drives the 

local economy. It’s not the big government Crown corporations. 

To be sure, they have contributed to local economies, yes. But 

it’s those mom-and-pop operations, those small operations that 

actually drive and feed the local economies on a regular basis. 

And because they’re sustainable, they keep on hiring more 

people to stay in as they’re expanding so the province has 

opportunities like no other time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And you 

know I just have, in all my years here I have — I can’t believe I 

just said that; I guess I’ve been here long enough to say that — 

that every year we hear the NDP always criticizing the 

government for putting money in the pockets of businessmen 

and women. And you know what? That’s all we hear from 

them. 

 

[12:45] 

 

But look what’s happened in the province with some very 

common sense approaches to taxation, to growth incentives, 

even supporting the local municipalities as they have seen 

growth. They’ve asked us for programs to support them as they 

have to increase infrastructure needs. We have to thank the 



5486 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

federal government as well for the amount of money they’ve 

put into other projects and other Building Canada Fund 

initiatives, recreational complex initiatives as well, to support 

growth. 

 

Now with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we still see that there’s 

opportunities for the government to play a role. And as we 

heard yesterday in the Speech from the Throne, the 

Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative fund will again be 

re-engaged, will be looked at to support municipalities and, for 

the first time, our First Nations communities as well who want 

to take part in this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s exciting news 

because we’re seeing opportunities just south of Saskatoon 

where a First Nations community is in fact looking at housing 

developments and such for non-Aboriginal, non-First Nations 

people. 

 

And you know what? Why not look at opportunities? Why not 

support those visionary men and women out there who want to 

be able to say, you know what, if it’s always been this way, 

why has it always been this way? Why can we not look at 

rewriting history? Why can’t we do something different? If 

we’re allowed to do it, why not? And why would not a 

government support that in any way, shape, or form we can, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? And that’s what this new re-engagement with 

SIGI — that’s the acronym for it, Mr. Deputy Speaker — is 

going to help. 

 

And you know, under the first iteration of SIGI since 2007, you 

know, nearly $200 million in borrowing was approved by this 

government, and 82 communities benefited from interest rate 

subsidies. You know, as a previous minister who oversaw that 

particular initiative along with the other previous ministers that 

did a great job before me, you know what? It was not a lot of 

money expended for great gain in every community that 

engaged and used this fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

That’s important because we still want to support this strong 

economy, this strong growth we’re seeing in the province. And 

you know, why again — I always say it — why would a 

government not look at the people who are on the ground 

working hard and developing their communities? Why would 

we not look to them for advice? Why would a government not 

take the advice of those people who are working day in, day out 

like the RM [rural municipality] administrators, the local 

municipal administrators, and city managers. When they come 

to the government asking for a possible, you know, a solution to 

a problem, why would we not engage that? I just don’t 

understand that. We would of course. 

 

The NDP think that we’re not doing enough. Clearly, I don’t 

know what they did. I mean, when I was the minister, I 

remember being told time and time again that they clawed back 

up to $600 million from municipalities. And you know what? 

That’s a lot of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re now, 

through the revenue-sharing program, we’re seeing the fact that 

we have municipalities who are in fact benefiting once again 

from the opportunities that are available because we’re 

re-engaging and we’re re-supporting the local municipal 

economies because we in fact made an agreement to them. They 

came to the government, before we were government actually, 

and said you know this revenue-sharing piece? It would sure be 

nice to have some of that because it would help us to put money 

back into infrastructure or operational needs, whatever we want 

to do. It’s unconditional money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And you know what? On that note . . . I mean, that’s where a 

government has to take the advice of those around us every day 

we can and see if we can in fact work that way. And you know 

what, you know what? The revenue-sharing piece in next year’s 

budget, predictable amount of money I might add, predictable 

amount of money by the current Minister of Municipal Affairs 

who’s done a great job with his staff as well and the officials in 

the bureaucracy working to support this initiative, in next year’s 

budget, $265 million, more than double than in fact what was in 

our, when our government took office, is going back to 

municipal governments in the revenue-sharing model, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. That’s important. This is money you can work 

with. 

 

You know, back on the tangent of helping those communities 

out as well, in another aspect, you know we see our 

communities of course still need some help when it comes to 

being, providing a safe area for families to live and raise their 

children and to support the economy of the province. 

 

And you know, I’m very proud. I was able to work in Prince 

Albert Police Service with Chief Dale McFee. And it was Chief 

McFee who came up and took some high level staff with him 

over to Scotland to look at a new model, a new model to be able 

to address and possibly reduce crime, but to address the cyclical 

part of our society that keeps on . . . We keep on having 

families involved in the justice system, and we were seeing 

those younger members of the family coming back into the 

system as well. And there seemed to be a cycle, a perpetual 

cycle of that. 

 

So when the former chief of the Prince Albert city police, my 

good friend Dale McFee, went forward with the Hub model for 

crime prevention in Prince Albert — and I know my colleague 

from Northcote, I imagine she’ll talk about this as well when 

she has her chance here — we both believe that that was the 

catalyst that we’re seeing now to see crime rates reduced in our 

province through other communities that the Hub has now 

become entrenched in. 

 

And you know, this program in fact will have 13 programs up 

and running in this province this year and, you know, we’re 

seeing Yorkton, La Ronge, North Battleford, Moose Jaw, 

Estevan, Weyburn, Nipawin, Swift Current, Saskatoon, 

Lloydminster engaged in the Hub and in the process of reducing 

crime in our cities and communities. And you know, this wasn’t 

just a made-in-Saskatchewan model just to stay here. 

 

I know full well that former chief McFee, who is now the 

deputy minister of Policing and Corrections, has in fact 

championed this across Canada. I know he has spoken in the 

States as well about this. We’re getting recognition as a 

government for spearheading this and funding these models and 

working with ministry staff across the province to in fact 

remove silos and work together in a team environment to 

reduce all this wasted time and energy doing the same work 

over and over again. 

 

And you know that it’s this good work that’s actually being 

seen by Ontario, Alberta, Manitoba, and Nova Scotia, and 



October 23, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5487 

they’re actually taking our lead on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And you know what? These are successful crime prevention 

programs that are being looked at and implemented in other 

parts of our country. And I want to thank Deputy Minister 

McFee for his leadership in this role, along with the minister 

herself involved with Policing and Corrections, for helping this 

move forward too, another former police officer, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, an old colleague of mine from way back. So moving 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay, not that far back. 

 

So we still have some time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so it’s going 

to be easy for me to keep on filling up the clock today with 

some good speaking notes here I’ve got on the great points from 

the Speech from the Throne. And you know, I talked about it 

before, that every year when a government sets a vision, 

whether it’s in the budget or in the Speech from the Throne, it’s 

a report card, to be sure that the people of the province and 

colleagues across the way can grade us upon. 

 

You know, there will be criticism that maybe we haven’t done 

enough. But you know, when I look at the speeches from the 

throne in all the years I’ve been here, we’ve always seen a 

progressive move to maintain the economy of the province, to 

support the initiatives across every ministry as best we could on 

a regular basis, always engaging with the staff, always engaging 

with the ministers, who are equally engaging back with the 

members of caucus for our communities, to ensure that it’s not 

just high-level kind of initiatives that are being put forward. 

They’re looking at the grassroots as well in our communities, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to support families, to support the 

economy, to support the strong initiatives that have already 

been started back in 2007. 

 

And you know, some of these as well are just basic common 

sense ideas like, you know, under Parks, Culture and Sport, the 

Main Street Saskatchewan program, you know, revitalizing 

historical downtown and commercial areas. And I know the city 

of Prince Albert has benefited from that, and I want to thank the 

current minister and previous ministers in that portfolio for 

those initiatives. Those are great things. And you know what? 

We have to consider, and I’ve said it before in many other 

speeches, the pioneers, those people’s shoulders we stand on 

today who made this province what it is. We were lucky. We 

inherited at a very good time in this province some good fortune 

involving royalties and oil prices and potash prices, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But we have to recognize those who came before us in 

this sector, that the pioneers that built this province made it 

what it is, that we were able to take over as a government and 

work with this economy that was strong then, and maintain its 

momentum. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, when 

we see our government engaging in things like the historical 

communities and the cores of our communities, I mean, people 

recognize that as a government that cares. 

 

We see our core communities and the historical sectors of our 

communities as being important. If we don’t continue to take 

care of our legacies and the history of our province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you know, what happens then to my children and my 

grandchildren in the future? We’re going to lose that 

perspective. And this government doesn’t want that to happen, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And you know, you talk about opportunities across the board 

for post-secondary, but you know, we also recognize that there 

are those individuals who want to get engaged in the economy, 

who want to be contributing citizens in their local communities, 

and for whatever reason they didn’t get their educational 

opportunities that they were after when they were younger. You 

know, our government listened to that sector, listened to those 

individuals, and listened to the people who were teaching those 

individuals in the adult basic education component sectors of 

our province, that, you know, we needed to in fact take care of 

the wait-list. Because there weren’t enough spaces for these 

individuals who want to get engaged in the economy, who want 

to better their lot in life, support their families, support 

themselves. And not every one of these individuals goes on to 

university and becomes a doctor or lawyer or whatever you may 

have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But some of them will go to the 

trade schools, and they engage in the economy. Some of these 

men and women, I would bet today in fact have started or are 

looking at starting their own businesses, which again 

self-perpetuates a cycle of a strong economy in our province, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we can’t forget that. 

 

And you know what? Part of the Throne Speech talks about the 

fact that in this upcoming fiscal year we will increase the 

number of ABE, adult basic education training seats, by 775, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — that’s a big number — eliminating the 

2012 wait-list and bringing the total number of seats to 9,000. I 

wish the member from Athabasca was here because I think he 

went off on a tangent on this as well. 9,355, an increase of 

nearly 60 per cent, 60 per cent since we took office in 2007. 

And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s when you look 

at those numbers and then we hear the member from Athabasca 

talk his own . . . he brandishes his own type of math over there, 

talking about percentages and ratios and statistics. I don’t want 

to be in his classroom as my teacher, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because I don’t think I would ever have got through high 

school, let alone a university degree and had the opportunity to 

be here, for Pete’s sakes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I mean I don’t know where he gets off on his numbers. And 

we clearly have statistics that show that this government is 

engaging with the people continuously in this province to better 

everyone’s lives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not just those people like 

he says that are private sector companies, and we’re just 

padding their bank accounts and filling their pockets with cash, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government in fact is looking at 

those individuals who need the government to support those 

opportunities. Training seats. They want to go to school. They 

want to advance their education. They want to engage in the 

economy. They want to provide a good, secure home for their 

family and give their children opportunities as well, that many 

of us were blessed to have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And you know, I just don’t understand how an opposition looks 

at things and criticizes the government. We talked about, you 

know, an interesting point that, you know, looking at the whole 

promoting this issue about poverty reduction and those kind of 

issues and things that were always there for us to look at. And 

you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? When you have an 

influential member in the community of Saskatoon who was a 

former candidate for the NDP leadership race provincially who 

now says, you know what? And I’m going to just use a small 

little piece of what he said yesterday: “My government [my 

government] announcing the development of a poverty 



5488 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2014 

reduction strategy is amazing. We would like to thank 

organizations @povertycostsask @premierbradwall #saskpoli.” 

That came from Dr. Ryan Meili, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you 

know what? That’s an interesting perspective coming from an 

individual who we recognize as a true advocate for those in his 

community and across this province who are struggling in 

economies, but they’re still trying to make it work, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They’re working hard to provide for themselves and 

their families. 

 

And you know what? When Mr. Meili steps up and thanks his 

government who we know isn’t of the same political stripe as 

him, but he removes the partisan politics from the equation and 

he thanks the government and thanks . . . In fact I think the 

Minister of Social Services, the previous minister as well, were 

fully engaged in this opportunity. Of course we have the 

leadership of the Premier and his staff who looked at this 

possibility of engaging this particular individual and this group 

in this province. Why would we not look at that? Remove the 

politics and just get to the work. Get it done, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Show leadership across the way, removes his political 

stripes, as do we when we talk and we engage those individuals. 

Why would we not as a government work that angle and 

actually make it work and work for the benefit of the people of 

this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

So you know what? This Speech from the Throne is one of 

many that I’m proud to say that I will in fact be supporting. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being the time of adjournment, 

this House stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5461 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5461 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5461 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5461, 5462 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5461 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5462 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5462 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5462 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5462 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5463 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5463 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5463 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Recognition of Canadian Law Enforcement Professionals 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5463 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5463 

 200th Anniversary of Celebrated Ukrainian’s Birth 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5464 

 Education Week 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5464 

 New Carbon Capture and Storage Project 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5464 

 Foster Family Week 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5465 

 Pasqua South Medical Centre Grand Opening 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5465 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5465 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5465 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5466 

 Smart Meter Program 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5468 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5469 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5469 

MOTIONS 

 Condolences 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5470 

  Cheveldayoff (transmittal motion) ........................................................................................................................................ 5470 

 Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5471 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5471 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Resignation of Deputy Chair of Committees 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5471 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5471 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5473 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5476 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5480 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5484 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	fix141023Debates.pdf
	SPECIAL ORDER
	ADDRESS IN REPLY
	SPECIAL ORDER
	ADDRESS IN REPLY




