




















































Hansard: December 04, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 24A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 4, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6257 

 December 4, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 

an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 

gallery here today are a number of leaders from a number of 

Saskatchewan’s Islamic community, participating in 

discussions we are having today on ways in which our 

made-in-Saskatchewan Hub model can be expanded to help 

serve the needs in all our communities. 

 

From Regina we have my friend Zarqa Nawaz, creator of Little 

Mosque on the Prairie and commentator on social issues in 

publications such as the Huffington Post, thanks for coming; 

Debra Schubert, member of the social committee for the Islamic 

Association of Saskatchewan, Regina branch; Imam Mohamed 

Moustafa Abdelsatar, imam of the Islamic Association of 

Saskatchewan, Regina branch; Said Noman, imam of the 

Somali Muslim Community of Regina; Munir Haque, president 

of the Islamic Association of Saskatchewan, Regina branch; Dr. 

Habib Rehman, president of Regina Ahmadiyya Muslim 

Community, and his wife, Shazia Rehman; Imam Ilyas Sidyot 

of the Islamic Association of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon branch, 

thank you; Anas Ashraf, director of the Muslim Students 

Association; Omaer Jamil, president of the Islamic Association 

of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon branch; Imam Desai, the Prairie 

Muslim Association; Hafiz Zubair Sidyot, president, Saskatoon 

Muslim Youth; Nasser Malik, president of Saskatoon South 

Ahmadiyya Muslim Community; Balal Anwar, public relations, 

Saskatoon South Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. 

 

I would like to thank all of you for coming here this morning 

and meeting with us. And I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these leaders to the legislature today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I would like to join with the government in 

welcoming this very important group, this very important 

delegation to the Assembly today: a mix, Mr. Speaker, of 

community leaders, of religious leaders from Saskatoon, 

Regina, other locations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my appreciation for the 

important role that they play in making Saskatchewan strong, 

ensuring that strong communities of faith in our province play 

the role that they should, and really serve as a way of ensuring 

that communities are supported and that communities can do 

well. So I want to thank them for that. I think in particular, Mr. 

Speaker, here in the Regina example, of the pre-Ramadan 

luncheon that the Islamic Association conducted as a way to 

build bridges and build understanding. In Saskatoon I think of 

the Canada Day celebrations that the Ahmadiyya Community 

hosts on an annual basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to thank them for this work and thank them for their 

continued contributions in the years ahead. So I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming these individuals to the 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a number of 

individuals, both seated on the floor here and in the west 

gallery. And they are all associated with Regina Lutheran Home 

and Eden Care Communities, and they’re also my constituents, 

Mr. Speaker. And if you can give us a wave as I mention your 

name. I’d like to introduce Maxine Holm who’s the Chair of the 

Eden Care Communities board. I’ve got Leah Clement who is 

the director of elder care services. I’ve got Jennifer Martel, 

Eden Care community builder. I’ve got Ryan Bahan who’s a 

leader of recreation therapy. And on the floor here we’ve got, 

also we’ve got Betty Jerome who’s the wife of Robert Jerome 

who couldn’t make it here today. And on the floor here, Alan 

Stephen who’s the CEO [chief executive officer] of Eden Care 

Communities, and Dorothy Burden who’s a Regina Lutheran 

Home elder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals continue to provide great work 

and inspiration to those at Eden Care as well as the community. 

I’d like to ask all members to give a warm welcome to these 

individuals to their Legislative Assembly and thank them for 

their great work in terms of serving those most vulnerable in 

our communities. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming all of the guests here from the Eden 

Care community. The Regina Lutheran Home is the heritage of 

this organization. I know that in our family, we’ve had many, 

many years of involvement. My parents actually live at 

Broadway Terrace now, and so I’d like to say a special thank 

you to the board and to the executive for how well they take 

care of all of the elders who are part of that community. 

 

I’d also like to make a special welcome to Maxine Holm who is 

here. She and her late husband, Roy Holm, are long-time 

friends. Roy was a great leader in Saskatchewan as the head of 

the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod, and he was a long-time 

resident of Estevan. So welcome, Maxine Holm. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 



6258 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, I have the 

honour of introducing some very important guests today who 

are seated in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, December 6th marks the annual National Day of 

Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women. The 

day commemorates the 1989 murders of 14 female engineering 

students at l’École Polytechnique in Montreal. I am honoured to 

welcome special guests who are taking a leadership role to 

speak out about all forms of violence against women and girls 

and the impact on families and communities. 

 

Joining us are two members of the Association of Professional 

Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan whose lives were 

directly touched by the events in Montreal. We have Patti 

Kindred who was an engineering student at the time, graduated 

from the University of Regina with a Bachelor of Applied 

Science in engineering in 1990. We have Dr. Kate MacLachlan, 

a geologist who graduated from McGill University in Montreal 

in 1989 and was visiting friends at l’École Polytechnique on the 

day of the massacre. 

 

And I’m also pleased to welcome Superintendent Alfredo 

Bangloy, the assistant criminal operations officer with RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] “F” Division; Inspector 

Sheree Ortman and Inspector Evan Bray from the Regina Police 

Service; Jo-Anne Dusel, the coordinator of the Provincial 

Association of Transition Houses; Maria Hendrika, the 

executive director of Regina Transition House; Sarah Vallee, 

the executive director of Sofia House; and Pat Faulconbridge, 

the executive director of the Status of Women. Mr. Speaker, I 

ask all members to join me in welcoming these outstanding 

citizens to their Assembly today. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And while I’m on my feet, there is 

another delegation of outstanding community members and that 

is members from our Salvation Army. Many of you would have 

had the opportunity in the rotunda to maybe shake their hands 

and say hello and have a warm cup of coffee and a treat. 

 

So with us today, Mr. Speaker, we have Major Doug Binner, 

the director of community ministries; Major Glenn Patey, the 

chaplain with Waterston centre; Major Mike Hoeft, the area 

commander of Prairie West; Lieutenant Kyla McKenzie, the 

executive director of Grace Haven/Gemma House; and Ivy 

Scobie, executive director of William Booth Special Care 

Home. May we all welcome these outstanding members to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to join 

with the Minister of Social Services in welcoming the 

delegation here today marking December 6th, a very important 

day here in Canada. 

 

I want to thank them for their leadership, for all that you do in 

supporting women and girls who are victims of gender-based 

violence, but also working to bring awareness to the issues. 

Whether it’s missing or murdered Aboriginal women, the high 

rate of police-reported domestic or partner violence that we 

have here in Saskatchewan, the work that you do on these 

issues is so incredibly important. 

 

For me as a mother and as a woman myself obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, a mother of two girls, I’m very grateful for the work 

that you do in our communities. To the folks from the Regina 

Police Service who are here as well, for all that you do. On 

behalf on the opposition, thank you for the leadership role that 

you’ve taken in terms of supporting women and girls who are 

victims of gender-based violence and preventing it going 

forward. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 

you and through you, it is my pleasure to introduce two good 

friends of mine sitting in your gallery. One is Trent Fraser. He 

runs Fraser Strategy. He’s a good friend of mine, and he wanted 

me to say one thing about him, is that he can skate very, very 

fast. We have the pleasure of partaking in some hockey every 

now and then on Friday at noon. And he’s a good community 

businessman and community-minded person, and he wanted to 

take in the proceedings today. 

 

And immediately beside him is a friend of mine I’ve gotten to 

know over the last couple of months, about half a year, his 

name is Kevin Dureau. He is a business owner in the 

community of Regina, does a lot of community-minded 

activities and runs a lot of fundraisers. And he’s hoping to be 

sitting on the floor of this Assembly come 2016. He is our 

candidate, possibly our candidate for the nomination for Regina 

Rosemont, and he’s looking forward to joining this side of the 

House after 2016. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to welcome all of the community leaders and all 

the guests that are here today, but I wanted to just join with the 

member from Walsh Acres and welcome certainly Trent Fraser 

to his Assembly here today. And he does skate awfully fast. His 

puck control, you know, isn’t always the best, Mr. Speaker, but 

he, you know, he’s a great guy, a great business leader, and lot 

of fun as well. 

 

And it’s also a pleasure to welcome to the Assembly, Kevin 

Dureau. I suspect, as I’m hearing here today, that I’m going to 

get to know Mr. Dureau a little bit better over the coming 

months. And certainly I respect anyone who steps forward into 

the political process; I believe that all that engage believe that 

they want to make a difference in their community. And I look 

forward to getting to know Mr. Dureau through that process, 

and I’d be quite happy to have him sitting up there after the next 

election as well, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members in this 

Assembly to with join with me in welcoming these two fine 

people. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 

group of eight grade 10 students from Collège Mathieu in 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6259 

Gravelbourg. They’re quite a sharp-looking group, and they’re 

accompanied by their teacher, Raymond Michaud. And 

Raymond is no stranger; he brings his class to the Legislative 

Assembly on a regular basis. So very, very pleased that you do 

that. It’s part of their social studies class. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have them give us a wave when I 

mention their name. There’s Dylan Auger, Koalby Auger, 

Joshua Blanchette, Josée Bouffard, Stéphane Gahizi, Éric 

Gauthier, Ryan Gosselin, and Nikolis Kleckner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be joining these fine students a little bit later 

and I’d ask all members to please help me welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join in with the Minister of Social Services in welcoming her 

other delegation, the folks from Salvation Army. They’re very 

important members of our community, I know, throughout the 

province, but my particular riding of Saskatoon Centre boasts 

some Salvation Army services. And every day of the year, I 

know they’re here today, but I have to say every day of the year 

they play an important part in our communities right across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I do want to acknowledge one person specifically: Major Doug 

Binner who I’ve known I think almost all our lives. He grew up 

in Parkbeg, Saskatchewan, went to school in the great town of 

Mortlach, Saskatchewan. So we’ve known each other a long, 

long time. And so it’s always a pleasure to say hello to Doug at 

least once a year if not more. But to all the folks with Salvation 

Army, thank you so much for your work you do in our 

community. So I’d ask all members to join them in welcoming 

them to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly some great-looking individuals seated in the eastern 

gallery. I’m talking about a group of English as an additional 

language students from the Open Door Society. They’re here 

with their great teacher, Deana Pageot, you know, a great 

educator in this community. 

 

And I had a chance to meet up with the students earlier in the 

morning and say:  

 

[The hon. member extended salutations in other languages.] 

 

And maybe we’ll have a bit more to say later on, Mr. Speaker. 

But this is a great group of students, and they come from as 

many places as Somalia, Pakistan, South Sudan, Philippines, 

Ukraine, China, Korea, Afghanistan, and Israel. So it’s really 

great to see them here today at the Legislative Assembly. Again 

welcome and hello. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the member opposite in welcoming Deana Pageot and her class 

of students from the Open Door Society to their Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that Deana is a long-time 

educator in the city of Regina, in the province of Saskatchewan, 

having served many years on the Regina Catholic School 

Division, as well as a teacher of teachers, working with the 

University of Regina and, as we see today, continuing to 

contribute to education in a role with newcomers to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’d like all members to thank her for all the work that she’s 

done for education and welcome her and her students to this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to join in welcoming all the guests to the Assembly 

today, but specifically Maxine Holm. Her late husband was a 

pastor in Estevan for many years at St. Peter’s Lutheran Church 

that I attended and also at St. Luke Lutheran in Midale. And 

Reverend Holm married, I think, all my siblings and myself and 

. . . or officiated at the wedding, I should say. Sorry. And he 

also officiated at the baptism of all my kids and my nieces and 

nephews as well. 

 

So I’d like to take this opportunity to welcome Maxine to this 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I would like to say a very special thank you to Major 

Glenn Patey of the Salvation Army. He did such fabulous work 

in Prince Albert and he was always on the go. And for such a 

small man, he made such a big impact. And I wish to thank him 

and thank all the members that work so hard to make our 

communities a better place to live. 

 

So on behalf of the Legislative Assembly I ask all of you to 

give us a warm welcome to Major Glenn Patey to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to join with the member from Walsh Acres in welcoming 

Trent Fraser to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to believe that four and a half years have 

already passed since the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver. 

Mr. Speaker, I think people will know that Saskatchewan had a 

first-class pavilion because of our Saskatchewan entertainment, 

because of our saskatoon berry pies, but most especially 

because of the people that were behind it, the volunteers and 

individuals like Trent who made all of that come together. We 

couldn’t have done it without people like Trent, and so I want to 

join with all members in welcoming Trent to our Legislative 

Assembly. 

 



6260 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 

Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 

fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. We 

know that in September this year, this government walked away 

from a 48-unit, low-income affordable housing project in 

Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take control of 

and then rent the units at full market price. And when asked to 

explain how the government could allow the private developer 

to back out of a fixed-price contract without any penalties, the 

Minister of Social Services said, and I quote, “You’re assuming 

that there’s these desperate homeless people,” showing how 

disconnected this government is from the realities within our 

communities. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 

in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 

now allowing private developers with whom the 

government has close relationships to default on 

fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

rise once again to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents as it relates to the danger created by that government 

on Dewdney Avenue, inundating it with heavy-haul trucks and 

not properly planning the traffic flow. Of course we continue to 

press for the urgent completion of the west bypass, but that’s 

not good enough, Mr. Speaker. Interim and urgent actions are 

required to ensure safety on Dewdney Avenue. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to take action as it relates to the unacceptable 

danger, disturbance, and infrastructure damage caused by 

the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue west of 

the city centre, to ensure the safety and well-being of 

communities, families, residents, and users; and that those 

actions and plans should include rerouting the heavy-haul 

truck traffic, receive provincial funding, and be developed 

through consultation with the city of Regina, communities, 

and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions here today are signed by concerned residents in 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of Creighton, Denare Beach, and area. Many residents 

in these communities are struggling with disabilities and 

currently do not have the support services they need and 

deserve. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

Government of Saskatchewan to establish and build a 

residential and day program in the Creighton/Denare 

Beach region to support the immediate and ongoing needs 

of the community, and so that persons with intellectual 

disabilities thrive in their respective communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people of 

Creighton, Denare Beach, Air Ronge, and La Ronge. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term 

care. The petitioners point out that many aspects of long-term 

care are deteriorating under this government, that the 

Government of Saskatchewan actually recognize the need for 

safe staffing levels to provide hands-on care to residents. They 

point out that the government is failing to fix the basics in 

long-term care, including rejecting the further urgent requests 

from long-term care facilities for increased and needed staffing 

levels. The petitioners talk, point out that the government has 

removed the regulations requiring a minimum standard of care 

for seniors, resulting in neglect. 

 

They talk about chronic understaffing in long-term care 

facilities resulting in unacceptable conditions, including 

unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a rise in 

physical violence amongst residents. And they talk about fixing 

the basics and achieving a real improvement in long-term care 

services requires a firm commitment to actually listen to 

front-line health care workers, residents, and their families, as 

opposed to failing to properly listen to their concerns. The 

prayer, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 

members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 

numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 

number of residents under their care in long-term care 

facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from citizens in Saskatoon. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition calling for the protection of health care 

services in Craik. And in the petition, Mr. Speaker, the residents 

of the province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6261 

the following: whereas Craik has had physician services for 

over 100 years; whereas the Craik & District Health Centre 

provides vital health services to a large rural area including the 

communities of Loreburn, Tugaske, Girvin, Aylesbury, 

Chamberlain, Dilke, Findlater, Bethune, Stalwart, Imperial, 

Elbow, Holdfast, and Penzance; and whereas access to 

physician services in Craik is of paramount importance to the 

community; and in the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan cause the provincial 

government to immediately stop its plan to scale back 

health care services in Craik, refrain from turning the 

stabilization and observation unit into offices, and ensure 

that the Canadian-trained physician that wants to continue 

practising in Craik is allowed to do so without government 

interference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from Craik. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present a petition from 

those Saskatchewan residents who are opposed to the 

correctional service job privatization. People in Saskatchewan 

are concerned that the government wants to privatize the food 

services in the corrections and young offender facilities. The 

government hasn’t listened properly to these workers who have 

many concerns about what impact the loss of these jobs will 

have for the corrections system but also for the local 

communities. So these people say: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

may be pleased to cause the government to cancel its 

privatization in the corrections and young offenders 

facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 

And these petitions are signed by people from Prince Albert and 

Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising today to 

present a petition condemning this government’s dangerous 

smart meter program. The individuals who signed the petitions 

want to bring to our attention the following: 

 

That whereas the government knew about major safety 

concerns related to its smart meter project; whereas the 

government ignored those safety concerns and plowed 

ahead with its program; and whereas the safety of 

Saskatchewan families was put at significant risk, the 

prayer reads as follows. They respectfully request that this 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following 

action: to cause the provincial government to take 

responsibility for its failure to act on readily available 

information about safety concerns with its smart meter 

program, including through the immediate resignation of 

the Minister Responsible for SaskPower and a fully 

independent inquiry into the concerning chain of events 

that severely compromised the safety of Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from 

Assiniboia, Regina, Saskatoon, Wishart, Broadview, 

Cowessess, Pleasantdale, Yorkton, Melville, Canora, Simmie, 

Melfort, Paddockwood, Prince Albert, Big River, North 

Battleford, Nipawin, Muskoday, Hagen, Spruce Home, Canora, 

Lloydminster, and Carrot River. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

River valley. 

 

National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence 

Against Women 

 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

House today to remind members that December 6th marks the 

international Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence 

Against Women. On this solemn day, Canadians remember the 

anniversary of the murders of 14 female engineering students at 

l'École Polytechnique in Montreal in 1989. This year marks the 

25th anniversary of this senseless tragedy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, violence against women is one of the world’s 

most persistent human rights violations. Unfortunately, Canada 

is no exception. Gender-based violence has no place in our 

society. In this fiscal year, we are committing over 29 million to 

help 83 agencies support women at risk of violence. In addition, 

we are investing a further 11 million in 32 organizations in 17 

communities to develop and operate other programs and 

services. We are also committed to rebuilding the North East 

Outreach and Support Services women’s shelter in Melfort that 

was recently destroyed in a fire. 

 

Today, my colleagues and I are wearing white ribbons as a 

signal of our commitment to ending violence against women 

and girls. I ask that we as leaders and decision makers use our 

influence to publicly speak out against gender and interpersonal 

violence and abuse. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Geneviève 

Bergeron, Hélène Colgan, Nathalie Croteau, Barbara 

Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward, Maud Haviernick, Maryse 

Laganière, Maryse Leclair, Anne-Marie Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, 

Michèle Richard, Annie St-Arneault, Annie Turcotte, and 

Barbara Kluznick-Widajewicz. Mr. Speaker, these are the 

names of the women murdered at École Polytechnique in 

Montreal on December 6th, 1989. 

 

This Saturday is the National Day of Remembrance and Action 

on Violence Against Women which marks the anniversary of 

this senseless tragedy in Montreal. The name of this day is 

important, Mr. Speaker, because it calls for remembrance and 

action to make life better for women and girls in our country. 

 



6262 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, we owe it to those 14 women to use this day to 

remember those we have lost and to commit to confronting 

misogyny and gender-based violence in our communities. My 

colleagues and I, and the members opposite too, are wearing the 

white ribbon to show our solidarity with victims of violence and 

are resolved to build safer communities for everyone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in remembering 

those we have lost to gender-based violence. And I also hope 

they will join me in continuing to fight to make our province 

and our country a place that is free from violence against 

women. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Regina Lutheran Home Meets Elders’ Needs 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 1950s, 

individuals from within the Regina Lutheran community 

created a committee to study the unmet needs of their elder 

constituents. In the early 1960s, the first elders in residence 

moved into the Regina Lutheran Home, and today it is a home 

to 62 people who are provided with heavy level 3 and 4 care. 

 

Adjoining the care home, The Cozy Nook provides homes for 

seniors in 25 assisted living suites. The Regina Lutheran 

community continues to create a elder-centred community. Life 

in an elders’ home revolves around interaction with plants, 

animals, and children, which is much different from 

institutionalized care. These relationships, along with that of 

their care partners, provide a pathway to a life worth living. 

 

On Friday the 21st of November I had the privilege to represent 

the Minister of Health at the Regina Lutheran Home 8th annual 

Holiday Magic Gala Fundraiser. The event was attended by 

over 230 people, including elders from the Regina Lutheran 

Home, and proceeds of the fundraising event will go toward 

updating the Regina Lutheran Home. 

 

I’d like to recognize and congratulate the entire family of 

elders, their families and loved ones, and the staff and 

management of the Regina Lutheran Home, some of whom 

have joined us in the gallery today and on the floor, for the 

great work and inspiration you are providing in elder care 

within Regina and our great province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Director of Sexual Assault Centre Retires 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today, a 

day when we call for an end to violence against women, to 

recognize an important community leader in Saskatoon, 

Elizabeth Freire. Elizabeth has served for 13 years as the 

executive director of the Saskatoon Sexual Assault & 

Information Centre, and today is celebrating her retirement with 

colleagues and friends. 

 

Elizabeth came to Canada from Brazil 25 years ago and 

completed her master’s in social work through the University of 

Saskatchewan. In 2001 Elizabeth moved to Saskatoon with her 

family to accept the position as executive director of the sexual 

assault centre. 

 

Under Elizabeth’s direction, the centre has grown dramatically. 

The agency has doubled in size and now occupies offices over 

two floors. She has supported the team of staff and volunteers 

with passion and enthusiasm and is dedicated to the provision 

of services for those who have been traumatized by sexual 

violence. She has tirelessly advocated for suitable, supportive 

programming for those who need it most. 

 

She leaves behind a legacy that Saskatoon Sexual Assault 

Centre is an agency with a reputation in Saskatoon and across 

the province for providing important services for women and 

men, and as well the many children who have been abused by 

this horrendous crime. Their work is recognized by the College 

of Medicine and the Saskatoon Police Service, and they are 

often called upon for their expert advice. 

 

I ask all members to join me in thanking Elizabeth for her years 

of service and for all that she has done to support the victims of 

sexual violence in our province.  

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Top Cadet Corps and Squadrons Honoured 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 4th 

this year’s top Saskatchewan cadet corps and squadrons were 

announced. The 2014 cadet units being honoured are 45 Jervis 

Bay, Royal Canadian Sea Cadet Corps, Saskatoon; 155 Royal 

Regina Rifles Army Cadets, Regina; and 702 Lynx Squadron, 

Royal Canadian Air Cadets, Saskatoon. 

 

Over the past months Saskatchewan’s military liaison, the 

member from Wood River, attended ceremonies to present 

certificates and pins to these cadets from these outstanding 

groups. The program annually recognizes the top sea, army, and 

air cadet units in the province and was first announced in 2009. 

 

The cadet program has a rich tradition in our province, with the 

first Saskatchewan cadet corps being formed in Prince Albert 

on February 1st, 1903. These cadets pre-dated the creation of 

our province in 1905. 

 

There are currently more than 1,660 youth enrolled in 58 sea, 

army, and air cadet corps and squadrons across Saskatchewan. 

Youth between the ages of 12 and 18 are accepted into the cadet 

program, which teaches citizenship, personal discipline, and 

general military knowledge. There has been a focus this year on 

Saskatchewan’s proud military heritage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

contribution and achievements that cadets make in our province 

and congratulating this year’s award recipients. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6263 

Health and Wellness Centre Opens in Yorkton 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday the 

Minister of Health and the Ministry of Remote and Rural 

Health celebrated the grand opening of the Sunrise Health and 

Wellness Centre in Yorkton that serves part of my constituency. 

This centre is a great example of innovation and patient-centred 

approach. It offers team-based . . . and is developed as a hub for 

integrated primary health services in the Sunrise Health Region.  

 

The centre provides physicians, nurse practitioner services, 

diabetes education, exercise therapy, pulmonary and cardiac 

rehabilitation, and a range of women’s wellness services. All of 

these services are provided under one roof. The model of care 

and the facility design ensures an efficient flow of people of 

information and of supplies. It also makes it easier for clients to 

access the services they need and receive comprehensive, 

timely care. 

 

I congratulate all the project partners for this great achievement. 

People in Yorkton and throughout the region will receive better 

primary health care, thanks to their dedication and hard work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has invested $13.2 million since 

2002 to support better primary health care in this province. This 

includes $3.42 million in 2014 and ’15. As we continue to 

strengthen primary health care in our province, we want all 

communities, large and small, to have a voice and to benefit. 

We will continue to support health care regions to provide 

patient-centred, community-based, and team-delivered primary 

health care in our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Remembering Jean Beliveau 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sad to say that 

this past week Canada has lost one of its greatest hockey 

players, a true legend: Mr. Jean Beliveau. A man of honour, Mr. 

Beliveau was known nationwide as a class act who took the 

time to make every individual he met feel special. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford had met 

Beliveau on several occasions, and as he and every other fan 

who ever met Beliveau would say, he was a gentleman that took 

the time to stop, talk to people, sign autographs, and always 

answer questions. 

 

After his playing days, Mr. Beliveau could have had quite a 

career as a politician. In the early 1990s, Prime Minister Brian 

Mulroney offered Beliveau a seat in the Senate. He declined the 

job on two occasions. Some years later, Prime Minister 

Chrétien offered Beliveau the chance to be Governor General, 

but once again declined, claiming he was not worthy of the 

honour. Mr. Speaker, that right there sums up Mr. Beliveau. 

 

His legacy will live on in the records he set, the legion of 

hockey players he inspired, but there’s no record book that can 

capture, no statue that could convey the greatness of Jean 

Beliveau, who won an incredible 10 Stanley Cups for the 

Montreal Canadiens over an incredible 20-year career. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this country has never seen a better ambassador 

for hockey than Mr. Jean Beliveau. From all the hockey fans in 

Canada, you’ll be sorely missed. Rest in peace. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Care and Staffing in Long-Term Care Homes 

 

Mr. Broten: — The number of families who are coming 

forward with major concerns about the quality of seniors’ care 

is overwhelming. The majority of them share their stories 

quietly because they’re afraid of repercussions for their loved 

ones, but more and more are speaking publicly, like Margaret 

Fraess’s daughter. 

 

Margaret lives at Samaritan Place, and her daughter has huge 

concerns about the poor quality of care because of 

short-staffing. Margaret went three months without a bath — 

three months. My question is for the Premier. Does he agree 

that three months without a bath in a care facility is entirely 

unacceptable no matter what? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, of course not. And we’d like 

to look into this matter, Mr. Speaker, as we have others. 

 

It’s interesting. This particular long-term care home is relatively 

new in the province of Saskatchewan. It was built in partnership 

with the Catholic Health Ministry. And you know, we’ve also 

heard some very good reports in terms of the model of care 

that’s provided there. But, Mr. Speaker, we certainly would 

want to look at any specific examples like this. It’s not 

acceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just this day in the legislature, we’ve been 

introduced to people who are involved on a daily basis, on a 

volunteer and professional basis in the care of seniors and 

residents in long-term care. We know that it’s happening across 

the province. 8,700 seniors in care in Saskatchewan, and so 

very many of them getting top-quality care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to add resources in this area. We’ve 

added 750 more front-line workers for long-term care than 

existed when members opposite were in government, with the 

same complement roughly of residents. We’ll continue to add 

nurses, as we have, and doctors, and look for ways to improve 

not just long-term care but acute care and the health care system 

in general in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in location after location, we hear 

how short-staffing is hurting patient care and resident care 

throughout the province. 

 

Margaret has cerebral palsy and epilepsy, and she suffers from 

delusions and other serious mental health challenges. Her 

daughter Debbie has guardianship over her.  

 

Under the model of care at Samaritan Place, if a resident 



6264 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

doesn’t want a bath, they’re not given one. It’s a fine concept in 

theory, but what is needed in practice is the right number of 

staff so that a care aid can spend a bit of time gently persuading 

the person that they really need a bath or they really need their 

adult diaper changed rather than simply making an offer and 

immediately walking away. There are major health implications 

of not having a bath, even a sponge bath, or not having your 

adult diaper changed. 

 

To the Premier: does he recognize that this model of care is a 

good one, but it doesn’t work when there isn’t the right number 

of staff? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s more than a 

function of staff. And I would point out that this facility and the 

staff that are there today didn’t exist just a few years ago. I need 

to also point out that it wouldn’t have existed had members 

opposite had their say, because they didn’t want this facility to 

be built at all. That was the discussion and debate we had in the 

legislature. 

 

The Minister of Health advises me though that in select regions 

and moving through to the rest of the province, training in 

gentle persuasion, which is the issue that’s been raised by the 

member, is happening across the province. For those residents 

where there’s some special challenges, Mr. Speaker, around 

dementia, this is particularly important; it’s true. It also can be 

very complex, Mr. Speaker, the Health minister advises, if 

front-line staff, whatever the complement is, are forcing things 

on patients who may resist and then, you know, you might have 

even greater challenges to their health and the chance for 

something to happen. 

 

Obviously this is a very long time though to go without a bath. 

That part I think most would recognize, and it’s something we 

would want to look at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this model of care in particular though and the 

question the member asked is not just a function of the number 

of staff. Sometimes the complexity of the individual patient and 

what’s required for each individual patient comes into play in a 

general sense with respect to these issues. We can look into this 

very specific one though. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier proves my point. 

Gentle persuasion is good. It is needed. It is the right course of 

action to take, but you need enough staff to do the gentle 

persuasion so that the right health outcomes are achieved for 

residents, for patients. 

 

Debbie has many other very serious concerns about her 

mother’s case. Her mother has been assaulted four times while 

in care facilities, resulting in broken bones, bruises, and a 

fractured spine. Her mother has been found wandering outside 

of the facility, and Debbie is very worried that she’ll be hit by a 

car or that she will freeze to death. 

 

Debbie says a major part of the problem is short staffing. She 

sees it, and she’s frustrated, Mr. Speaker, to see recent office 

renovations for administration while basic front-line care 

continues to suffer. 

 

Debbie says she has reached out to everyone she could think of, 

including her Sask Party MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], and she just kept getting the runaround. So she 

called us because she wants change and she agrees that we need 

regulated minimum quality-of-care standards and better staffing 

levels. 

 

My question is for the Premier. How many more people will 

have to come forward before he will recognize that these are not 

simply isolated stories? What will it take for him to act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve already established that 

there are standards in this province, Mr. Speaker, that regions 

and facilities are required to meet. There is a document of 

course we’ve made available to the opposition, and obviously 

regions are aware of it. They must meet it. 

 

The premise of his question is wrong. I mean the premise of the 

question is, when will the government act? The government has 

been acting in terms of improving long-term care from the 

situation we inherited since the day we were first elected in 

2007. We’ve been replacing long-term care facilities rather than 

closing the beds, which is what happened here, and we have 

been adding staff. 

 

Now maybe there needs to be additional resources. That’s 

something that might well be part of the budget process we’re 

engaged in right now. But this is the record of this government: 

licensed practical nurses up 37.4 per cent in the province; 

registered nurses up 9.3 per cent from when members opposite 

had the chance to do this as well; care aids up 9.7 per cent, 

specifically in long-term care. 

 

And this needs to be on the record because the premise of the 

question . . . And the Leader of the Opposition I think would 

have people believe there has somehow been a reduction or 

there hasn’t been an increase. Same complement of long-term 

care residents roughly speaking, 750 more front-line long-term 

care providers in the province of Saskatchewan today versus not 

very long ago when members opposite had the chance to do 

something about these issues. 

 

It may well be that more is needed, Mr. Speaker, especially in 

certain circumstances. That’s something the government’s open 

to, and we’re open to it, Mr. Speaker. You will know that we 

are, based on our record of increased investments and more 

front-line workers in long-term care in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, those on the front lines are 

concerned about bloated administration. Those on the front 

lines are concerned about more and more middle management 

and not those on the front lines. 

 

Saskatoon Health Region said they needed 450 care aids to get 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6265 

the level of care to where they want it to be. They only asked 

for 38, and all they got were 19, Mr. Speaker. That’s this 

government’s record. And the Throne Speech, no new 

initiatives to address seniors’ care, but what we can see is a 

continued dismissive approach. 

 

Earlier this week, we raised the case of Art Healey who lives at 

Rose Villa care facility in Rosetown. He was found wandering 

outside in freezing cold temperatures. The family blamed 

short-staffing. The Premier blamed a broken door. But now the 

family says that this government has put Art in lockdown, and 

he can’t even walk around inside the facility. 

 

His daughter, Mr. Speaker, says it’s like a prison, a violation of 

his rights, and she says she now knows why people are so afraid 

to speak up. She says this: 

 

I did not want to have anyone lose their freedom to move 

about the facility freely. I shudder when I think how bad 

the care of our elderly has to get before more funding is 

provided for more floor staff. 

 

My question to the Premier: how is it an adequate response to 

simply put him on lockdown? Why not fix the main door and 

hire more staff? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 

this particular case, certainly the health region and the facility 

are working with the company that has provided the door, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that it is properly functioning and that the 

WanderGuard system is in place. 

 

I’m not aware that this is going to change in terms of the care 

that’s being provided, and certainly I think, though, the staff 

and the administration are wanting to ensure that this individual 

is safe while those repairs are being made, Mr. Speaker. But 

there is also issues with a patio door that doesn’t have a lock on 

it, Mr. Speaker, that we can’t lock the doors for facilities, Mr. 

Speaker, for safety reasons. And so there’s a dialogue going 

back and forth between the facility and the manufacturer. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members opposite that this 

government has invested for example in gentle persuasion 

approach in I believe five health regions, Mr. Speaker. 

Heartland Health Region is one of them, $245,000 that this 

government provided; $80,000 in Kelsey Trail Health Region; 

$115,000 in Prairie North Health Region; $305,000 in Sun 

Country; and $1 million dollars in Regina Qu’Appelle, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re interested in seeing that there are positive 

results and, if that is the case, Mr. Speaker, in these regions, we 

would look to expand that into other regions across the 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Purchase of Farm Land 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, two years ago this month the 

Agriculture minister appointed a special investigator to study 

large land deals and trace the flow of money. To the minister: 

what happened to that investigation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

I thank the member for the question. There were actually two 

investigations carried out by the special investigator, and there 

was no wrongdoing found in either one of them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, many farmers and residents of 

rural Saskatchewan are still incredibly concerned about vast 

tracts of farm land being bought up by people or entities that are 

illegally using foreign money to buy that land. And major 

concerns have been raised about the special CPP [Canada 

Pension Plan] deal that delivered huge benefits to two Sask 

Party insiders. A former and respected manager of the Farm 

Land Security Board says that special deal was bizarre. 

 

To the minister: will he commit today to a fully independent 

review of The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act and the ability 

of the Farm Land Security Board to effectively enforce its 

provisions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — As the member knows, Mr. Speaker, 

non-Canadians are restricted to owning 10 acres of 

Saskatchewan farm land. Any companies that purchase 

Saskatchewan farm land must be 100 per cent Canadian owned. 

 

Saskatchewan does have fairly strict regulations in comparison 

to other provinces. But just the same, Mr. Speaker, we 

understand that there is concern out there about potential 

offshore money being involved in purchases of Saskatchewan 

farm land and with institutional investors, and so we are fully 

prepared and we are looking at possibilities of opening up that 

Act. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Government Use of Consultants 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 

Central Services. How can she possibly explain the whopping 

168 per cent increase in the use of consultants in her ministry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Campeau: — Thank you for the question. Mr. 

Speaker, the government does use contractors to fill positions 

that are difficult to recruit for and are temporary in nature or 

where specialized expertise is required. So this applies 

particularly to the IT [information technology] side of Central 

Services where technical and professional resources are 

contracted to fill in the gaps in the technical know-how. 

 

In the case of my ministry, consultant numbers vary from year 

to year, depending on the work being undertaken and the skills 

required. 

 



6266 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

Central Services maintains and supports nearly 1,000 different 

software applications that are over 10 years old, Mr. Speaker. 

Supporting these applications requires a wide range of skills 

that are not easy to acquire. What the auditor is seeing is a 

significant number of projects that are under way that are 

transforming the way that government does business and 

helping us keep pace with meeting citizens’ needs and 

modernizing and consolidating outdated systems. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has 

exposed the Premier’s claim on reducing the size of government 

as a total sham. At the same time as the Premier has been 

cutting jobs in the public service, he’s been ramping up the use 

of highly paid consultants, a 228 per cent increase right across 

government. 

 

In Central Services alone, nearly $22 million is now going to 

consultants, up from $8 million in 2008. In 70 per cent of those 

contracts, there was absolutely no documentation on why the 

consultant was even needed, from the Provincial Auditor, Mr. 

Speaker. So my question to the Central Services minister: why 

not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Campeau: — Mr. Speaker, hiring contractors to fill 

in our technical skill gaps is nothing new. In the final three 

years when the opposition was in government, from 2004, 

2005, through 2006, 2007, they had an average of 84 IT 

consultants on contract per year and even as high as 100 at one 

point. And in fact our annual number of consultants is down 22 

per cent from theirs, and we’ve never had as many as 100 IT 

consultants on the IT file, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Agreement with Smart Meter Supplier 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we saw this week that the 

SaskPower minister’s story just keeps changing by the day, and 

pathetically he keeps trying to hide behind the former president 

of SaskPower by quoting what the former president said. Well 

yes, Mr. Speaker, what the former president said was correct: 

we either go with Sensus or we don’t get the $18 million back. 

 

It was actually the Premier and the SaskPower minister that 

repeatedly said, we’ll get our money back no matter what. To 

the Premier: why did he say that when it’s not true? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, what the member opposite is 

alleging is completely unfounded, and I think he knows it. 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, what the president of SaskPower said 

initially was, “If they [Sensus] are not able to produce a meter 

that’s acceptable to SaskPower or independent specifications, 

they will pay us $18 million in cash.” 

 

On October 27th in this very Assembly, Mr. Speaker, the day 

that the report was released on the Sensus meters, I said in this 

Assembly, “We will put them through . . .” That is, Sensus 

meters. 
 

We will put them through rigorous testing here in 

Saskatchewan. If they meet the standards of CSA at that 

time, we may consider using them again. If . . . they are not 

able to meet the standards here in Saskatchewan, the rest 

of the money will be recovered by the taxpayers of our 

province.” 
 

I don’t think it could be any more clear to the people of 

Saskatchewan. That’s exactly consistent with what the 

SaskPower president and CEO at the time said, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s exactly what happened in this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, my question isn’t for the 

minister, whose story has changed by the day and who has sold 

out Saskatchewan people, their hard-earned money and their 

safety. My question was a straightforward one, and it was for 

the Premier. 

 

The former SaskPower president was clear from the outset that 

we either go with Sensus or we don’t get any of the $18 million 

back. But the Premier and the SaskPower minister went out of 

their way to contradict the president, stating that they’ll get their 

money back no matter what. 

 

To the Premier: why did he go out of his way to contradict what 

the SaskPower president said? Why did he provide inaccurate 

information to Saskatchewan people? Why won’t he finally just 

table that deal with Sensus here today? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll provide for Hansard 

and we’ll even read it to him if he likes, Mr. Speaker, the exact 

comments that were made on October 27th in this legislature by 

myself. I’ll read them real slow for you. 

 

We will put them through rigorous testing here in 

Saskatchewan. If they meet the standards of CSA at that 

time, we may consider using them again. If . . . they are 

not able to meet the standards here in Saskatchewan, the 

rest of the money would be recovered by the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Which of course is in sharp contrast to the way operations were 

in Saskatchewan under those members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, when they were in charge of things here in 

Saskatchewan, they had companies like Business Watch 

International, a pretty grand name for a company, Mr. Speaker, 

especially when it was a pawnshop is what it was, Mr. Speaker. 

And what did they do with respect to that? They lost $2.4 

million on that little venture, Mr. Speaker. Whether it was 

potatoes or pawnshops, they lost money time and time again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the story they’re spinning today, 

time and time again that minister, that Premier went out of their 

way to say we get the money back no matter what. And that’s 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6267 

clearly contradicted by what testimony in committee by 

ministry officials clearly said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Provincial Auditor yesterday, Mr. Speaker, said that the 

government has no evidence that lean is creating sustainable 

change or making health care better, and apparently the 

government also doesn’t know if it’s actually saving any money 

because the Health minister, Mr. Speaker, refused to answer 

written questions about any financial savings achieved through 

lean. Either he doesn’t know the answer, Mr. Speaker, or he 

doesn’t want Saskatchewan people to know the answer. And 

either way, that is completely unacceptable. 

 

We also requested this information directly from the health 

regions, and we heard back, Mr. Speaker, from three of them. 

And those three health regions report that they saved 

$49,244.26. That’s it, Mr. Speaker. That’s the same amount of 

money we pay to have one sensei here for 12 days. Mr. 

Speaker, my question for the Premier: how can he possibly 

defend that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I can indicate to the House, as I have before, that since 

2008 since this government started to use lean — even though it 

was used a little bit by the members opposite, to their credit — 

we have saved $57 million in our health regions, Mr. Speaker. 

And I will give . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Says John Black. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, says Canadian Blood 

Services. Not John Black; Canadian Blood Services. 

 

In 2009 using lean principles, Mr. Speaker, we went from $53 

million in purchasing blood products to now $38 million, a $15 

million reduction in the amount that we spend on an annual 

basis to purchase blood products. Mr. Speaker, at the same 

time, Manitoba, which started out at $53 million that same year, 

now spends $61 million in blood products. Mr. Speaker, that is 

because of lean being used in Saskatchewan. It is saving us 

dollars, and that is just one example. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the blood example has nothing to 

do with the $40 million American toxic consultant. This 

government knows it, Mr. Speaker, and the minister won’t even 

table the information to the written questions about the savings. 

 

We asked the health regions for their update of savings as a 

result of lean. Cypress Health Region says they’ve saved 

$31,648. Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region says they’ve saved 

$17,465, and the Prince Albert Parkland Health Region says 

they’ve saved — get this — $131.26 because of lean. Let me 

repeat that. In P.A. [Prince Albert], Mr. Speaker, they’ve saved 

$131.26. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a Japanese translator costs $600 a day, and the 

Prince Albert Health Region has only saved $131.26. My 

question to the Premier: if John Black was supposed to save 

them so much money, why do we see such meagre savings 

through this project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we know it is saving us dollars within the health care 

system in this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s why this 

government in the last year can introduce a 3 per cent increase 

in the Health budget and still, at the same time, open new 

facilities and hire additional staff in the system, unlike when the 

members opposite were the government and the Health minister 

had a 6.8 per cent increase in Health, and what happened? Beds 

were closed. Staff were fired. Facilities were closed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but we know that lean is more than just about 

saving money. Mr. Speaker, distribution of wrong medication 

errors went, from Five Hills Health Region, from 17 a year in 

the mental health unit down to one. And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, 

if the members opposite would like to put a price on what that 

has meant to patient care, Mr. Speaker. Do they put a price on 

what the care is for our patients? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what dream world 

the minister and the Premier are living in, but if he listens to 

front-line stories of families not getting care, of front-line 

workers from Santa Maria who are frustrated, Mr. Speaker, he 

would see a very different reality than whatever they’re 

dreaming up over on that side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The entire Prince Albert Parkland Health Region reports that 

they have saved $131.26 because of lean, and they specifically 

say, they specifically say that they have not realized any other 

financial savings from lean. The Provincial Auditor says the 

government isn’t tracking or reporting the right information to 

know if lean is creating sustainable change or making health 

care better. We’ve covered that many times. And of course we 

know a majority of the front-line workers have a very different 

story to tell, that it has no impact at all, or it’s actually harming 

patient care. 

 

And now we know, Mr. Speaker, that this government doesn’t 

even have a good financial story to tell when it comes to the 

John Black version of lean that it’s forcing on this province: just 

$49,244 saved across three health regions, and in Prince Albert 

just $131.26. My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: is he 

ready to admit that the John Black version of lean is clearly not 

working? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

obviously, Mr. Speaker, when we look at lean, it is about saving 

dollars, but it’s also improving the care that we can provide to 

our patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, using lean 

methodology, reduced the number of cancelled MRI [magnetic 

resonance imaging] scans from 12 per week down to one, which 



6268 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

allows them, without adding a single dollar of additional 

resources, to do 650 more scans per year, Mr. Speaker. Now if 

we can see a 7 per cent increase in productivity across the 

health regions, that would see us being able to do 2,600 more 

MRIs a year without a single dollar, as opposed to when the 

members opposite were the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would refer to the Canadian medical . . . Mr. Speaker, 

one of the medical journals that talked about, in 2004, 

Saskatchewan’s 22-month wait for an MRI is “almost 

criminal,” said radiologists association, Mr. Speaker. And you 

know what the response was from the member from Lakeview 

when he was the Health minister? “That is how our system 

works.” A 22-month wait for an MRI that’s almost criminal, 

and that’s how the system works? 

 

We’re going to focus on improving the system. We’re going to 

focus on quality improvement and saving money. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 

No. 176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to move that Bill 177, The Insurance Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 552 to 572. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has provided 

responses to questions 552 to 572. I recognize the Government 

Whip. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 573 to 584. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 

to questions 573 to 584. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Performance of the New Democratic Party 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my comments I’ll be moving the 

following motion: 

 

That this Assembly does not support the NDP’s policy to 

raise taxes on Saskatchewan businesses which was 

adopted at the NDP’s most recent convention. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a very timely motion because 

within about a year we’re going to have an election in this 

province. And you know, to date in the last three years I don’t 

think we’ve heard . . . We’ve heard a lot of criticism on every 

issue from the NDP [New Democratic Party] opposite. The 

members opposite are very critical of everything happening in 

this province. We know they don’t like growth. We know they 

don’t like the population to grow in this province because well, 

for what, 60 out of the last 100 years they’ve worked very hard 

to make sure that people left this province instead of came back 

to it as we see happening today. 

 

But as I said, Mr. Speaker, it’s very timely because it would be 

a good opportunity for the members opposite to tell us what 

they would do should — God forbid — they ever got to be 

government in this province again. And I think they have that 

opportunity today and we’ll be waiting with a bated breath to 

see where they would go. 

 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6269 

But, Mr. Speaker, at the NDP . . . I think it was one of their 

recent conventions, and why this motion kind of came to light 

today is that one of their recent conventions, this was one of the 

resolutions that was passed. And it says: 

 

Be it resolved that an NDP government would ensure fair 

taxation [and I want to repeat that, Mr. Speaker, ensure 

fair taxation] on business and high income earners by 

increasing their amount of income tax. 

 

Well that’s fair. I’ve seen that happen in this province many, 

many times under an NDP government. And you know what, 

Mr. Speaker? That’s exactly why our young people were 

leaving this province in droves. Schools were closing. They 

closed hospitals down right across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

And as usual with an NDP government, many, many people left 

this province, especially the young people that we needed so 

much to stay here and raise their families and have families in 

this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the other resolutions and part of the 

same resolution I guess it is: 

 

Be it further resolved that an NDP government would 

grant income taxing powers to Saskatchewan 

municipalities. 

 

Well we know why that is, Mr. Speaker, because when they 

were government — and I saw this first-hand, being a reeve in 

an RM [rural municipality] when they were in government — is 

that they cut funding to those same municipalities. So those 

municipalities would need the ability to tax at a higher level 

because the NDP would download on them as they did before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s common knowledge right across this 

province, but especially in rural Saskatchewan, that we hope 

that we never have to put up with another NDP government and 

watch the demise of this province like we did in the last 16 

years before we formed government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the things that we’ve done since we’ve 

came to power, and a lot of them have to do with taxes which 

has helped grow this province, but since 2007 the Sask Party 

government tax reductions saved families almost $2.8 billion. 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents will save 480 million this 

year due to tax cuts. Since 2007 our government has increased 

the personal, spousal, and child exemption amounts and 

introduced new low-income tax credits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for an example, an individual taxpayer pays no tax 

on the first $18,650. A member of four with $50,000 annual 

income will pay just $166 in provincial income tax in 2014 

compared with $2,302 in 2007, and of course that was at the 

end of the NDP reign. Tremendous difference, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s about $2,100 for a family of four less in tax to pay. By 

the end of 2014, this family will have saved $14,000 over seven 

years. I think those dollars are much better spent by the 

individuals and the taxpayers of this province than they were 

with the NDP government opposite for all those years we were 

stuck with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also we have removed 114,000 Saskatchewan 

residents from the provincial income tax roll. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, if you want to help low-income people, as the 

members opposite quite often talk about — but yet they had no 

action on it — there’s the example of how you can help lower 

income people, by removing 114,000 of them from the 

provincial income tax roll. Mr. Speaker, that’s not talk. That’s 

action on behalf of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, property tax payers funded 60 per 

cent of the cost of K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education 

and boy, that opens up a whole ball of wax that the NDP had 

when they were government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw, I think it was, I don’t know what it would 

be now, about 9 or 10 years ago when the former premier, Mr. 

Calvert, was at the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] conventions and said on a number of occasions, 

year after year, the status quo is not on with the education tax 

on farm land. But did we see a change? No, Mr. Speaker, we 

did not. What we saw was a band-aid put on the cut and then 

ripped off by the same government a short time later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people of this province remember very well. They 

haven’t forgotten and they will not forget what the NDP did to 

them when they were in government. And I think we see across 

this province, Mr. Speaker, how this province is growing, how 

the population is increasing in this province, how we see so 

many new people in all our communities, especially in Regina, 

Saskatoon, P.A., Moose Jaw. I’m sure I can speak for the 

members on this side of the House from rural Saskatchewan. 

How many small towns in this province are seeing houses fill 

up, new families move in? 

 

Mr. Speaker, tomorrow I have the luxury of going to 

Langenburg — a community in my constituency, a growing 

community in my constituency, Mr. Speaker — to have 

sod-turning for a brand new school. Mr. Speaker, how many 

times did we go to those functions under an NDP government? 

Well we didn’t go because we didn’t have the opportunity, not 

because we weren’t invited, because there was no new schools. 

In fact, our biggest problem mainly in rural Saskatchewan is 

they were closing schools, one after another across this 

province. 

 

[11:15] 

 

What was the number? One hundred and seventy-six, 

something like that. Yes, here we go. That was the record of the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s 

also timely right now . . . And, Mr. Speaker, my time is going 

very quickly here, but I really find it odd the new-found 

compassion of the NDP in question period when they come and 

they start speaking about long-term care. And they’ve been on 

this issue, and there’s been some good issues brought to light 

here, and they should be, Mr. Speaker. And as the Health 

minister and the Premier have said, these issues will be dealt 

with. They shouldn’t be happening. But the new-found 

compassion of the NDP is really odd, considering their record 

in health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons I ran for politics in 1995 was 

because of the track record of the NDP at closing hospitals, 52 

hospitals. And then on top of that, if that wasn’t bad enough 

outside of Regina, they closed the Plains hospital which 



6270 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

actually was one of the best hospitals, larger hospitals, for rural 

Saskatchewan. Number one, you could get to it in a heartbeat, 

very quickly. You could find it very easily for rural people that 

weren’t used to the city. And what did the NDP? They closed 

that too. Mr. Speaker, people in this province cannot afford and 

will not forget what happened under an NDP government. 

 

They also talk about in long-term care, Mr. Speaker, and they’ll 

probably . . . I’m sure a member opposite will say, well the 

member from Melville-Saltcoats has no idea what he’s talking 

about. Well I do, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to long-term care, 

because my mother and father both went through the system. 

And that system, I would repeat every time I have the 

opportunity to speak, is that the quality of care they received in 

the health care system, in the long-term care system in the 

Lakeside Manor Care Home in Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker . . . And 

for the NDP to get on their feet day after day and criticize the 

care given by the workers in our health care system, I think 

should be embarrassing for the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know a lot of the people that work in that system 

and I can tell you one thing. I couldn’t do the job that those 

people do in those long-term care homes. It is not an easy job. 

And those people do it with compassion and care every day that 

they are at work in dealing with our parents and someone from 

our families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for the members opposite, after their record for so many 

years at losing facilities, closing beds across this province, they 

have the nerve to get on their feet and say, after all the increased 

dollars that we’ve put into the system . . . We’ve built what, 13 

new long-term care homes, Mr. Speaker; 750 more workers in 

those same care homes for pretty well the same number of 

residents. Mr. Speaker, it’s almost laughable on their side of the 

House that they have the nerve to get on their feet. 

 

And then the Leader of the Opposition and the Deputy Leader 

get up, and they don’t want to answer for their past record of 

the NDP because they say, well we weren’t here when that 

happened. Well, Mr. Speaker, I was here in ’95 and I remember 

when that same group over there and same members on that 

side of the House blamed Grant Devine for every problem they 

had in this province. And all of a sudden they don’t want to be 

responsible for what they did when they were in government. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t work that way. 

 

And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, it’s timely, this debate is 

timely today because we need to know, and the people of 

Saskatchewan need to know, if they ever got to be government 

again, what they would do, Mr. Speaker. I mean we saw the last 

election in 2011 under Mr. Lingenfelter, and his right-hand man 

happens to be the Leader of the Opposition today, the same guy. 

And he’s the same guy that had another $5 billion he was going 

to spend to fix all the problems. I was going to be going home 

past Yorkton on a twinned highway. Can you believe it? 

 

Well we actually did something about it. We got passing lanes 

going out there that has improved the quality and safety of 

travel out there tremendously. But it was affordable, sustainable 

under a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, and I guess the Leader of the 

Opposition, if I was him I’d want to distance myself from Mr. 

Lingenfelter too. But he can’t; it’s not that easy. Because if I 

remember right, and correct me if I’m wrong, he was the guy 

that signed off on their campaign policy. The same guy. And 

now all of a sudden the Leader of the Opposition says, no that 

was back in 2011. That’s not me. Well it was him. And I think 

every one of us on this side of the House know exactly what he 

would do and his eight other colleagues would do, if they ever 

got to be part of government. 

 

I mean we all know what the member for Lakeview would do. 

My mother was in the care home when he was going to raise 

fees, 3,000, up to 3,000 bucks a month. And the only reason he 

backed down was partly because of opposition members, but 

mainly because of the backlash that he had from people across 

this province who didn’t like what they were doing with 

long-term care. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to miss these speeches. 

Because I’m going to go home, and I’m getting older. And 

when I’m out of this House and I turn the TV on and I see the 

few members that are left on that side — and I believe it’s 

going to be few and fewer — Mr. Speaker, I’m proudly going 

to bust the TV because I’m going to tell my grandkids and my 

great-grandkids, I was there when they did that. They’re not 

going to believe it. They wouldn’t think anybody would do it. 

My grandkids especially would say, aw, papa, you’re just, 

you’re pulling our legs. Well I’m not. And the people of 

Saskatchewan know I’m not. 

 

You know, we’ve got people in every community across this 

province that will say, and they’re not all diehard Saskatchewan 

Party supporters, well we will never tolerate an NDP 

government in this province again. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, we saw what happened in Alberta for — what? — 30 

or 40 years. They’re the natural governing party. And you 

know, there was a point in our history here, the NDP, well the 

CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] and then the 

NDP, when it’s convenient they have to change their name 

because it’s not popular to be where they are. Probably about 

due for a name change right now. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I’ve said one thing 

that the members on this side don’t know to be true, factual. 

And I’ve noticed, Mr. Speaker, by the number of members left 

listening to my speech, they probably don’t want to hear the 

truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, there’s so many things I could talk 

about. The Minister of the Economy, the member for 

Kindersley just touched on a little bit of the NDP’s record 

today. And what was that — a pawnshop, I think he talked 

about? Now there’s a venture for you. You know, the business 

people on that side of the House said, if we’re going to grow 

this province, we’ve got to sink some money into pawnshops. I 

mean, my God, I didn’t think it could get any worse, and it did. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, just when the NDP thought it 

couldn’t get worse, you know what the federal leader did 

yesterday? He came out with a press release — I can’t believe 

this; it’s just like a windfall — but he said if the NDP gets to 

form government federally, they’ll bring in the gun registry. I 

heard from constituents today that I haven’t heard from for 

years that are riled up again because they thought that problem 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6271 

had gone away. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as you can realize, I have a lot more I’d love 

to say, but at this point I have colleagues that also want to get in 

on the debate and have some good things to say about the NDP. 

But I’ll be listening. Tell us what your policy is; I’ll be listening 

with bated breath. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly does not support the NDP’s policy to 

raise taxes on Saskatchewan businesses which was 

adopted at the NDP’s most recent convention. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Melville-Saltcoats has 

moved: 

 

That this Assembly does not support the NDP’s policy to 

raise taxes on Saskatchewan businesses which was 

adopted at the NDP’s most recent convention. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a pleasure 

to follow my fellow Norwegian Saskatchewan friend when he 

gives his speech. And I know that the mister bear-clearing will 

be happy to hear some of my comments because I have listened 

for almost 20 years now to the minister and when he was in 

opposition and now when he’s an MLA, and basically we’re 

getting a consistent variety of comments that go right across the 

board. I think he summed it up himself, is that in the legislature 

when he’s in opposition, he could say anything he wants. I think 

he also does that when he’s in government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the point of this particular debate today is 

who is listening to the people of Saskatchewan. And what we 

know is that this government is getting to a point where they’re 

older, maturer, and maybe not hearing so well because when we 

go and listen to Saskatchewan businesses, they say, what’s 

wrong with our naive Premier, with our naive economic 

minister who don’t even understand the basic rules of 

procurement so that Saskatchewan businesses can compete here 

in their own province? We have people coming to us day after 

day after day who are saying, what’s wrong with this Premier? 

 

Now earlier this week the Premier copied the speech from the 

member from Regina Rosemont from last week and said, we’re 

no longer going to be boy scouts. Well finally they’re listening 

a little bit to the fact that they are totally naive as it relates to the 

procurement policy. We also know that there’s a whole other 

aspect to this which is around buying locally and doing things 

locally. They have basically changed some of the procurement 

policies of government but also de-emphasizing our 

Saskatchewan businesses. And Saskatchewan businesses are 

complaining. 

 

Now I think what we have is bluster from that member. We 

know that the bluster comes from a Liberal who turned to a 

Sask Party conservative right wing kind of guy. And now we’re 

not quite sure where they are, but we know that they have that 

perspective. 

 

And what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that they then return to 

some of the kinds of budgeting practices that we’ve seen in this 

province before where we borrow money to pay for everyday 

expenses. And, Mr. Speaker, on December 3rd Murray 

Mandryk — that’s only yesterday — he said basically the 

summary report from our Finance minister is masking 

problems. And he goes right to the heart of it and shows that 

this government has been borrowing money through the 

Crowns to pay the everyday expenses. And we all know where 

that gets us. It gets us to a point where we have a great deal of 

difficulty in paying back those debts. We had that situation just 

over 20 years ago and it caused difficulties for all of us. But the 

people of Saskatchewan pulled together and sorted out a whole 

number of those particular issues. 

 

Now when you talk to people and listen to people in 

Saskatchewan now, they’re saying, where’s all the money? 

What happened to the money, Mr. Speaker? Because we know 

that over the last seven or eight or nine years, we’ve had some 

of the best times that Saskatchewan’s ever had, and here we 

have the headlines in the paper, “Summary budget masking 

problems” on finances. 

 

We know that there’s no ability to put any money aside out of 

the extra revenues that we’ve received from our resources. Any 

concept of using and building a heritage fund or an overall 

pension fund like they have in Norway or Alaska or other parts 

of the world has been squandered by this Minister of Finance 

and this Premier. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the people of 

Saskatchewan find that acceptable. They are very concerned 

that what happens is the money seems to have gone. Where did 

it go? 

 

Part of what, part of what happens in this particular government 

is that they’re making some very strange choices. We heard a 

bit of it today. We saw it in the auditor’s report yesterday that 

they hire consultants willy-nilly. They don’t even keep a record 

of why they’re hiring the consultants so that the auditor can 

actually go and tell us how the money’s being spent. Mr. 

Speaker, that is unacceptable. And I’m surprised that the 

member from Saltcoats is part of that type of government 

because I know he’s pretty careful with money. 

 

But when you’ve got government that’s spending, government 

that’s spending money across the board, where does it go? So 

what happens for our local people? They say, lookit, 

SaskPower’s borrowing money hand over fist. We’ve got an 8.5 

per cent SaskPower increase. We’ve got 27 per cent energy rate 

hike. We’ve got hikes in the SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] rates. We’ve got SaskTel increases. So what we 

have, Mr. Speaker, is a government that’s trying to talk about 

taxes but then going off into the Crown side and raising the fees 

on a regular basis so that they can transfer that money back into 

the accounts to pay the everyday amounts that are owing. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, we know that there are concerns around how 

this has been done. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Now another aspect is that they’re very afraid to actually show 

what the finances of the problem are. So what do they do? They 



6272 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

go to the extent of, in the mid-year statement last week, picking 

a price for oil that’s substantially higher than our neighbour. If 

you calculate the difference between those two prices, guess 

what? It equals to be just a little bit more than the surplus that 

they’ve declared. That seems to be quite convenient to me, Mr. 

Speaker. And it goes right to the heart of their sham, their sham 

of how they’re managing things that are going on here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want the straight 

goods. They want to know, where has the money gone? Why 

are we in the situation where there’s things that are not being 

dealt with? Why are we short-staffing all of our, in our health 

care facilities? Why are people saying, I don’t feel this boom? 

I’ve got all these extra expenses; I’m getting hammered on a 

whole number of areas. And, Mr. Speaker, that becomes a 

fundamental question for all the people of Saskatchewan. 

Where did the money go?  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a refusal of a whole number of 

these people to actually give the information to an independent 

auditor to see where the money’s gone. When we do get the 

audit reports, we show that some of the records are not very 

good to deal with that. We know they’ve spent $40 million on 

this pet project of the Premier, and now I guess the Minister of 

Crown Investments, where they hired John Black and 

Associates. And what do they get — $131.26 in P.A. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a problem and it identifies for Saskatchewan 

people why we have to be very careful with this type of 

government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we are living in a province that has an 

abundance of resources and practical things are not being dealt 

with, we know that choices have been with the government. We 

know that we don’t have the savings account that we all hoped 

that we would have when we hit a boom time like we have now. 

It looks like the chances of ever getting a savings account under 

this government are zero. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, government is about making choices. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Minister of Finance and the 

Premier have made a number of choices around doing things in 

more expensive ways. There’s no question about that. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it relates to building capital structures. It relates to 

how they deal with schools. It relates to a whole number of 

areas. Now we have the Minister of Finance, who has long 

experience in the whole school system, going back to the 

municipalities and say, well can you give us a bit more money 

to help us pay for some of the schools? That’s exactly the kind 

of thing that the people of Saskatchewan don’t want to hear or 

see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ultimate question for this government is, 

where did the money go? When are they going to account for 

what’s happened with all the money that we’ve had in this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. Next speaker. I recognize 

the member for Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m delighted to be able to join in this debate, though I 

do so with quite a disadvantage following my colleague from 

Melville-Saltcoats. His position was articulated with a — what 

would you say? — very unique and invigorated approach. 

Appreciate it. He was impassioned. He was persuasive, and 

that’s because he spoke from his heart and from his experience 

in ensuring that, as he rolled up his sleeves to help create not 

simply a new party but a new chapter for this province, that it 

was focused on the future and for future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we think about the motion that my colleague 

from Melville-Saltcoats put forward, that is: 

 

That this Assembly does not support the NDP’s policy to 

raise taxes on Saskatchewan businesses which was 

adopted at the NDP’s most recent convention. 

 

The reason we do this is that this is a very troubling policy 

position, a very troubling proposition. It’s troubling for 

small- and medium-sized businesses in Saskatchewan. It’s 

troubling for large corporations in Saskatchewan. But most 

especially, most especially it’s troubling for Saskatchewan 

communities and cities, for families, and for our future 

generations, for our young people, the young people that we 

remain focused on. That’s especially important when we think 

about the value of the graduate retention program this year 

where we will have more than 50,000 young people 

participating in and benefiting from the graduation retention 

program, the most aggressive youth retention program in the 

country. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what is especially concerning right now is 

that, as the NDP has approached an existential Y in the road, 

they’ve taken the advice of Yogi Berra and they have simply 

said they’re going to take it. That means they’re going to go to a 

default position. They’re going to go to their traditional 

orientation and inclination, and that is, they’re going to increase 

a tax burden on those that are helping to ensure the prosperity 

of Saskatchewan, and that is our businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is problematic. In fact, it’s so problematic that 

Dr. David McGrane who’s just come out with a brand new 

book on the future of really Saskatchewan by looking back and 

comparing Saskatchewan and Quebec, he asks and offers this: 

on page 246 of his brand new book, he says that “The future 

ideological direction of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan NDP 

is now quite uncertain.” That’s Dr. David McGrane. 

 

Now there are a couple of ways you could address that 

statement. The first, maybe for political scientists, the future of 

Saskatchewan, of the NDP, is quite uncertain. And that in and 

of itself may be a topic for one day or maybe something that 

voters in this province begin to address. But our topic today is 

far more important than that, and that is, under the NDP, the 

future ideological direction of Saskatchewan is actually quite 

uncertain. And if we take away the word ideological we can 

simply say, under the NDP, the future direction of 

Saskatchewan is quite uncertain. This stands in stark contrast to 

the certainty and orientation and direction that our Premier and 

this government have attempted to work, to work towards, and 

that is by focusing on growth and putting forward greater 

certainty. 

 

Now importantly, what our Premier has reinforced, and this 

makes the position very unique, he’s answered a question: what 

is the purpose of our prosperity? It’s a deep question. It’s a 

probing question. And in the plan for growth he explained that 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6273 

an expanding economy is the foundation for a growing and 

prosperous province. The purpose of growth, the purpose is to 

build a better quality of life for all Saskatchewan residents. And 

to this end the Saskatchewan plan for growth outlines the 

government’s direction to improve health care and education 

outcomes while building growing and safe communities and 

improving the lives of persons with disabilities in 

Saskatchewan. It’s a powerful statement about purpose. 

 

We know that to that, that there were six core growth activities, 

and I’ll get into those. But what did the member for Regina 

Lakeview have to say about the Plan for Growth? “A document 

like this distracts everybody, and I think his popularity will stay 

up there as long as there’s sort of a myth of a booming 

economy.” That from the member for Regina Lakeview. This 

came out of The Globe and Mail. 

 

What we see in fact is that growth has enabled, first, our 

population to grow, and as Tony Blair has remarked, an easy 

indicator of the success of a polity is, is the population moving 

in or moving out? And of course the answer is, more people are 

moving in and more people are staying in Saskatchewan. That’s 

a very simple indicator. 

 

What we also see is that this plan for growth has afforded the 

opportunity to provide greater certainty. That certainty has 

ensured that a framework has been set for our private sector to 

continue to grow. That’s not simply about the private sector. 

That’s about families staying together here in Saskatchewan. 

It’s about young people planning their futures in Saskatchewan. 

It’s about seeing those young people putting their dreams in 

Saskatchewan. And that’s tangible. 

 

Over this last seven years, there have been more than 70,000 

new jobs created in this province and, importantly, we see that 

those are spread across a great variety of sectors: about 18,000 

in the construction sector; in health care, more than 10,000; in 

natural resources, more than 6,000; in education, more than 

5,800; in agriculture, which continues to help grow not simply 

Saskatchewan’s economy but Canada’s economy, we see that 

more than 5,000; and a variety of other sectors have contributed 

more than 17,000 jobs. The significance of this plan for growth 

provides us the opportunity to go through and reflect on what 

these priorities look like and mean for the people of this 

province. 

 

So investing in infrastructure, the member for Lakeview has 

asked, where has the investment gone? Well how about into 

more than 8500 kilometres of highways rebuilt or repaired; into 

more than 12,600 new affordable housing units providing more 

opportunities for Saskatchewan families; into numerous new 

long-term care facilities to ensure that more people have better 

care, and we know that’s a continual work-in-progress; into 38 

new schools, and that’s important as our population continues 

to grow; and in fact right in Saskatoon, the new children’s 

hospital. There’s an example of where the dollars that are being 

fuelled by growth, where they’re going. Just one example. 

 

We go back to the growth plan: educating, training, and 

developing a skilled workforce. In post-secondary education 

alone, more than $5.5 billion invested in future generations in 

our post-secondary institutions. We can think about the 

graduate retention program as I’ve already highlighted. But we 

can also think about the significance of the Saskatchewan 

Innovation and Opportunity Scholarship, the Saskatchewan 

Advantage Scholarship. 

 

We can actually have a look at key areas of infrastructure 

development, for example the knowledge infrastructure 

program that we shared with Ottawa, more than $117 million 

across the province, right across the province. We know what 

that meant in communities from Nipawin to Estevan to Swift 

Current, here in Regina, in Saskatoon, and countless more. 

 

And importantly when it came to the Academic Health Sciences 

Building, we were able to move forward on a long-standing 

promise, a promise that was first offered by members opposite 

in 2003, but construction didn’t start. And so what we see today 

is that both E wing and D wing are up. They’re operational. 

And the college continues to make progress as we’ve expanded 

the number of doctors being trained, the number of nurses being 

trained, and the integration of health sciences being performed 

both in research and the training capacity at the University of 

Saskatchewan and to see a distributed model that’s ensuring 

that more people are being trained right across the province. 

 

What we see, Mr. Speaker, is that these dollars, to answer 

directly the member from Lakeview, these dollars are helping to 

improve the quality of life for the people of this province. 

That’s based on business propositions that foster and facilitate 

growth. That includes a reduction in small-business tax. It is 

just one example of fostering and fuelling the growth, not for its 

own sake but for the sake and ensuring the security of future 

generations and of today. Mr. Speaker, that’s why I’m 

supporting this motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s always interesting to take my place in this Chamber and 

join in the debate in this Assembly. It’s not an order of the loyal 

water buffalo that’s meeting. So for the members over there 

saying, Blues Brother quartz I, you know, don’t resemble that, 

so please cut it out. 

 

In terms of the topic that we’ve got here in front of us today, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s good to see the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats continuing to make a contribution to the 

cause over there. You know in opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the member from Saltcoats had a lot of different things to say. 

And I’ll give him this: he always said it with a lot of passion 

and a lot of fire, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But when it came to governing and the way that things that had 

been said in opposition were called to account in terms of what 

the members had to say come the time to govern, of course that 

member was clear with the people in Melville-Saltcoats that, 

you know, I believe the quote is, “In opposition we’ll say just 

about anything.” And I’m not saying that so much as any sort of 

indication as to the way that we approach public policy debates, 

Mr. Speaker, but I think it was interesting that the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats copped to the say-anything approach of this 

government, be it in opposition or in government. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got the say-anything swan song 



6274 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

here today. I don’t know how many more speeches we’ll get to 

hear from the member from Melville-Saltcoats, but it’s . . . I 

may not agree with the substance, Mr. Speaker, but the style is 

always, is always pretty interesting. So good to see him up 

again. 

 

And I guess the other interesting thing is, following in this 

debate after the member from Greystone, I’m a bit 

disappointed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m a bit disappointed. I 

thought he would use this as an opportunity to announce his 

candidacy for the federal Liberal Party in the coming federal 

election. And I guess we’ll have to go on and wait for that a bit 

more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of that member tipping his 

hand as to what the future might hold for him. But there’s some 

pretty strong indications that on the south side of Saskatoon the 

federal Liberal ticket’s got a place for the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

And I guess that makes sense as well, Mr. Speaker, because 

we’ve seen a bit of a Liberal exodus from this government. 

We’ve seen folks sort of inventing or burnishing Liberal 

credentials so that they can continue to portray themselves as 

some kind of big tent, Mr. Speaker. But you know, it may be a 

big tent but in some cases a lot of clowns. 

 

But also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of not announcing 

today, I think it’s interesting seeing the billboard campaign with 

the government right now in terms of the . . . I think the motif is 

Saskatchewan strong or Saskatchewan is strong — strong 

leadership, this, that, and the other. And it’s interesting because 

you know, it sort of reminds me in some ways of . . . And again 

I know this from history because I wasn’t alive then for this 

election, Mr. Speaker, but it reminds me of the old Trudeau 

Liberal campaign of The Land is Strong — The Land is Strong. 

 

And of course, they went to the people of Canada, the federal 

Liberals in terms of, you know, questions like taxation, 

questions like housing, questions like the well-being of the 

country. Trudeau and the federal Liberals went to the country 

and said, you know, the land is strong. 

 

Here again today we see another government coming forward 

and saying, you know, the land is strong. So there’s a retro 

approach from this Sask Party government that, you know, 

seizing upon an old Trudeau slogan. Kind of interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. But maybe it’s some kind of parting gift to the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone as he heads off to that 

Liberal ticket or hopes to land on that Liberal ticket. Maybe it’s 

some kind of a parting gift to that individual. 

 

But what it gets down to, Mr. Speaker, is, you know, two sort of 

things that are going on. There’s the hype in terms of the land is 

strong, and there’s the reality. And the land is certainly strong, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. People are strong and families are strong 

and businesses are strong in this province of ours, Mr. Speaker. 

And we’ve got tremendous bounty in terms of the things that 

this province has been blessed with. But in terms of the way 

that the government is trying to portray how well they are 

doing, how this government is doing on the one hand, and how 

different issues go unaddressed and go wanting, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there’s a lot that needs to be answered for. 

 

And again today we’ve seen clear reminders in terms of the 

inadequate approach when it comes to housing from this 

government. We see the inadequate approach when it comes to, 

quite frankly, to women’s shelters in this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We see that in terms of long-term care. We see that in 

terms of the general approach of this government on a number 

of fronts. And one of those fronts is taxation certainly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in terms of the approach that most reasonable 

people would have is that you’d want to have a progressive 

taxation system. You’d want to have a fair return to the people 

of Saskatchewan for their resources. 

 

And you know, you need not look any further than a recent 

interview that the Premier gave to Robin Sears with the 

Macdonald-Laurier Institute where he recounted the whole 

potash play by PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] 

in terms of taking BHP and Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan and how that was going to go. And in the midst 

of that, the Premier, of course rightly and wisely, asked the 

former premier of Alberta, Peter Lougheed, his advice. And as 

recounted by Robin Sears and the Macdonald-Laurier Institute, 

the Premier is asked by Lougheed, you know, well, Brad, 

whose potash is it? To which the Premier said, well, Mr. 

Premier, it’s the people of Saskatchewan’s. And you know 

what, Mr. . . . And to quote from the article from the 

Macdonald-Laurier Institute, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s interesting to see the way that the barking and the yelling 

and the shouting will continue from the members opposite, and 

maybe some of their backbenchers don’t have enough to do 

with their time. Maybe some of their front-benchers, who 

should know better, who should be working harder, don’t have 

enough to do with their time. But we see this, this isn’t the first 

time we see something like this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in terms of what happens at the Sask Party convention, if 

these individuals are so interested in convention activities, it’s 

interesting that there was a resolution brought forward to 

introduce financial literacy in high schools in the province. 

They’re supporting that at the recent Sask Party convention and, 

you know, a straightforward resolution, Mr. Speaker. It seems 

to be quite a sensible proposition. But of course what happens is 

you have one of the delegates gets up and says, you know, this 

is a very dangerous thing, Mr. Speaker, because this might get 

the students in our high schools thinking about the co-operative 

sector and the credit union sector. You know? How ridiculous, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. But to me it speaks volumes to the kind of 

yelling and barking that goes on over there and passes for 

comments over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of what 

they’re trying to speak to. 

 

And it’s this sort of hard right wing, you know, so far out on the 

right wing they might fall off the edge of the planet, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the way that they approach a number of 

questions. And to the Premier’s credit — I’ll give him credit, 

Mr. Speaker — he’s managed to keep the big tent sort of 

pointed forward. He’s managed to keep different markers out in 

terms of, no we’re not a bunch of wacko right wingers, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But in moments like that where the 

overarching concern of a delegate at the Sask Party convention 

is about the dangers of exposing high school students to the 

co-operative sector and the credit union sector, you know, it 

boggles the mind, Mr. Speaker, on one hand. But on the other 

hand, any of these questions, unless you’ve got the hard right 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6275 

wing sort of prescription, you’ll get no end of yelling and 

shouting from the members as to, you know, this needs to be 

more right wing or even further right wing or fall off the edge 

of the planet kind of right wing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the record of this government, we 

see again some very different things being preached on the 

billboards and some very different things happening in the 

budgets and in the realities of Saskatchewan people. And when 

it comes to the record of, you know . . . 

 

And again the record of the Saskatchewan NDP is not perfect. 

I’ve never claimed that, Mr. Speaker. We’re humans. And in 

terms of what we’ve tried to do in terms of public policy, I 

think we had some successes, and I think that we had some 

things we needed to do a better job on. 

 

But one of the things that happened after the ’91 election, Mr. 

Speaker, of course there was a financial situation to be taken 

care of, a mess that was left on the step of the incoming 

government. And you know, if I might add parenthetically, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, would but that ’91 government had been left 

$2 billion plus in terms of cash surplus on hand. But they 

weren’t, Mr. Speaker. They were left with a devastating fiscal 

situation, and they had some very hard decisions to make. 

 

But as the Saskatchewan NDP approaches these projects, Mr. 

Speaker, we stand for fairness. We stand for getting a good 

return for the people of Saskatchewan. And again, it’s been 

great to take part in the debate today here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to recognize my colleague from Melville-Saltcoats for creating 

a rather stirred debate here this morning, Mr. Speaker. Lessons 

to be learned from that level of expertise and that level of 

delivery. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, it was only a couple of . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, sorry, couple of days ago on Tuesday when several of 

us in here attended the chamber luncheon and we heard that 

kind of passion from our Premier as well as 800 businessmen 

and women from the province and from around the city to listen 

to that. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by going back a little 

bit in politics. It’s my understanding that James Carville, one of 

the strategists in the Clinton campaign, apparently had posted 

some sayings in the war room. And probably one of the most 

famous ones, and I quote, and I want to emphasize it’s a quote. 

It simply said, “The economy, stupid.” That statement has been 

dissected and it has been added on to. It has been articulated in 

many different forms over the years. But for me, Mr. Speaker, it 

really, really talks about the importance of the economy. 

 

I’ve spent a lifetime in the helping sector. I started out teaching 

school in the elementary system, small children, trying to help 

them grow. Moved on to an administrative position. Went on to 

serve on an elected board. Only trying to help people. Without a 

strong economy, Mr. Speaker, that is simply not going to 

happen. 

In Saskatchewan we can truly relate to that because for 16 years 

prior to us coming into government, we had a government that 

did its very best to fund itself through taxation. And we know 

the results. We know the results of what happened with that 

economic philosophy: 176 schools closed, 52 hospitals closed, 

19 long-term care facilities closed, 1,200 long-term care beds 

gone. We haven’t even practised yet. They had choir practice 

this morning. We didn’t have choir practice, Mr. Speaker. One 

Plains hospital closed.  

 

Mr. Speaker, when was the last time you saw in the city of 

Regina five construction cranes? Take a look outside, Mr. 

Speaker, and you’ll see that. So with regards to Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can see the importance of the 

economy. 

 

However since 2007, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a pronounced 

paradigm shift. And let me just quote, hot off the press actually, 

a letter we received — I believe the opposition received it as 

well this morning — from Steve McLellan, Chair of the 

Saskatchewan chamber, and let me quote part of that letter. It 

says, and I quote: 

 

In his November 4th business update, Paul Martin (one of 

the ABEX MCs) noted an interesting trend, that the 

overwhelming majority of the evening’s winners were 

companies which were not in existence before 2006. He 

said, “Basically, this year’s event marked the arrival of the 

new entrepreneurial Saskatchewan” and that “The 

provincial economy is forever changed.” 

 

And they want to go back. If I continue: 

 

It is indeed true [still part of the quote] that the atmosphere 

in the room that evening was different than at the same 

event decades ago. There is a sense of optimism, of 

opportunity, and belief that if you want something enough 

and work hard enough [Mr. Speaker] it’s possible to 

succeed beyond expectation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to go back to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been an obvious paradigm shift in our 

province, a shift from a have-not province to a have province, 

Mr. Speaker. From a place to be . . . from a place to be from, to 

a place to be; from looking back to looking forward. 

 

In that new paradigm, Mr. Speaker, there have been all kinds of 

success stories, and I want to, I want to just bring to light a 

couple of those. And I believe they’re the ones that Steve 

McLellan was referring to. We all know the success story of 

Hillberg & Berk, a young lady from the province of 

Saskatchewan who has become one of the leading jewellery 

designers in the province, in the country, if not in North 

America, and in fact in Europe when we know that her products 

and her design and her energy has gone into designing a brooch 

specifically for Her Majesty the Queen, and worn three times I 

might add, which is quite a significant accomplishment for one 

of our Saskatchewan entrepreneurs. 

 

[12:00] 

 

The district brewers, Mr. Speaker. The story of a young fellow 



6276 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

that graduated with an engineering degree, wanted to become a 

master brewer, went to school further in Chicago and learned 

how to become a master brewer, came back to Saskatchewan. 

Why? Because there was an environment, an atmosphere that 

was conducive to him opening up a business in this province 

and contribute, creating the — I don’t know if I’m allowed to 

say it; I’m going to say it anyway — Müs Knuckle, a product, 

and that’s U with an umlaut, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very 

famous Saskatchewan product. 

 

Tentree, tentree apparel, Mr. Speaker. A couple of young 

entrepreneurs, Emsleys by name, contributing not only to the 

economy of Saskatchewan but environmentally conscious as 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Rock Creek bistro in Regina. And as I mentioned before, 

Mr. Speaker, when was the last time you saw five construction 

cranes operating in the city of Regina? 

 

Well guess what, Mr. Speaker? Let me just talk for a couple of 

minutes about affordability, for example. On October the 1st, 

2014, Mr. Speaker, our government increased minimum wage 

to $10.20 an hour. Since 2007 our government has increased 

minimum wage six times, 28.3 per cent increase, from $7.95 to 

$10.20. Our minimum wage will be indexed, Mr. Speaker, on 

the cost of living. Indexing of the minimum wage will provide 

security for our minimum wage earners and ensure 

predictability for business owners in this province. That’s 

helping people, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I’m used to, and 

that’s what I stand behind and that’s what I will continue to 

advance. 

 

This simply doesn’t happen if government continues to fund 

itself or through taxation. Let’s talk a little bit about taxes in 

this province. Since 2007 the Saskatchewan Party government’s 

tax reductions have saved families almost $2.8 billion. 

Saskatchewan residents will save $480 million this year due to 

those tax cuts. If that’s not helping Saskatchewan families, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know what is. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, an individual taxpayer pays no tax 

on his first $18,650. A family of four earning $50,000 annually 

will pay just $166 in provincial tax compared to $2,302 in 2007, 

Mr. Speaker. And I could go on. And what about royalties, in 

terms of the benefits we gain from royalties for helping 

Saskatchewan people? In oil alone, since 2007, $7.74 billion in 

oil revenues; in the previous seven years under the previous 

government, 4.12. Potash royalties under our government, $700 

million; the previous seven, 230. And in uranium since 

2007-08, $674 million in royalties; under their previous seven 

years, 303. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the kind of numbers that talk about 

helping Saskatchewan families. Mr. Speaker, the unintended 

consequences of raising taxes, intended or unintended, Mr. 

Speaker, are significant. Increasing taxes on businesses causes 

intended or unintended consequences: inadequate income, low 

wages, high prices, perhaps shoddy merchandise, poor choice, 

maybe no choice, lost jobs, evictions, homelessness, poverty, 

and crime. Mr. Speaker, thank you for this opportunity to speak 

to this motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It is a pleasure entering into this debate. And I think 

this is a very important discussion that we have here because, as 

my colleagues on this side talked about, who’s listening and 

who’s out there connecting with people and talking about issues 

that really matter to people. And I do want to acknowledge and, 

I’m not sure if thank is the right word, but acknowledge. I just 

have to say, the member from Saltcoats, I always think of his 

passion, and when he gets going it’s always a pleasure to hear 

his speeches, I think. 

 

And also from Saskatoon Greystone in terms of . . . and I know 

those folks have indicated that they . . . I mean it almost sounds 

like they’re ready to campaign. They’re ready to go. But we 

know that they’re not going to campaign. I’m going to 

campaign. And I often think of what the Minister of Finance 

will tell us when we want to know what’s in the budget. He will 

tell us, so many sleeps or whatever. Have patience; you’ll find 

out when you find out. And they will find out when it’s time for 

them to find out about our campaign. It’s good that they’re 

interested. It’s very good that they’re interested, but we’re 

talking about issues that really, really matter to people in this 

province, that really matter to this province. 

 

But I do want to talk about what I’ve been hearing and what 

happened in September. And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

do talk about this every day, and that is the issue about what 

happened in September when this government let a business off 

the hook when they had a fixed-price contract. Now the Premier 

will go on now, and they will laugh. But this is something 

serious, and I think this is true. I think this is true that past 

behaviour indicates what will happen in the future. This is what 

they will say. This is what the Premier will say. And so here 

they are, and they’re all nodding their heads. That’s right. But 

here you have a situation and every day . . . And I think this is a 

serious matter, that they’ve indicated that how they relate to 

business on contracts is up in the air. Who really knows what 

will happen? If you’re a friend of that government, you get 

treated in a different way. You get treated in a different way. 

 

If you’ve got a fixed-price contract, it’s only common sense that 

you honour the contract, that you honour the contract. Now they 

will argue, and if you listen . . . Oh it’s silent. Now they won’t 

want to argue except for when I’m talking, you know. But 

you’ll hear over there that they think there’s a different take on 

this. This is not a different take on this. This is the situation, and 

we saw it exposed in the light of day when they let Deveraux 

off the hook for their 48 units, a housing project for low-income 

people. Let them off the hook, and it was a fixed-price contract. 

And this is a big deal. This is a big deal on many different 

levels, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But I have to say, and I’m going to quote from a local columnist 

in The StarPhoenix on September 10th and I’ll read it here, 

“But the Saskatchewan Party . . . ” and I quote: 

 

But the Saskatchewan Party government’s rather bizarre 

decision to allow Deveraux Developments to walk away 

from its commitment to build a 48-unit low-income 

housing unit in north Regina is much more than that. 

 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6277 

It is the latest indication that Premier . . . seems unwilling 

to do anything to displease business . . . even when he 

knows business is dead wrong and even if it means his 

government failing on its promises to deliver low-income 

housing. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a pretty important indictment 

when this Premier will say, what you do will indicate what you 

will do in the future. So here is a government that’s walking 

away from fixed-price contracts. Now this one was a $10 

million contract. But we’ve talked a lot in this House about 

schools, and they’ve raised it up in this debate here today about 

the P3 [public-private partnership] schools and how we know 

that there’s a lot of question marks across Canada about that. 

 

We’ve heard just recently, in the last couple of weeks, about the 

BC [British Columbia] auditor raising concerns about what it 

means for having to borrow at higher interest rates, forcing 

local school boards to take on loans that at a higher interest rate 

will add unnecessary costs, will add unnecessary costs because 

this is how this government approaches business. And then the 

big question mark out there is, will these huge contracts be at 

risk? Because we know, we know the government now has a 

policy of, if you’re in trouble with these fixed-price contracts, 

you can walk away. You can walk away. And especially if 

you’re a friend of this government, you can walk away, because 

that’s what Deveraux did. They walked away. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think they’re out of touch. They’re out of 

touch and the Deveraux . . . And I just talked about that. I wish I 

could go on. But I could go on about the consultants. Now we 

understand that in the last . . . Since 2008, the use of private 

consultants has gone up over 200 per cent — 200 per cent. 

While they’re cutting the workforce provincially, it’s gone up 

200 per cent. And who is the biggest consultant? John Black. 

John Black and his gravy plane. That is something else. Well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know the members over there are kind of 

getting worked up when we talk about this, when we talk about 

this and we expose this . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the members to come to 

order as the member from Saskatoon Centre has the floor, and I 

would ask the members to respect his right to speak. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate that. And so we . . . Did you guys pay the bills? Is 

there a smart meter out there? It’s the smart meters. It’s revenge 

of Sensus. Give us our money or it’s revenge of Sensus. Okay, 

there you go. 

 

All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. But I was talking 

about the use of consultants and how it’s really grown out of 

control with this government. And we could look at specific 

examples like John Black, or we can look at bigger examples. 

And this is how this government operates. This is how this 

government operates. And how can they do that? 

 

But you know, I want to talk about what we’re doing and I 

know people are anxious to hear what we’re talking about. And 

we were talking about the level playing field for businesses, so 

we’ve offered forward the procurement bill. And we wonder 

why this government won’t run with that. It makes a lot of 

sense. It’s a common sense approach. Why is it . . . And we 

hear the member from Regina stand up and he congratulates 

people from the Regina Chamber of Commerce, and we think 

that’s a wonderful thing. But all of them, all of them have the 

question: why can’t we have a level playing field here in 

Saskatchewan? Why is it that this government tends to have an 

infatuation with going out of the province, going out of the 

province for their work? We have some real questions about 

that. 

 

And of course the one that I think is really particularly exciting 

is around buy local. You know, I represent downtown 

Saskatoon, and we have the biggest corporations but we also 

have the most entrepreneurs. And this is exciting and this is 

really interesting. And they’ve approached us. They’ve 

approached us. And when they’ve been rejected by that side, 

when they’ve been rejected by that side and say, they don’t 

want anything to do with this buy local, ironically, you know, 

they talk about who they’re friends with and who’s in their 

inner circle. 

 

You know, we have support even from the Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business on this. We think buy local is a great 

idea. Why can’t we get behind this idea? Why can’t we get 

behind it and say, listen, we’ll do the buy local, and we know 

what that means, and maybe we do it once a month. But that 

means people get familiar with their coffee shop, with their 

bakery, with their local garage, their local garage, their local tire 

shop, getting to know who their local business people are. And 

then when you do that it starts to grow and it grows. And we 

think that’s a great idea. It’s about supporting small business 

people, and that’s a huge, huge thing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we’ll do is we’ll talk about good ideas 

and we’ll talk about common sense ideas like buy local, a level 

procurement field. That’s really important. But we are deeply 

worried, and we understand why this government wants to 

divert attention from what their habits are getting to be — using 

out-of-province, out-of-country consultants and corporations, 

and walking away from fixed-price contracts. That’s not the 

way to do business in Saskatchewan. People are saying that 

sends a weird signal to people who expect . . . who want a level 

playing field. So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this 

motion. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 

Questions. I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Certainly there is always a balance to be struck between the 

funds raised by government and the public services on offer. 

And one of the things that this government has done, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re hearing a debate about taxation, is talk 

about how they’re reducing the size of the public service. 

 

But yesterday, Mr. Speaker, from the Provincial Auditor we 

find out that they’ve reduced the size of public service on the 

one hand, but they’ve increased the use of consultants by 228 

per cent. My question is to the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. How the heck does that work? Why are they increasing 



6278 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

the use of consultants by 228 per cent? Isn’t that the true 

indication of what this government is up to? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And what a 

surprise that I would get that question. I’m really taken aback. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we make decisions in government that are best 

going to benefit the people of Saskatchewan, and we will 

continue to do that so that we can continue to help our people. 

And need I say it again? Since 2007 tax reductions to the people 

of this province total $2.8 billion. Saskatchewan residents alone 

this year will save $480 million from tax cuts. Since 2007 our 

government increased the personal spousal and child exemption 

amounts and introduced a . . . [inaudible] . . . income tax credit. 

If it takes some IT personnel, some separate contracts to help us 

meet those needs and those goals, Mr. Speaker, we will 

continue to do that. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the NDP’s 

most recent convention, a resolution was brought forward that 

stated that the Saskatchewan NDP re-examine its position on 

the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline. To the member 

from Regina Lakeview: will you reconfirm your support for the 

Keystone XL pipeline? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that in Saskatchewan we 

have miles and miles, kilometres and kilometres of pipelines, 

and that what we have are resources in Saskatchewan that need 

to be sold to the world. Keystone XL pipeline is one of those 

sort of assets that all of us in our part of the world need. 

 

The more important question I think is, why is this government 

in a situation where they have cut out all the local engineers, 

architects, construction companies, all of those, from the 

procurement policies of the government? You know, we go to 

Christmas receptions in this season and we’re getting a lot of 

pressure from people to say, tell this government to smarten up. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and of course my question obviously will go to the member 

from Regina Douglas Park because he’s the only one of the 

three speaking today that’s actually running in the next election, 

So we think it’s important to hear his point of view in the next 

. . . today. 

 

And it was interesting to hear him go through the chamber of 

commerce award winners. That’s very good and we 

congratulate those people. But here we know in Saskatoon, Aim 

Electric and Amtech Electric are two electrical contractors in 

our province here. And why does that member think it’s okay to 

send electrical contracts out of province to sketchy Texas 

companies like Grid One instead of supporting our own 

businesses here in Saskatchewan like the ones he just got up 

and congratulated? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 

again I referred to the fact that we will continue to do, in this 

province, what we believe is best to meet the needs of our 

citizens. And the record is that 1 in 10 contracts approximately 

go to firms that compete in a fair bidding process to get those 

contracts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to go on though and add to that a little bit. In terms of 

helping the citizens and the people of our province, 750 more 

long-term care beds in our province, Mr. Speaker, that’s helping 

people, Mr. Speaker. And how do we get that? We get that by 

making sound economic decisions based on what’s best for the 

people of our economy. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, in last week’s debate the member 

from Regina Rosemont said that “Far too often I see this 

government far too willing to sell out the interests of 

Saskatchewan people and businesses . . .” Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that’s rich coming from the members opposite because it’s 

clear from the resolution passed at their convention if they were 

in government they would hike taxes for Saskatchewan 

business people. It’s the same old NDP ideology that ran 

families and businesses out of our province, just like when they 

were in government and raised taxes 17 times.  

 

To the member from Lakeview: why would the people and 

business owners of Saskatchewan trust a party that continually 

raises taxes and plans to raise taxes again if they form 

government? Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to sound like the judge, 

but please answer the question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a very interesting question 

because I think the Premier was here last week listening to that 

particular answer by the member from Rosemont. So he gave a 

whole speech to 800 people a couple of days ago, and he said, 

no point being procurement boy scouts. Well the member from 

Rosemont was telling the Premier a number of times, stop being 

a boy scout. Stop being so naive about how procurement 

policies for the province of Saskatchewan work. 

 

The business community of Saskatchewan is saying, grow up, 

you guys. Grow up. Make sure that you give us the same kind 

of advantages our neighbours in Alberta and British Columbia 

and Ontario get. That’s the answer for that particular question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

government has gone on record committing to lowering the 



December 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6279 

corporate tax rate from 12 per cent to 10 per cent over the next 

three years. This is from 2012. Now of course, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve yet to see that materialize. My question to the member 

from Regina Douglas Park: are they still on track to cut the 

corporate tax rate from 12 per cent to 10 per cent, and where 

will they make up the $200 million or so that is entailed in that? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thanks. Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. And 

again our record speaks for itself, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had 

seven continuous balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker. We will do 

and we will continue to implement programs that we believe 

will help to develop the economy of this province in a way 

that’s going to continue to benefit the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t need to go over the record again, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

made over 100 promises. We’ve kept those promises, Mr. 

Speaker. That speaks to the integrity of our platform going 

forward. It speaks to the integrity of our government, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ll continue to do that as we benefit the citizens 

of our province. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we continue to see 

inconsistencies from the members opposite. It is clear they have 

no plan because even they don’t know what their policies are. 

Last week we heard the members talk about their procurement 

and buy-local bills, acting as if they were going to be the 

champions on businesses in Saskatchewan. This week we are 

finding out that if they were in government they would hike the 

taxes on local businesses. 

 

To the member from Regina Lakeview: how can the businesses 

of Saskatchewan trust your party when it is evident that you are 

speaking out of both sides of your mouth? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is really cute. The member 

that just asked this question is the secretary for procurement and 

working with small businesses. We haven’t heard a word from 

him. We heard a little bit from the Premier, where he copied the 

member from Rosemont’s speech from last Thursday when he 

spoke to the government. And he finally is waking up that you 

can’t be naive or a boy scout when you’re dealing with 

procurement. 

 

Procurement in Saskatchewan has gotten to the point where 

business people are coming to us regularly and saying, smarten 

up, go to the government . . . Last night I was at a business 

event, a Christmas party. I had three people come up to me and 

say, I’ve talked to the Premier; he’s not listening. I think that 

we have a big problem in this province when the Premier gets 

so full of himself that he can’t listen to the people of this 

province. 

 

It’s important for the building of our businesses, of our 

province, that we have a government . . . 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 

has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 607 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Broten that Bill No. 607 — The Buy Local Day 

Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter the debate on Bill 607, An Act to encourage the 

Patronage of Local Businesses, Suppliers and Services. There’s 

many opportunities to rise and speak to legislation before us, 

Mr. Speaker, and occasionally there are bills that really speak to 

you, Mr. Speaker, as an MLA. 

 

And I’m the daughter of folks who actually had a small 

business. My parents had a small, local business wholesaling 

herbs and specialty tomatoes to places like Dutch Growers and 

the co-op greenhouses, as well as being, they were long-time 

vendors at the Saskatoon Farmers’ Market. I grew up, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, spending every Saturday of my life, every 

Saturday of my life, my early years, working at the farmers’ 

market, Mr. Speaker. And I can remember the days where my 

parents had to make deliveries to particular places like Dutch 

Growers or the co-op, the franticness of getting the orders out, 

Mr. Speaker. So I think buying local is an incredibly important 

thing. 

 

So in terms of what this bill is about and where it came from, 

Mr. Speaker, it is a simple, straightforward bill, as the Leader of 

the Opposition pointed out in his second reading speech. It 

couldn’t get much more simple or common sense than this, Mr. 

Speaker. There is absolutely nothing controversial about it. This 

should be an easy thing, it’s an easy thing for our side of the 

House to support. It should be a very easy thing for the other 

side of the House to support as well. 

 

It simply proclaims the first Saturday of every month as a 

buy-local day. Mr. Speaker, we support it. Local business 

people support it. An organization called Sasklandia has been 

pushing for it. The CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business] supports it, Mr. Speaker. It is an easy thing to do. 

 

As some members opposite have pointed out, every day should 

be buy-local day. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I would 

love this and I completely agree, but the reality is there are 

many people who actually don’t consider too much or think 

about where they spend their money. Decisions are often driven 

by convenience, perceived — sometimes real — cost savings, 

or simply out of habit, Mr. Speaker. So proclaiming the first 

Saturday of every month as Buy Local Day is an incredibly 

easy and incredibly effective way to share how valuable local 

businesses are to our province’s economy and to our 



6280 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2014 

community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can look at stats. Stats show that for every $100 spent at a 

local business, $73 stays in the province to pay local suppliers, 

wages, taxes, and services. Mr. Speaker, I think about my own 

family again, a supplier to local businesses in Saskatoon. And I 

know where my family spent their money, Mr. Speaker. You 

can contrast that with $100 spent at a business that is not 

Saskatchewan-owned, and with that only $43 per 100 stays in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. So $73 for every $100 spent — that 

is incredible bang for our local shopping buck, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a great way to bring benefits of shopping local into the 

consciousness of consumers who might otherwise not give 

some of their shopping choices a second thought. So declaring 

one day a month, Mr. Speaker, as a buy-local day again can 

help raise the consciousness of local consumers about where we 

spend we our money and why it’s good to spend it here at 

businesses, Mr. Speaker, that are locally owned and operated, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think in talking about Bill 607 it’s important to acknowledge 

the folks who have raised this as an issue here in Saskatchewan. 

You only need to do a simple buy-local search on the Internet to 

discover there are many places and many communities 

throughout North America embarking upon a similar campaign 

like the one proposed with this very common sense bill, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s places throughout North America who are 

doing very similar things. But this particular idea, the idea of 

declaring one day a month as a buy-local day here in 

Saskatchewan came from a group called Sasklandia: Fred 

Reibin, Kurtis Muench, and Roshan Hoover. These folks are 

working hard to build a buy-local movement here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They have four key pillars for building a buy-local movement, 

including connecting local businesses in a local community 

because getting to know one other and making connections is 

key to building a buy-local movement in our province; 

incentivizing and celebrating buying local; increasing the 

supply of locally produced goods, which will mean more access 

to local options. And their first plank and the one that we’re 

talking about here, Mr. Speaker, to gain support from the top, as 

they believe that it’s the most effective way to build a 

movement if you have strong support from the top, and that 

includes governments and legislatures and not just citizens. 

 

So this is why Sasklandia started pushing for the proclamation 

of a buy-local day. Very happy hearing the opposition to 

support this because it makes sense, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

colleagues on both sides of this House should be happy to 

support it when it comes time to the vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:30] 

 

I actually have a fair amount to say on buying local. There’s so 

many great businesses in, I think about my own community of 

Saskatoon. We’ve got places like . . . When we think about 

shopping local, it’s not just products that we’re buying. It’s 

about shopping, dining, purchasing services like a salon, for 

example. 

 

We’ve got the Good Food Junction in Saskatoon, Salon 

Williams. Vern’s Place, Mr. Speaker, which is just a couple 

blocks from my house, which if many people know about 

Vern’s Pizza which is where it started, Mr. Speaker, and that 

started in my community at Vern’s Confectionery, Mr. Speaker. 

The Better Good is one of my favourite shop-local places. Cafe 

Delish, Little Bird, Earth Bound Bakery. Actually Earth Bound 

Bakery, it was interesting, started out as a vendor at the 

Saskatoon Farmers’ Market. Farmers’ markets are great places, 

little incubators for businesses often, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I have much to say on this topic, but I do know, noticing the 

hour, that I need to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 607, The Buy Local Day Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:31.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6257 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6257 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6257 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6257 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6258 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6258 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6258 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6258 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6258 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6259 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6259 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6259 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6259 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6259 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6259 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6260 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6260 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6260 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6260 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6260 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6261 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6261 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6261 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6261 

 Regina Lutheran Home Meets Elders’ Needs 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6262 

 Director of Sexual Assault Centre Retires 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6262 

 Top Cadet Corps and Squadrons Honoured 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6262 

 Health and Wellness Centre Opens in Yorkton 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6263 

 Remembering Jean Beliveau 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6263 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Care and Staffing in Long-Term Care Homes 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6263 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6263 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6265 

 Purchase of Farm Land 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6265 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6265 

 Government Use of Consultants 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6265 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6265 

 Agreement with Smart Meter Supplier 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6266 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6266 

 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6266 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6267 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6268 

 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6268 

 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6268 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Performance of the New Democratic Party 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6268 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6271, 6278 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6272 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6273, 6277 

  Marchuk ........................................................................................................................................................................ 6275, 6278 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6276, 6278 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6278 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6278 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6279 

PRIVATE MEMBERS PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 607 — The Buy Local Day Act  

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6279 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


