




















































Hansard: May 08, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 61A  THURSDAY, MAY 8, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5355 

 May 8, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would seek leave for an extended introduction, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to colleagues. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure this morning to 

introduce Caitlin Taylor. Caitlin is seated in the front row of 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Caitlin is our 2014 

Saskatchewanderer, and I’m sure you also recognize her as our 

2013 Saskatchewanderer. She reapplied for the expanded 

year-long position last December, Mr. Speaker, and won the 

competition. Her skills and talent, passion and work ethic are 

exceptional. She was selected from a field of more than 40 

talented applicants. 

 

Caitlin has been travelling the province in her new role since 

the end of January. In addition to showcasing why 

Saskatchewan is a wonderful place to visit and a great place to 

stay, she is demonstrating what makes it one of the best 

provinces in Canada to live, work, start a business, and raise a 

family. Caitlin, Mr. Speaker, is an outstanding ambassador for 

our province. She continues to engage a huge social media 

following; she boasts nearly 6,500 followers between her 

Saskatchewanderer Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram accounts. 

 

As the 2013 and 2014 Saskatchewanderer, Caitlin has attended 

and participated in sport, recreation, and cultural events 

throughout the province, including the Mosaic cultural festival, 

the Wanuskewin Days powwow, and most recently a 

citizenship swearing-in ceremony here at the Legislative 

Building. She has spoken at numerous events throughout the 

province, including the Association of Saskatchewan Realtors 

annual general meeting, the Saskatchewan Trails annual general 

meeting, and regional heritage fairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish her the best of luck as she gears up to 

experience summer now in Saskatchewan for the second year in 

a row. She will continue touring and promoting our province 

until the end of this year. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the 

Assembly to welcome Caitlin to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 

behalf of the official opposition, through you and to you we are 

also very pleased to welcome Caitlin to this Legislative 

Assembly, a very important part of Saskatchewan and part of 

your wanderings. 

 

Certainly I think you have the absolute dream job, and we’re 

really thrilled to have you doing that job and representing 

Saskatchewan and getting out there and seeing all the wonderful 

opportunities that are available for people to do in 

Saskatchewan. And I know, I expect I’ll be maybe running into 

you at some of the festivals and events this summer, so 

hopefully we’ll run into you there. But certainly on behalf of 

the official opposition, we really are very pleased to welcome 

you to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, to and through you to all 

the members of the Legislative Assembly, I would like to 

introduce two people in your gallery today. With us today are 

Anne Chase, a board member with Ovarian Cancer Canada, and 

Stephanie Gosselin, regional manager for Saskatchewan and 

Manitoba with Ovarian Cancer Canada. 

 

I was able to participate in a flag raising with them earlier today 

in front of the legislature to recognize World Ovarian Cancer 

Day. Mr. Speaker, one of my colleagues will have more to say 

in a member’s statement. So I’d ask all members to join me in 

welcoming Anne and Stephanie to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the legislature, I’m pleased to join with 

the minister in welcoming Anne and Stephanie to their 

legislature on World Ovarian Cancer Day. It’s an important day 

to recognize an illness that doesn’t impact a huge number of 

people but the diagnosis often can be very . . . It’s not a good 

diagnosis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For bringing awareness and making sure that the women who 

are going through this can connect with one another, I think the 

work that you do is very important. And on behalf of the 

official opposition, thank you so very much for that and 

welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with my 

colleagues in welcoming to all members of this Legislative 

Assembly, to you and through you, I might add, Ms. Anne 

Chase from the Ovarian Cancer Canada society. 

 

And I’d like to make special mention of Ms. Stephanie 

Gosselin, who grew up in a community where both my wife and 

I grew up, and had since moved to Edmonton and Perth, 

Australia, Mr. Speaker, back to Airdrie, and now back to 

Shellbrook where her and her husband have moved with their 



5356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

three children to enter into a farming career. And I’d like to 

congratulate Stephanie on her recent position with Ovarian 

Cancer Canada as a regional director for Saskatchewan and 

Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Stephanie Gosselin — her maiden name was 

Hughes — has been a friend of my wife and our family for 

many, many years, and generations now. So I would like 

everyone to join me in welcoming Stephanie and Anne to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And while on my feet, Mr. Speaker, and speaking of my wife, I 

would introduce her as well to her Legislative Assembly. My 

wife, Krista Moe, came down with Stephanie. As I mentioned, 

we’re friends. 

 

But as we know and as the member opposite had indicated, 

ovarian cancer and cancer in general is a disease that reaches 

out and touches virtually every family in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And our family is no exception, with ovarian cancer 

touching our family six years ago. And my wife coming down 

to raise the flag at the Legislative Assembly with Stephanie and 

Anne today is special for us. And I would like all members to 

join me in welcoming my wife to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of this House, I’d like to ask all 

members to welcome several guests in the east gallery. These 

folks are from SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General 

Employees’ Union]. They’re here to watch the proceedings. 

They’re very interested in the discussions that we may be 

having. So on behalf of all members here, we’d like to ask all 

members to join us in welcoming them to their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the House, it gives me great pleasure to 

introduce 10 grade 5 and 6 students from the Englefeld School, 

the home of the Eagles. And with them today, they’re 

accompanied by their teacher, Jolene Gullacher; also parent 

chaperones, Andrea Burseth, Pam Crone, Vasyl Vorona, Rina 

and Cory Murray. 

 

They must have been on the road early today, because it’s a 

good two-hour drive anyway from Englefeld. And nice to see 

you all here. And I would ask all members of the House to 

welcome these students to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 23 

grade 5 and 6 students from Avonlea, Saskatchewan. They 

made about a 45-minute trip into Regina, obviously. They are 

accompanied by their teachers, Denise Dombowsky and Joanne 

Kirkpatrick; as well as parent chaperone, Jeff Robertson and 

Christina Daniel. 

 

And I have to say that once I put my glasses on there’s a lot of 

familiar faces up there from my days teaching back in Avonlea 

many, many years ago. So I would like everybody to welcome 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition against Saskatchewan health care 

laundry privatization. And we know that in May 2013 the 

Government of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize 

health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a 

for-profit, Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen. And we 

know that as a result of the decision to privatize health care 

laundry, six non-profit public health care laundry facilities will 

be closed within two years in the communities of Prince Albert, 

Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon. And 

we know that the privatization of health care laundry will mean 

the loss of over 300 good-paying jobs, devastating local 

economies and families. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 

Saskatchewan’s health care laundry, which will result in 

the devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, 

and Saskatoon. 

 

And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 

misuse vital taxpayers’ dollars by taking money out of 

Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 

an Alberta-based corporation. And furthermore, the 

privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 

risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 

over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 

ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 

outbreaks in health care facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from all 

over the province. Thank you so much. I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition. Many northern residents benefited 

from the rental purchase option program, also known as the 

RPO. These families were very proud homeowners in their 

community. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government 

stubbornly ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it 

cancelled the RPO, and that means the dream of home 

ownership is destroyed for many families in the North. And the 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To cause the provincial government to restore the 

rent-to-own option for responsible renters of the social 

housing programs and to reinstate the remote housing 

program. 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5357 

And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And we’ve had petitions signed 

from all throughout Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to present a petition for a residents-in-care bill of rights. 

Those who have signed the petition recognize that residents in 

care have the right to dignity, respect, and safety; that residents 

in care deserve basic guarantees of the quality of care they 

ought to receive; that it’s the responsibility of the provincial 

government to ensure consistent standards of care in facilities 

throughout Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

adopt Bill 606, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 

which would provide Saskatchewan seniors with the right 

to quality, high-level standards of care in seniors’ care 

homes. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by folks in Saskatoon. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition to the Government of Saskatchewan calling 

for improved safety on the Highway No. 1 corridor between 

Regina and Balgonie, which has become unacceptably 

dangerous as attested to by the number of traffic collisions, 

many involving personal injury and death, Mr. Speaker: 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 

respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan, 

until the overpasses are built along this corridor: (1) 

immediately install traffic lights at appropriate locations 

along Highway No. 1 between Regina and Balgonie, (2) 

immediately reduce speed limits to appropriate levels 

within this corridor, and (3) take steps to ensure that the 

speed limits are properly enforced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular batch of petitions represents 

citizens from Regina, Cupar, Pilot Butte, Emerald Park, Francis, 

Lumsden, Lemberg, Balgonie, Regina Beach, Raymore, 

Stoughton, Silton, and White City, including I think everyone 

on Fairway avenue. Mr. Speaker, this is again a significant 

batch of petitions coming forward in what are hundreds, if not 

thousands, of people calling for this action. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to present 

a petition that’s opposed to correctional service job 

privatization. The government has been going ahead with a 

proposal to deal with privatization of food service in the 

correctional system without properly listening to the front-line 

workers. And in this petition it’s: 

 

Respectfully requested that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan may be pleased to cause the government to 

cancel its privatization in the corrections and young 

offenders facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 

And these petitions are signed by people from Regina, Riceton, 

Lumsden, and Grand Coulee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today, and I’m pleased to rise to present a petition to the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. There’s over 1,500 

signatures here, Mr. Speaker. And this is in relation to the 

announcement of this government to close a number of public 

liquor stores in rural communities. 

 

And the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 

want to bring to our attention the following: the Government of 

Saskatchewan is planning to close Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority stores in Langenburg, Ituna, Ponteix, and 

Kerrobert. These closures will result as a loss of good jobs and 

quality public services. SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority] staff live and work in their communities. 

They have children who attend local schools, helping keep 

enrolments up and schools open. These workers support local 

businesses and pay local taxes. Public liquor stores return 

profits to the people of Saskatchewan, 232 million in 

2012-2013. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

stop the closure of public liquor stores in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals that have signed these 

petitions come from Annaheim, Balcarres, Battleford, Biggar, 

Birch Hills, Candle Lake, Cactus Lake, Coleville, Creighton, 

Denzil, and Delisle, Dodsland, Eatonia, Englefeld, Eston, 

Evesham, Fiske, Flaxcombe, Goodsoil, Grand Coulee, Gronlid, 

Gull Lake, Hague, Handel, Hanley, Hoosier, Hubbard, 

Humboldt, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Ituna, Kelliher, Kelvington, 

Kerrobert, Kindersley, Lake Lenore, Lang, Langenburg, 

Lanigan, La Ronge, Leross, LeRoy, Lestock, Lloydminster, 

Loon Lake, Luseland, Lumsden, Macklin, MacNutt, Major, 

Marengo, Martensville, Melfort, Melville, Moose Jaw, 

Muenster, Naicam, Nipawin, Outlook, Quill Lake, Pilot Butte, 

Plenty, Plunkett, Ponteix, Prince Albert, Raymore, Regina, 

Rosthern, Rose Valley, Rouleau, Saskatoon, Simmie, Spalding, 

Springwater, St. Gregor, Stranraer, Tisdale, Tramping Lake, 

Unity, Vanguard, Viscount, Watson, Weyburn, Wishart, and 

Yorkton. Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Mental Health Week 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 5th to 11th 



5358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

marks the Canadian Mental Health Association’s 63rd annual 

Mental Health Week. This is an important week to raise 

awareness about mental health issues in the community and 

work together to eliminate the stigma and discrimination facing 

individuals living with mental health problems. 

 

As the Canadian Mental Health Association points out, “Mental 

health is more than just the absence of mental illness.” Mental 

health is an important part of overall health and allows us to 

cope with stress, to work and to study productively, to 

contribute to our communities, and to realize our own abilities. 

At least one in three Canadians experience problems with their 

mental health each year, says the Canadian Mental Health 

Association. To that end, this year the association is launching 

the first ever Be Mind Full initiative. 

 

Peter Coleridge, the national CEO [chief executive officer] of 

the Canadian Mental Health Association says, “Too often 

people claim to be feeling fine when they do not feel fine.” The 

reality is approximately 7 million Canadians, 20 per cent of the 

population, live with mental illness but many do not seek 

treatment because of the stigma and discrimination associated 

with mental health problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, creating a supportive community for those with 

mental health challenges takes a commitment from individuals 

and governments. I encourage each of my colleagues in this 

House to take advantage of this awareness week, to learn more 

about how we can support and improve mental health services 

in our communities, and to realize the important role we can 

play in reducing the very painful stigma and discrimination 

facing those living with mental health challenges. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Women of Distinction Awards Gala 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last night I 

had the pleasure of attending the YWCA [Young Women’s 

Christian Association] Regina Women of Distinction Awards 

Gala. 

 

This great event is an extension of the YWCA’s commitment to 

supporting women in the realization of their full potential. The 

YWCA Women of Distinction nominee is a woman who 

displays a sustained and significant contribution in her field of 

endeavour whether it’s locally, nationally, or internationally. 

 

In addition to honouring talented women who make a 

difference, the gala awards dinner raises funds to support the 

YWCA’s program and services. There was a fantastic selection 

of silent auction items as well as great raffle prizes to be won. 

Many thanks to all the generous donations and sponsors. 

 

Awards were given in several categories including circle of 

friends; community leadership and enhancement; contribution 

to a rural community; cultural heritage; education and 

mentorship; entrepreneurship and innovation; leadership and 

management; science, technology, and the environment; the 

arts; wellness, recreation, and healthy living; and Young 

Woman of Promise. 

In addition, the Lifetime Achievement Award was presented to 

Jacqui Shumiatcher. Jacqui has been described as an 

unassuming, generous, courageous, young-at-heart woman. 

Jacqui has had a lifetime of achievement and accomplishment 

and long-time dedication to improving the lives of others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

each one of the 2014 Women of Distinction nominees and 

award winners. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Special Olympics Event in La Ronge 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend I had the pleasure 

to attend the first annual showcase sporting event and coaching 

clinic for Special Olympics Saskatchewan. Athletes and 

coaches from all across northern Saskatchewan came to La 

Ronge to showcase and build equality in sports for everyone. 

 

Special Olympics aren’t just a few days of sports competition 

once or twice a year. In reality the training for competition is as 

important as the competition itself. Special Olympics involves 

individuals of all ages and ability levels, including athletes with 

low motor abilities as well as highly skilled athletes who can 

compete at a higher level of sports both in and out of Special 

Olympics competition. It is a year-round program. Athletes who 

participate in Special Olympics receive a lifetime of learning 

through sports. They sharpen their motor skills, gain 

self-confidence, develop social skills that help them live a better 

life. 

 

The Special Olympics committee organized a dinner and a 

movie which was a community fundraiser. The local Elks 

Lodge had a pancake breakfast fundraiser that benefited local 

athletes. There was an exhibition of showcased sports including 

soccer, basketball, rollerblading, visual arts. These events were 

followed by appreciation supper and PowerPoint presentation of 

the entire showcase. 

 

I would like to extend my congratulations to the committee 

including Mike Clark, Pam Sanderson, Krissa McKay, for their 

vision and great work in bringing equality and dignity to these 

special athletes. To all the coaches, chaperones, many 

volunteers, and the JRMCC [Jonas Roberts Memorial 

Community Centre] staff, we appreciate your great work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

National Day of Honour 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today in 1945 Canadians celebrated the moment when Allied 

forces triumphed over Nazi Germany to claim victory in 

Europe. Tomorrow, May 9th, is also a day of remembrance and 

recognition of our Armed Forces as it is the National Day of 

Honour. 

 

The National Day of Honour commemorates the strength and 

sacrifices made by members of the Canadian Armed Forces in 

Afghanistan and recognizes the friends and family of the fallen. 

 

From May 4th to 9th, Canadians who have been injured in 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5359 

Afghanistan will participate in a six-day, six-city relay where 

they will pass the last Canadian flag flown in Afghanistan from 

Canadian Forces Base Trenton to the Afghanistan 

Commemoration Parade in Ottawa where the flag will be 

presented to the Prime Minister. In Ottawa, the National Day of 

Honour will be commemorated by a parade that will begin at 

the Canadian War Museum and travel along the memorial route 

to Parliament Hill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more than 2,000 members of the Canadian Armed 

Forces were wounded in this conflict and 158 women and men 

lost their lives. Because of the work that they did, more children 

have access to education, more Afghans are being trained as 

teachers, and through an ongoing vaccination campaign, more 

than 8 million children have been protected against polio. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me in recognizing the 

National Day of Honour and to take a moment tomorrow to 

reflect on the sacrifices made by the women and men in the 

Canadian Armed Forces and by their families and friends. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Youth Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, May 

3rd, I was honoured to attend the 13th annual Youth Business 

Excellence Awards in Nipawin. The YBEX [Youth Business 

Excellence Awards] Awards are hosted by Newsask 

Community Futures in order recognize the accomplishments of 

young people throughout northeast Saskatchewan and 

encourage entrepreneurship as a career option. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year there were 37 submissions which 

involved 79 youth, which is up considerably since last year. 

Since the YBEX Awards began, over 580 young people age 30 

and under within the northeast region have been involved in this 

worthwhile program. 

 

The categories were as follows: business plan, operating plan 

venture, Special Achievement Awards, Agriculture Business 

Awards, and the Newsask Memorial Award. 

 

While there are just too many award recipients to mention, I 

would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think that Carrot River 

Valley holds some of the most innovative and talented youth 

from around Saskatchewan. It was a great evening and I was 

marvelled by the accomplishments of the youth that we have 

coming from this corner of the province. 

 

I’d ask all members to please join me in congratulating the 2014 

YBEX Award recipients. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

World Ovarian Cancer Day 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 8th of last year 

marked the first World Ovarian Cancer Day. Once again May 

8th is the day we draw attention to this disease which kills 

1,750 Canadian women each year. Earlier today the 

Government of Saskatchewan raised the Ovarian Cancer 

Canada flag at the legislature in recognition of this very 

important day. 

 

Approximately 2,600 Canadian women will be diagnosed with 

ovarian cancer this year. The survival rate of ovarian cancer is 

90 per cent when the disease is detected in its early stages. Mr. 

Speaker, there are, unfortunately, no simple tests for early 

detection. The warning signs are easy to dismiss, and too few 

people know what symptoms to watch for so that they can seek 

treatment early. We can do our part by becoming aware of the 

risk factors for contracting ovarian cancer, and the warning 

signs. There are resources available from advocacy groups like 

the Canadian Cancer Society and Ovarian Cancer Canada. 

 

In Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan ovarian cancer support 

group has been meeting monthly since 2006 to share 

experiences, learn about research, and offer support. The group 

is open to women going through treatment, survivors, and 

family members of women touched by the disease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to thank the people that raise awareness 

of ovarian cancer so more women can seek medical attention 

and help sooner if they display a warning sign that will lead to 

diagnosis. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

A Mother’s Day Tribute 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

stand in the House today to recognize a very special day which 

we will celebrate this Sunday. It is of course Mother’s Day. 

This weekend we should all take the time to pay tribute to the 

women who brought us into this world and who helped raise us 

to be the people we are today. 

 

Our mothers are there to support us, love us, and maybe 

discipline us from time to time. They are anchors to our 

families, dedicating themselves to being important role models. 

As children, they feed us, run after us, clothe us, teach us, 

nurture us, and make sure we don’t get into too much trouble. 

Mine had a lot of work. 

 

Even when we become adults, their love and support never 

stops. As our province continues to grow, it is important for 

people to remember where they came from. Days like Mother’s 

Day helps to remind us and give pause and thanks to the people 

who are responsible for where we are today. Personally I am 

very thankful for my wife and the mother of my daughters, 

Leone; my own mother, Pat; and of course my wife’s mom, 

Elizabeth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

hard work, love, and support that our mothers continue to 

provide for all of us. We love you and appreciate all you have 

done for us. Happy Mother’s Day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



5360 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

Utilization of Saskatoon City Hospital 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Most people in 

Saskatoon and throughout the province cannot understand why 

Saskatoon City Hospital is not used for the purpose for which it 

was built. I think it’s probably safe to say that it’s never been 

properly utilized, but this government, Mr. Speaker, has made 

the situation much worse, much worse by actually closing City 

Hospital for acute care since 2008. 

 

This government turned City Hospital into a health facility that 

performs day procedures, provides outpatient services, and 

houses people waiting for long-term care. Anyone that shows 

up at City Hospital or ER [emergency room] during its reduced 

hours and needs to be admitted for acute care is transferred by 

ambulance to St. Paul’s or RUH [Royal University Hospital]. 

This defies common sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the Premier: how can this government, how can they defend 

the increasing underutilization of Saskatoon City Hospital under 

its watch? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 

are aware that the emergency department at RUH in Saskatoon 

is experiencing some capacity issues. What we’ve done with the 

three hospitals, the health region has looked at all three 

hospitals and made some efficiencies. Saskatoon City Hospital 

emergency will stay open into the future, as the Minister of 

Health has mentioned on a number of occasions. And there’ll be 

efficiencies around all three facilities in Saskatoon. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the associate 

minister give a reply, but I believe he pulled the wrong note 

there when he was trying to answer the question. The questions 

was, how can this government justify not using Saskatoon City 

Hospital for the purpose that it was built for? 

 

Dr. Nawal Sharma has spoken out publicly about this and 

expressed his frustration. He says: 

 

Most physicians and nurses think the standard of acute 

care in Saskatoon hospitals has steadily declined in recent 

years. This isn’t for the lack of effort by doctors, nurses 

and other care providers, but because of the lack of space 

and resources. 

 

He goes on: “It’s an unfortunate state of affairs that City, the 

best built state-of-the-art acute care facility, is closed for the 

purpose it was built.” 

 

Since writing that letter to the paper, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Sharma 

has met with senior health region administrators, and he’s 

identified at least 64 beds and rooms that were designed for 

acute care but are being used for administration offices or other 

purposes. My question to the Premier: how can he justify health 

care administration being so bloated that we have whole wings 

intended for acute patient care being used for offices and other 

purposes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Minister 

of Health has said in the past, Saskatoon City Hospital is not 

closing their acute care. In 2012 and ’13, Saskatoon City 

Hospital provided care to 5,483 in-patients; day surgery is 

operating in its main rooms, over 7,000 patients; emergency 

room service, over 5,000 patients; ambulatory procedures are 

taking place, which helped over 14,000 patients. 

 

As in most major cities in Canada with multiple hospital sites, 

there are defined roles and service expectations for each 

hospital. And with the continued growth it was experiencing in 

its day surgery, out-patient clinics, and diagnostic services, 

Saskatoon Health Region focused City Hospital as a hospital for 

ambulatory, acute care services, and the site for in-patient 

rehabilitation and complex generic care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before and as the Minister of Health 

has said repeatedly before, the acute care service will continue 

in Saskatoon City Hospital, as the member opposite knows full 

well. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if an individual, a patient, shows 

up at the ER during the reduced hours at Saskatoon City 

Hospital and they need to be admitted for acute care, Mr. 

Speaker, they don’t stay at City Hospital. They’re taken to RUH 

and St. Paul’s, which are very, very full. 

 

Dr. Nawal Sharma’s speaking out again precisely because the 

health region and the government are being stubbornly 

dismissive. And we see it again this morning. The government 

should listen to what he’s saying: “Most physicians and nurses 

think the standards of acute care in Saskatoon hospitals has . . . 

declined in recent years.” And he talks about congested ERs, 

undue delays in admitting patients, overcapacity alerts, hallway 

beds, and extreme pressure to discharge patients as soon as 

possible. 

 

Dr. Sharma wants to see a plan to see Saskatoon City Hospital 

used properly for acute care. He’s identified 64 beds in rooms 

that were intended to provide acute care to patients that are now 

used for purposes other than that. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

people, Saskatoon residents, health care providers in the 

province want Saskatoon City Hospital to be used properly. 

Why isn’t this government listening? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence 

of the Premier, I will gladly take this question. The region 

views Saskatoon City Hospital as representing the hospital of 

the future, in which care is increasingly provided on an 

outpatient and ambulatory care basis. With advances in surgical 

technique, anesthesia, and other technological improvements, 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5361 

more surgical procedures are being done as day surgery. 

 

And for the information for the House, on April 23rd, 2008, 

Saskatoon Health Region met with the Saskatoon City Hospital 

staff to discuss the future role of the three hospitals in 

Saskatoon. The major changes affecting City Hospital were 

decisions to combine critical care and in-patient medicine 

services at Royal University and St. Paul’s Hospital and focus 

City Hospital on day surgery and ambulatory services. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, will this government admit there 

are many beds in Saskatoon City Hospital, that was built to 

provide acute care for patients that are now not being used for 

acute care, are being used for offices, being used for 

administration, and being used for other purposes, and not 

providing acute care to Saskatoon patients when in fact RUH 

and St. Paul’s are bursting at the seams? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to take this question again. Again I can repeat what we are 

doing in Saskatoon. The one thing that the member should 

know, we in our government and our health system, that we are 

looking for efficiencies. We’re looking for ways to improve 

health care. It’s patient first. And we’ll continue to look for 

innovation and use all means necessary to improve the patient 

care to the people in Saskatoon. As I said before, the region 

views Saskatoon City Hospital as a hospital of the future. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in our government, we open long-term care 

homes, we open new hospitals. And the opposition when they 

were government, they closed hospitals across the province. 

They closed the Plains hospital, and they closed long-term care 

beds as well. And, Mr. Speaker, I like our record much better 

than the opposition when they were in government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Ministerial Relationship With Board Members 

 

Mr. Broten: — Yesterday I asked the Premier “Would it be 

appropriate for the minister to talk to her friend about issues 

related to the Social Services Appeal Board?” The Premier said, 

“The answer to the question is no . . .” 

 

But then we learn, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers actually paid for 

a one and a half hour discussion between the Minister of Social 

Services and her very close friend that she appointed to the 

board, and the topic of the discussion was about issues related 

to the appeal board. 

 

The Premier said yesterday that such discussions would not be 

appropriate. My question to the Premier: what action was taken 

after learning about the inappropriate conversation between the 

minister and her good friend who is the Co-Chair of the board? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I know that 

the members opposite were questioning the conversation we 

had, and I think the members should know there was never any 

individual cases discussed. What we have to talk about is the 

processes. We have to make sure that what we’re doing is 

making the system easier for the clients that we have. 

 

I had the opportunity last fall to talk with a number of members 

from the Social Services Appeal Board. And we discussed 

things like making sure that the system was available to them 

either through phones or video links, making sure that there is 

better communications between the caseworkers and the clients 

so they wouldn’t have to go to the appeal process, and making 

sure that we make it the very easiest we can for our clients. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the type of conversation that I needed to have, 

not just with Rita, but with other members from the appeal 

board to make sure that we can update and ensure that we have 

right processes for our individuals. 

 

That’s always been my concern, Mr. Speaker, is that people that 

are vulnerable have an opportunity to get the very best not only 

information but support they can from our government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Minister of 

Social Services went to Ghana and London, and there are many 

inappropriate expenses that were billed part of that trip. And we 

know that the minister took her very close friend along on that 

trip. They had a $200 personal lunch, paid for by taxpayers, 

which was only repaid once it was exposed. They were 

chauffeured around in a Mercedes at a cost of $3,600, which 

again was only repaid once we exposed it. And we know that 

the Minister of Social Services appointed the same friend as the 

Co-Chair of the Social Services Appeal Board, which is 

supposed to be, supposed to be an independent tribunal. But the 

minister and her friend have been chatting it up inappropriately, 

and that’s something that the Premier said yesterday would not 

be appropriate. Again my question to the Premier: why isn’t this 

being taken seriously? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as members of cabinet, we’re all responsible for the 

administration of certain pieces of legislation. I myself am 

responsible for the automobile accident insurance appeal board 

and, Mr. Speaker, I meet with the Chair of that board on a 

regular basis to talk about administrative matters, Mr. Speaker. 

It would be a shock to me to find out that members opposite 

when they were in government didn’t have the same 

conversations so that we can effectively work for the proper 

administration of the legislation that we’re responsible for, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if that person is the 

minister’s close personal friend of many years. It’s interesting, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. Now they’re getting these other 

ministers to pop up and try to provide a bit of backup. 

 

But they should listen to the own words that the Minister of 



5362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

Social Services has said. The Minister of Social Services said 

herself that she would think it would be inappropriate if an NDP 

[New Democratic Party] Social Services minister appointed 

their very close friend and travel partner to the Social Services 

Appeal Board. She said, “It’s probably better if they’re not a 

real close friend of the minister.” And she said, “I would 

imagine maybe this is the type of thing we should be reviewing 

again to see if, to make sure we’re not closely tied to somebody 

that’s on a board.” 

 

But the government, instead of admitting they made a mistake, 

they chose to double down on this and claimed there’s no issue 

whatsoever with the independence of the Social Services 

Appeal Board tribunal, where the next step is to go court. 

 

But now we know the minister and her very close friend have 

had at least one inappropriate conversation. And it’s not just me 

that’s saying that; the Premier yesterday said it would be 

inappropriate to have those discussions. My question, Mr. 

Speaker, to the Premier: why won’t he act on this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned 

in my first response, a number of us, most members of cabinet 

are responsible for the administration of the legislation that 

we’re responsible for, and many of those pieces of legislation 

are adjudicative in nature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m personally responsible for the administration of justice in 

this province. I meet with the Chief Justice of the Court of 

Appeal and the Chief Justice of the Court of Queen’s Bench on 

a regular basis to discuss administrative matters, Mr. Speaker. If 

that weren’t the case, then I can’t imagine how the 

administration of justice would be affected in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s no difficulty with members of cabinet meeting 

with Chairs of boards who are responsible in an administrative 

or an adjudicative manner, Mr. Speaker. That just makes sense. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, taxpayers paid $117.50 for the 

Minister of Social Services to have a one and a half hour phone 

call with her close friend on February 1st, who she appointed to 

the Social Services Appeal Board. The discussion was about 

issues related to the board. Well yesterday I asked the Premier, I 

said, “Would it be appropriate for the minister to talk to her 

friend about issues related to the Social Services Appeal 

Board?” And what did he say back, Mr. Speaker? The Premier 

said, “The answer to the question is no . . .” 

 

We’ve talked to others who are well acquainted with the Social 

Services Appeal Board who all agree that this interaction is 

completely unacceptable. At best, Mr. Speaker, at best, it 

contributes to the appearance of interference with an 

independent tribunal. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how on earth can he 

justify this after learning about the details of the contact 

between the minister and her very close friend? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the members 

opposite have a copy of the claim that says the phone call was a 

consultation re board processes. That’s exactly what we need to 

do, is to determine what the boards do and can they do it any 

better.  

 

Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition talked about the FOI 

[freedom of information] process and how that could be 

improved. I am always concerned about whether we can do a 

better job for our vulnerable citizens when it comes to an appeal 

process. Can they do it faster? Can they get their information 

sooner? Can they get their payments out quicker, Mr. Speaker? 

And really, part of the issue is making sure that the information 

between the caseworker and the client is shared easily so maybe 

we don’t need the process. It’s all about making it better for the 

individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is well aware this is not 

about individual cases. This is about process. That’s what it said 

on the statement. That’s what I talked about. And that’s the 

importance of doing the job that I do and my colleagues do. We 

have to make sure we can improve processes if we’re going to 

improve the lives of the people in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Living Skills Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday the member for Saskatoon Centre asked several 

questions regarding the current status of the living skills 

program offered at Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw. I have 

looked into this matter and found that this is one of some 300, 

approximately, programs, third party delivered programs by the 

Ministry of the Economy delivered through SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology. 

And I can confirm for the House this morning that this program 

has not been cancelled. 

 

We from time to time look at programs to provide the very best 

education, and programs are reviewed frequently. This includes 

a delivery of programs in other institutions such as community 

colleges or community-based organizations to ensure best 

practices are being followed. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Just for the benefit of all members of this House, this program 

comprises of an eight-week life skills training component 

followed by a 10-week work placement program. And I 

understand that there are people that have applied and have 

been accepted in both the spring and fall applications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a program that’s very important to the 

people in Moose Jaw. There’s been some 500 people over the 

years have gone through the program. It is extremely important. 

It adds to the component of about $84.3 million in this year’s 

budget for people with disabilities, for a total of $466.2 million, 

more than doubling the funding. 

 

This is a very important program, Mr. Speaker. You don’t have 

to take our word for it. Just look at what Amy McNeil, the 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5363 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rehabilitation Centres, has said. And she said, and I quote, “We 

are leading the country in . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Closure of Liquor Stores 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the government announced on 

April 3rd that it would close public liquor stores in Ituna, 

Langenburg, Ponteix, and Kerrobert. Many are concerned about 

the loss of jobs and the impact that loss will have on these rural 

communities. The Ituna Business Association wrote to the 

minister and said, “As the local business association, it was 

very disheartening to hear that a business in our town would be 

closing, and we hope that you will reconsider this decision.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we’re joined by many in our province who 

support these thriving public liquor stores. The application for 

franchises closes today. It’s not too late. Will the minister listen 

to the business association? Will she reverse her decision to 

close these liquor stores? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 

very important for the people of the province to know that the 

majority of retail sale outlets within our province is delivered 

through the private outlets. We have 190 private franchises 

throughout our province as well as 440 private off-sale outlets, 

and we only have 79 SLGA stores. 

 

The conversion has been done from an SLGA store to a 

franchise by all governments throughout the years in our 

province. It does not reduce the services in those communities; 

it only changes who is the service provider. This is a 

cost-saving business decision, Mr. Speaker. The closure of 

these four stores will mean an additional savings for SLGA of 

three-quarters of a million dollars. That’s money, Mr. Speaker, 

that our government’s priorities is to be spent on health care, 

education, and infrastructure. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’re joined today by SLGA 

employees from Ituna and Kerrobert. They share the concerns 

of the Ituna economic development committee who wrote to the 

Premier recently saying, “The impact for our current businesses 

is not what a small community needs. To keep a community 

viable, it’s essential to keep all businesses operating.” They 

went on to write, “Why would you do this when each year this 

location has made a profit and will continue to do so if allowed 

to stay open? These profits help secure funding for other 

government initiatives.”  

 

Will the Premier listen to the advice of the Ituna economic 

development committee and to the employees affected by this 

proposed closure and reverse his government’s decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said in 

my previous answer, the profit margins on these stores is less 

than the 15.3 per cent discount which is offered to franchises. 

Mr. Speaker, it is a cost savings business decision that our 

government has made and it will save us approximately 

three-quarters of a million dollars, Mr. Speaker. Those are 

valuable dollars that can be spent on our priorities of education, 

health care, and infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my entire constituency, I have one SLGA store. 

I have a number of very thriving communities that have 

franchises. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been told the minister met 

with the mayor of Kerrobert just this week, and I’ve also been 

told there was a meeting of 100 concerned citizens in Kerrobert 

last week. They asked for and got a two-month extension to the 

franchise application deadline. People in that area are concerned 

about the loss of their local liquor store, and people in many 

other communities are worried that their store might be next. If 

the minister stubbornly insists on closing these profitable stores, 

what does she have planned for other rural stores? How many 

others are on the chopping block? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this was a budget 

decision. The member opposite knows that there is only four 

stores. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Social Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 

volunteer board of directors of Earl Grey Housing Authority 

sent concerns to the minister, and one of those concerns had to 

do with the maintenance budget. But when we asked the 

minister why the maintenance funding for Earl Grey Housing 

Authority was cut by 63 per cent, she said the numbers were 

dreamt up the night before. 

 

The minister had received those very numbers a week prior 

from Earl Grey Housing Authority, Mr. Speaker, and we have 

those budget documents. And we know the facts are that 

government has cut the maintenance funding for Earl Grey 

Housing Authority from $1,475 to $550, a 63 per cent cut. I 

hope the minister can set the record straight today. Does the 

minister want to clarify her comments? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted 

to make sure that the member opposite knows, first of all, that I 

had an opportunity to speak to members of the Earl Grey 

Housing Authority yesterday. And we talked about the money 

that was given to them, and they understand that it’s a two-step 



5364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

process. They know that they were given a portion of their 

funds earlier this year, about $500 of it. And then they’re going 

to be reviewing the needs when it comes to the other housing 

authorities — the capital asset planning work that’s going on 

right now — to determine the work that should be . . . go on as 

we move on. They know there’s more funds available. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an important part of what we’re doing as 

government to ensure that the 18,000 units that we have are 

kept in good shape. And my conversation with the board 

yesterday, with a member of the board yesterday . . . They were 

delighted to hear that I was going to come out and meet with 

them, that we’re going to talk about this issue, and to see what 

other input they can have as we make decisions on the funding 

as we go forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — We appreciate the minister’s willing to sit 

down with the board, but the official from Sask Housing wrote 

to Earl Grey, instructing that the housing is intended for seniors 

of 60 years of age or older or those with a permanent physical 

or cognitive disability near that age. And the letter says and I 

quote, “If the housing authority rents a unit for other purposes, 

it must charge community market rent.”  

 

But that doesn’t line up with what the minister was saying 

earlier this week. She claimed that rent for all tenants is based 

on income. So the minister’s saying one thing, but her officials 

in the housing authority are under a very different impression. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, does she know what the actual policy is and 

how it’s impacting low-income people in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Yes, I’m well aware what the housing policies are. I’m well 

aware the changes that were made in the last while, and I’m 

well aware why they were made in the last while. We have to 

make sure that people that are vulnerable, people that are most 

in need are getting the houses that we have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we looked at the numbers of people that are 

renting these houses and know that there are some people that 

are making below $39,500 a year that can be in our homes. We 

know what the maximum rent is. We also know that some of 

the board will have the opportunity, if there’s chronic vacancy, 

to look at if somebody else can actually be in that home. 

 

Our goal is not to have empty homes. Our goal is to make sure 

that the homes are there for people who are most in need. That’s 

the discussion that we’re having. Not only am I . . . within our 

ministry, but with authorities that are right, the housing 

authorities across the province. That’s why I had a discussion 

with them. That’s why I’ve gone out to other authorities in the 

province, and that’s why I’ll be meeting with the Earl Grey 

Housing Authority. And I’m sure the members opposite won’t 

be there. 

 

The Speaker: — You can tell it’s getting close to the weekend 

again. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

National Day of Honour 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to mark a solemn event taking place tomorrow 

around the country. The federal government has declared May 

9th, 2014 the National Day of Honour for those who have 

served in Afghanistan and the 158 who died during the mission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will remember that on March 12th, in front of 

the Legislative Building there was a ceremony marking the end 

of the Afghanistan mission and the departure of the last 

Canadian troops from that country. That day the Premier 

opened his remarks with these words, and I quote: 

 

Today we honour the heroes who served our country and 

our province so courageously during the mission to 

Afghanistan. We come here, I would hope, humbled by 

the knowledge that others have sacrificed so much on our 

behalf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are humbled by the sacrifices of those who 

served. And even though we can only ever feel a portion of 

their loss, we join with families — mothers, fathers, brothers 

and sisters, spouses and children — to honour those souls so 

close to them who gave their lives so that we can live free. 

 

So many times over the more than 12 years of the Afghanistan 

mission, we wiped away tears and watched as a cavernous 

military transport on the ground at CFB [Canadian Forces Base] 

Trenton gave up its precious cargo in an all-too-familiar 

ceremony. Our nation’s heroes, borne on the shoulders of 

fellow soldiers, returned to Canada and to their loved ones, 

there to accompany them the rest of their journey home. 

 

Tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, we honour the more than 40,000 who 

served in Afghanistan, remembering those lost in combat in the 

overall mission and those who have tragically perished since. 

Along with their families and loved ones, they will all be 

honoured with two minutes of silence marked 

coast-to-coast-to-coast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the last act of remembrance coming up 

this year. On June 6th, we remember the 70th anniversary of 

D-Day. And later this summer, August 4th marks the 100th 

anniversary of the start of the First World War. On that day, just 

to the northwest of this building at the Saskatchewan War 

Memorial, we will hold a commemoration ceremony to honour 

those who answered the call and paid the supreme sacrifice in 

the First World War. It is not lost on us that 100 years after the 

Great War we are once again honouring those who have served 

and those who have laid down their lives on battlefields 

thousands of miles away to keep us safe and free. 

 

In response to those unprovoked attacks that took the lives of 24 

Canadians on that clear September morning, Mr. Speaker, our 

men and women in uniform took the fight to the perpetrators. 

They fought valiantly and without equal — sons and daughters 

of Saskatchewan, proud Canadians. 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5365 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the 17 names honoured on the 

Afghanistan plaque at the Saskatchewan War Memorial into the 

record: 

 

Corporal Jordan James Anderson 

Corporal James Hayward Arnal 

Corporal Cole Daniel Bartsch 

Lieutenant Justin G. Boyes 

Corporal David Robert William Braun 

Captain Nichola Kathleen Sarah Goddard 

Master Corporal Byron Garth Greff 

Corporal Shane Patrick Keating 

Corporal Bryce Jeffrey Keller 

Sergeant Darby Todd Morin 

Lieutenant Andrew Richard Nuttall 

Master Corporal Joshua Brian Roberts 

Sergeant Prescott Shipway 

Master Corporal Allan Maurice James Stewart 

Master Corporal Jeffrey Scott Walsh 

Journalist M.J. Lang 

 

The Speaker: — Statement has ended. I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The individuals who also passed away, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Corporal D.R.R.J. Wasden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may he rest in peace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do recall the day back in March when we, as 

an Assembly, gathered and recognized the service on the front 

of this legislature and had many veterans here in the Assembly. 

And at that time, Mr. Speaker, we, as an Assembly, recognized 

that the soldiers who have returned did their duty, that they 

have served their country for a purpose and a calling that is 

about promoting peace and a better global future for all of us 

here living on Earth. 

 

But we know, Mr. Speaker, that many individuals did not 

return. We know that war involves a great amount of death, a 

great amount of pain, and a great amount of suffering. So it’s 

absolutely appropriate that tomorrow we would recognize a 

national day of mourning to recognize those who paid the 

ultimate sacrifice, Mr. Speaker. And may we use it as a 

reminder that we do our duty as Canadians who are here to 

ensure that our veterans are treated properly and treated fairly. 

 

Since we won’t be gathering tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, I think it 

would be appropriate if we took a . . . by leave of the Assembly, 

stood for a moment of silence which you could conclude at the 

end of the appropriate length of time, Mr. Speaker, if members 

are in agreement with that. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 

leave for a moment of silence. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 

 

[11:00] 

The Speaker: — Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Anti-Poverty Strategy 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. It is a pleasure to stand 

today and enter into the debate on an anti-poverty strategy. And 

we’ve seen a lot more attention to this over the last few months, 

but it’s been a call that’s been going for many years, and it’s 

one that I think that we should heed. So it is an important 

debate that we have before we take our leave of the House for 

the summer. And we know that it’s one that has serious 

consequences right across this province. 

 

And we find ourselves in an unfortunate situation where we 

have . . . we are only one of two provinces that are left in the 

country without an anti-poverty strategy. And just as recently as 

earlier this week, we saw a situation where once again the 

Children’s Advocate . . . And it’s not a new call. The Children’s 

Advocate has been calling for an overarching anti-poverty 

strategy in Saskatchewan because, as he’s pointed out with the 

stats . . . And we’ll probably get into a lot of stats and I hope we 

don’t get into a situation of duelling stats, but I think it’s 

important that we take the time to really reflect on what the 

Children’s Advocate has said. 

 

Earlier in March we had the Poverty Costs coalition talking 

about it. A few years ago we had the Poverty Free folks talking 

about it. We’ve been calling for it. But many others have called 

for it and it’s just one that makes a lot of common sense. And I 

think with this government . . . And even the Minister of Social 

Services has talked about strategy. She’s talked about the 

mental health, addictions strategy and the disability strategy. 

Both are very good and wise initiatives, but it would be good to 

have us connect the dots. It would be very wise for us to 

connect the dots. 

 

I think that it’s important that every government realizes that 

we’re only as strong as our weakest link and how, if there is 

poverty in our communities, then it’s something that we should 

focus on. And it’s not one that we should be stepping back and 

congratulating ourselves if the rate goes down. Until there is no 

poverty, I think we keep focusing on it. And that doesn’t matter, 

whether when we were in government or the Sask Party’s in 

government, it’s something that we should rise above the petty 

politics of it and really strive to do the good job that I think that 

we can do. And this is where an overarching strategy can make 

a lot of sense. 

 

And as the Children’s Advocate had pointed out, 16 per cent of 

non-Aboriginal children live in poverty. Thirty per cent of 

Métis and non-status First Nations children in our province are 

living in poverty. Sixty-four per cent of status First Nations 

children in Saskatchewan are living in poverty. And we know 

that there are estimates that poverty costs us some $420 million 

in higher health care costs, and of course the whole issue of 

what this means for social assistance costs, some $720 million 

there. And as well, we know that Saskatchewan tops the list in 



5366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

terms of highest rates of women residing in a shelter. 

 

And we can go through this, and just last week I raised 

questions in the House about what was happening at our food 

banks where we see in Regina the food bank usage has gone up 

some 24 per cent in terms of senior citizens using its services. 

And for the first time, we’re starting to see seniors who are 

having to utilize shelters, emergency shelters, and this is 

something that nobody can take any kind of happiness. This is a 

call to action. This should be a call to action and one that we 

would happily embrace here in this House. And it would be a 

great thing if we were to say, listen, let’s really work on this, 

you know. 

 

And I recognize the government, as I said earlier, two strategies 

that they’re really striving to put forward, and I hope to attend 

some of their sessions. Good work. Good work. We have a lot 

of hope. There is a lot of optimism that those will do the jobs 

that they are required to do. But the question we have 

overarched is the same one the advocate has, the same one the 

poverty folks have, is the overarching strategy that to eliminate, 

to tackle the issue of poverty in our communities. 

 

And so I just want to reflect on a couple of articles, and then I 

do want to take a minute to talk about our own situation here in 

Saskatchewan. And of course, this was an editorial that was 

actually in response to the cost of poverty campaign. And it 

notes that it was a coalition of Saskatchewan community groups 

that put this together, and they really focused on the cost, the 

financial cost, and hoping that that would have caught the 

attention of this government. 

 

But the government while . . . And I understand some met with 

the Poverty Costs folks, and I’m happy to hear that. It’s always 

good to be meeting with community groups, and we would 

always hope the government does that. But there were no 

reassurances that anything more would come out of it, and we 

have some concerns about that. 

 

But a StarPhoenix editorial on March 15th, 2014, talks about, 

and the headline is “Ideology beats sound policy.” And it talked 

about two articles, or two news items, that were in play that 

week. One was of course the poverty campaign, and the other 

one of course was the whole issue on tanning beds. But it seems 

that . . . And this is the quote from The StarPhoenix: 

 

In both cases, the attitude of the government seems to be 

that other provinces can heed good advice and get positive 

results, but Saskatchewan will do its own thing despite 

evidence that says the government would avoid costly 

problems down the road by taking action now. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

Saskatchewan and British Columbia are now the only 

provinces without a poverty reduction strategy after 

Alberta, long the standard bearer for personal 

responsibility, recently adopting a comprehensive policy. 

Yet Social Services Minister June Draude insists that 

Saskatchewan’s growth in average weekly earnings and its 

low unemployment rate somehow point to a superior 

anti-poverty strategy in this province where a tenth of the 

population is impoverished. 

And it goes on to talk about: 

 

Given the . . . high cost of social programs such as health 

care and welfare, not to mention the human cost of 

unrealized potential that has its roots in poverty, it’s 

difficult to understand the provincial government’s 

reluctance to consider sound public policies in place 

elsewhere in Canada. 

 

And it goes on. But I have to say it’s something that we really, 

we should take the time to think through and rise above. Rise 

above, as I said, that petty politics that sometimes in this House 

stops us from doing the right thing, stops us from doing the 

right thing. So I would really ask today, as we debate this 

situation that we have in our province, that we really take a look 

at what can we do and really engage our communities to 

develop this overarching anti-poverty strategy. We have a 

moment in time. And I think that often this government likes to 

say we are either the first province to do something but, you 

know, it’s not really about being the first or last; it’s about 

doing the right thing. And it’s never too late to step up and say, 

you know what, let’s get at this problem; let’s get at this issue, 

you know. 

 

I was struck by this cartoon that was in The StarPhoenix back in 

the fall. And it’s a cartoon of Stephen Harper and it says, the 

one caption says, good news, the poverty rate is on the decline 

in Canada. And then the next box it says, bad news, the 

evidence-based data comes from a box of fortune cookies. And 

the fortune cookie is, the label on the box is, 2011 results of 

voluntary household survey. 

 

And this is the thing that I really worry about, that we’re 

missing. We’re missing out on . . . Sometimes we survey, 

sometimes we use data that isn’t that solid and we get caught up 

in that and it’s really unfortunate, particularly in the light of the 

changes at the federal level. We can’t really trust those 

numbers. But I do want to say, and I have raised these numbers 

in the House, you know, when we look at our own social 

assistance rates here in the province, while . . . 

 

And I do think and I have to acknowledge, and I will say this 

and I’ve said it many times, we are encouraged by the SAID 

[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program, and that 

has really worked well in terms of the call from the community. 

DISC [Disability Income Support Coalition] has really set the 

agenda on what we should be doing there. And full recognition 

to DISC and the good work they’re doing, and I’d also like to 

recognize the government for listening. Now we always have 

some questions about how it’s being implemented, but 

generally it is the right way to go. 

 

Now I have to say that this still leaves other situations that we 

have in terms of social assistance. And one that we see right 

across when we started keeping track . . . And this is through 

written questions, so if my numbers are wrong, they’re only 

wrong because of the written questions that we got, the answers 

that we got. So if there are better numbers, we would sure like 

to see them and have them because it’s important that we have 

accurate information. 

 

But we see right from 2008 when there was an average of 6,000 

families on social assistance. In 2012 that number actually . . . 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5367 

Actually it increased 2010 and ’11. We are still seeing about 

6,000: 6,100 in 2012, 5,700 in 2013. We haven’t got a full set 

of numbers yet for 2014. But that is really significant, Mr. 

Speaker. So while we know the minister will say and talk about 

poverty rates going down, that they’ve cut this and that, we see 

the numbers. 

 

When you couple them with what’s happening with the 

Children’s Advocate’s numbers and we see our own answers to 

written questions, we have concerns. And we see some 

problems with the children’s numbers here. These are the 

number of children that we see: in 2012, there were about 

13,000; last year, 12,400 children who were living in families 

who were receiving social assistance. That’s a shocking 

number, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that while we can talk about percentages or cuts in 

the poverty rates, these are real people. This isn’t a percentage. 

These are real kids who are in our schools across the province. 

Way too many of them are, you know, as the Children’s 

Advocate pointed out, are First Nations or Métis, but this is a 

real number. These are kids that are in our schools, in our 

neighbourhoods, and these are our families that are in our 

communities and our towns and villages right across the 

province. And we really should be doing something about it. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as well, the caseloads that we have for 

Social Services . . . And again these are numbers from written 

questions. And we see that in February of 2014, the latest 

numbers we have, there is a caseload for Social Services, when 

you combine social assistance, TEA [transitional employment 

allowance], and SAID, the number was 28,101. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, when we left government, the caseload was 25,998 — 

about 26,000. That’s 2,000 more than when we left government. 

Mr. Speaker, in the lowest, and then we have the lowest 

actually was in 2008, 23,678. 

 

So well we see the numbers are there, that there is work to do. 

And I always appreciate that the minister says there’s more 

work to do, but the first thing you do, you have to have a plan. 

You have to have a plan and one that fits all these pieces 

together. 

 

And I would really call on the government to take some time, 

really think about the value of their position of saying, no, 

we’re not going to do this. And while they say that we’re 

involved in action, but the actions aren’t having the effect that 

they think they’re having, that in fact it seems that they’re 

stuck, that they’re stuck. There may be things that they’re doing 

well, and as I said, and we’ll talk about SAID, but there’s many 

more pieces to the puzzle than just that. 

 

The Children’s Advocate has advocated for changes and a real 

focus on that because he sees the result when things go off the 

rails. So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time that we really think 

about this motion before the summer break. And I would move: 

 

That this Assembly call on the government to develop and 

implement a comprehensive anti-poverty strategy. 

 

And I do so with my folks on this side of the House. And I 

think it’s a very important motion, so I would enter this motion 

into the House. I do so move. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Centre: 

 

That this Assembly call on the government to develop and 

implement a comprehensive anti-poverty strategy. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m pleased to 

have the opportunity to enter into the debate. This is actually a 

debate that I have both personal and some experience in. I’ve 

got an interest in this for sure. 

 

So since this is the motion from the member from Saskatoon 

Centre, I take it that he’s trying to assert that this government 

doesn’t care about the province’s most vulnerable. And I find 

that to be a fascinating premise but not surprising since we’re 

used to the opposition standing up in this Chamber and making 

farcical and unsubstantiated claims. They like to frame this 

with, we’ve been told and this is what we are hearing. Well we 

already come to this Chamber and leave the hearsay and the 

gossip behind and stand behind what we say because we have a 

growth plan. We set targets and goals, and we have a lot. There 

is a lot more work to do. And I have nothing but examples here, 

and I’d be happy to read them into the record. 

 

So let’s start with poverty in Saskatchewan. In 2006 and 2011, 

that’s a 50 per cent reduction in the percentage of persons in 

low income. That’s a Stats Canada. So that’s from 10.7 per cent 

in 2006, 5.3 per cent in 2011. Saskatchewan is tied with 

Newfoundland for the second-lowest percentage of people 

living in poverty at 5.3 per cent, again another StatsCan 

number. Sask outperforms almost all other provinces and their 

strategies. And between 2006 and 2011, the incidence of child 

poverty dropped from 14.8 per cent to 6.2 per cent. 

 

The NDP record at this though, so the NDP introduced a 

strategy in 1998 called Building Independence: Investing In 

Families. That was in 1998. So the incidence of child poverty in 

Saskatchewan, in 1998 the incidence of child poverty was 11.2 

per cent, again a Stats Canada. That was the number. By 2006 

that number had gone from 11.2 per cent to 14.8 per cent, so the 

incidence of child poverty actually increased in those . . . while 

the opposition was in place. 

 

So the headline at the time, in 2005, here’s a headline on The 

StarPhoenix: “NDP fails to reduce child poverty: Saskatchewan 

numbers higher than the national average.” 

 

In 2003, the incidence of child poverty in Canada was 17.6 per 

cent, while in Saskatchewan that number was 18.3 per cent or 

40,000 children, says the 2005 Report Card on Child Poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And so Garson Hunter, who’s a professor of 

social work, University of Regina, social policy research unit, 

said, those numbers are disappointing; we don’t see any 

government social policies being brought in that meaningfully 

address the issue of child poverty. There’s Garson Hunter. I 

know him well, a really good prof, knows his stuff. 

 



5368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

In 2006 Saskatchewan’s child poverty rate was the second 

highest in the country. That’s the Child and Family Poverty 

Saskatchewan Profile 2008. And in the NDP’s 1991 platform, 

they promised to work to eliminate the need for food banks in 

Saskatchewan, wanted to work to end child poverty by 

providing increased income supplements. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

that didn’t quite occur. 

 

So I was kind of puzzled by the member from Saskatoon Centre 

when, and I’m not sure, but I mean he talked about it again 

today in his motion and he talked about the 24 per cent increase 

in the numbers of seniors using food banks. And that was from 

an April 30th, 2014 CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 

News article. So I’m not sure whether the member from 

Saskatoon Centre is either misinformed or misinterpreted the 

stats. I mean we saw today in regards to SIAST and the living 

skills program some difficulty understanding exactly what the 

facts were. So anyways in this article, it states that there was a 

24 per cent increase in the number of seniors using the food 

banks last month compared to last year at this time. 

 

So the HungerCount 2013 report however shows a 9 per cent 

decrease in Saskatchewan from 2012 in seniors using food 

banks, from 689 to 629 individuals. The overall percentage of 

people using food banks who are over the age of 65 is 2.8 per 

cent. So the overall number of people using food banks in 

Saskatchewan has decreased by 8.8 per cent from 2012. So I’m 

fascinated, you know, where these numbers come, but I guess 

HungerCount 2013, a reputable agency. Well okay. Not for 

now. 

 

So I’m going to go on because I’ve got nothing but examples of 

investments that this government has made for the most 

vulnerable. And I’m going to start with supports for seniors 

since we’re on that topic. 

 

So from our budget, so Social Services 2014-15 budget for 

seniors include $10 per month increase in benefits under the 

seniors’ income plan — that’s in July of 2014 — to a maximum 

of $260. That’s single seniors. And $225 per month for each 

member of a married couple. All right. An increase in the 

monthly income threshold and the personal care home benefit 

from $1,875 to $1,950, that’s again in July of this year. 

 

Let’s move on, since I’m proud to be the Legislative Secretary 

for disability issues, proud to be a part of that. Well let’s talk 

about the investment we’ve made for people, citizens with 

disabilities. So in particular, $9.9 million in funding for the 

Ministry of the Economy’s employability assistance for people 

with disabilities program to assist adults with disabilities to 

prepare for, secure, and maintain employment. Again, an 

amazing program. 

 

I, for one, like to trumpet any time I can the issue of . . . and our 

program, our SAID program, Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability program. And I’ve got nothing but positive comments 

from people in the disability community about how grateful and 

happy that they are, amazingly. 

 

Anyway so this Ministry of Social Services investment of $5.1 

million in 2014-15 will increase benefits under the SAID 

program for the third year in a row — $20 a month for those in 

residential care, $50 a month for individuals, $55 a month for 

couples. This increase will take effect in June of this year. It 

will benefit more than 12,000 households. Absolutely, 

absolutely amazing, sir, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy again to 

talk about this and go on in terms of the SAID program, this 

four-year commitment to increase income, living income 

benefits by $100 a month for those living in residential care; 

$350 a month for those in independent living arrangements; and 

$400 a month for couples who are living independently. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to talk about some of the pieces that 

we’ve been involved in in relation to tax reduction. So for 

instance the low-income tax cut-off, the low-income cut-off . . . 

Since 2007 Saskatchewan has seen larger reductions in the 

incidence of low-income, both adults and children, than any 

other province in Canada. Saskatchewan has the lowest rates of 

low income for all persons and children in Western Canada. 

Saskatchewan has the second-lowest incidence of low income 

for all persons in the country. So between 2007 and 2011 the 

number of Sask residents in low income declined by 23,000 

people, including 8,000 fewer children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the actions that we’ve taken to assist low-income 

people, we increased the minimum wage by over 25 per cent 

since 2007 from $7.95 to $10 an hour; implemented historic 

personal income tax cuts since 2008 which have removed more 

than 114,000 lower income Saskatchewan people from the 

provincial tax rolls; doubled the low-income tax credit; and 

significantly increased the income threshold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go on. Just a couple more pieces. But 

in relation to adult basic education and in relation to First 

Nations and Métis, $5.9 million targeted specifically for First 

Nations and Métis learning to continue efforts to close the gap 

between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people — 25 per cent 

of the adult basic education budget is allocated for on-reserve 

programming. 

 

In 2012-13 the demographic participant information showed 68 

per cent of adult basic education learners are First Nation and 

Métis and lastly, Mr. Speaker, adult basic education training 

continues to focus efforts on First Nations-Métis education and 

the employment strategy. Mr. Speaker, thank you so much 

for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand today and participate in the debate and of 

course on the motion:  

 

That this Assembly call on the government to develop and 

implement a comprehensive anti-poverty strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that now is the most crucial 

time for the people of Saskatchewan to begin some of this 

particular work, Mr. Speaker. We heard the member from 

Saskatoon Centre speak very eloquently about the challenges 

that many people face within his constituency, within his city, 

and of course within his province.  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important, that we also 

stress on this side of the Assembly, is that on page 10 of the 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5369 

child’s advocate report, there is a couple of headlines that really 

caught my attention. And the first headline on page 10 is, 

“Two-thirds of status First Nations children live in poverty.” 

That was one headline, Mr. Speaker. The second headline, and I 

quote again from the document, “Children living on reserve do 

not . . . [enjoy] the same level of services as those off reserve.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when I mentioned earlier that I thanked my 

colleague from Saskatoon Centre for calling on this government 

to develop a comprehensive anti-poverty strategy, Mr. Speaker, 

that he comes from an area that has a myriad of people from 

different worlds and of course different lifestyles. And he 

speaks very eloquently and passionately about the challenge 

that all people face, and I recognize that. There are many people 

in many of our communities that struggle, and the ones that pay 

the greatest price are perhaps the children. 

 

Now I think what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, when I look 

at the document itself, I want to take a reference to the 

document and speak about the First Nations and Métis people 

and of course the northern community people as well. I do this, 

not out of disrespect nor to diminish the needs of others, but to 

simply highlight the cause and the concern that many northern 

leaders and many northern people have expressed over the years 

as we talk about developing an anti-poverty strategy as a 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look at the revenues that the government 

currently enjoys, great revenues from oil and gas. The 

agricultural sector is certainly booming, Mr. Speaker. You look 

at the industry of potash. You look at the cattle industry. You 

look at the tourism opportunity, Mr. Speaker. You see the great 

amount of revenues that Saskatchewan is enjoying at this 

juncture of our history. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And this is the purpose and the reason and the logic I think 

behind my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre, is 

doing the call and has continued doing the call for the 

government to get serious, to get serious about implementing a 

very comprehensive anti-poverty strategy. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think the member from Saskatoon Centre recognizes the great 

amount of income that the current government enjoys. The 

economy is booming. The population is growing. But there’s 

still a segment of our population that is not feeling the benefit 

and is not feeling part of our province because of poverty. 

 

Now in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have many 

challenges that we often want to speak about. And I look at 

some of the families and some of the hurtful things that have 

been done to some of the families in northern Saskatchewan. 

And many of the cuts are related to the Social Services 

department, in particular the Sask Housing component. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know many people’s rents have gone 

sky-high. We know many seniors in our cities are paying much 

more rent than they anticipated. We know they’re paying more 

for their medicine. But in northern Saskatchewan, that problem 

is also dramatically increased because of the distance from 

some of our more central markets. And we’re talking paying a 

significant amount more for power, because you consume more 

power in the North because some of the houses are not properly 

insulated, in particular the Athabasca Basin where it’s not 

uncommon to see 900 to $1,000 a month for power bills. Mr. 

Speaker, we see the high cost of transporting basic foods that 

help address poverty and, Mr. Speaker, nothing from this 

particular area has been addressed whatsoever. 

 

We see families that are finally starting to see a little light when 

they have the opportunity for employment, where they have 

struggled when they were younger with very young children. 

And they go to school. They get a trade. And, Mr. Speaker, they 

then turn around and get a decent job. And this family wants 

one thing that 77 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan enjoy, 

and that is the opportunity for home ownership. And you look 

at what has not been done in support of these communities, is 

that they have not been afforded the opportunity to buy their 

house off Sask Housing because the minister callously 

cancelled that program. And it affects that family, that working 

family, Mr. Speaker, and the children living in those homes. 

 

Day in, day out we stand here in this Assembly and we present 

petitions on the remote housing program, on the rental purchase 

option, for many families in northern Saskatchewan so that 

they’re able to exercise those options and buy out Sask 

Housing, so they can see the value and achieve the dream of 

owning their own home and having a mortgage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the fundamental difference, the fundamental 

difference that I’d point out to people that might be listening, 

and the reason why I think the member from Saskatoon Centre 

made this very compelling argument, is now’s the time. The 

economy of Saskatchewan is pumping on all cylinders. The 

Government of Saskatchewan is enjoying record revenues, 

enjoying record revenues, and as much as they want to pat 

themselves on the back, they simply inherited the booming 

economy and the growing population. But we’re not going to go 

there, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to go there primarily 

because it takes lot of hard work and a lot of hard years to 

rebuild the economy and the hopes of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But while we have this largesse of revenues coming into our 

province, while we’re enjoying the boom of the agricultural 

sector and of the tourism sector, of the oil and gas sector, of the 

mineral sector, and the list goes on of how every sector in 

Saskatchewan seems to be pumping on all cylinders, making 

our province stronger financially and, Mr. Speaker, that is 

something that we within the NDP circles applaud and 

recognize it’s something that we need to continue building on. 

 

However, the fundamental argument that we have is while we 

have this opportunity, we should be doing a comprehensive 

anti-poverty strategy to help those that have less than us. It is a 

very simple message: to help those that have less than us. And 

there’s nothing more compelling and compassionate than that 

basic statement that the member from Saskatoon Centre has 

made on a continual basis. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we see the actions, as I mentioned, of 

cutting programs that are very essential to northern 

Saskatchewan communities and to First Nations and Métis 

people. When we see the advocate’s report say that two-thirds, 

almost two-thirds, and I’ll quote again, “Two-thirds of status 

First Nations children live in poverty,” these are Saskatchewan 



5370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

people, Mr. Speaker. Yes, they enjoy the distinction of being 

our First Nations people, but they live in Saskatchewan. These 

are Saskatchewan families. These are Saskatchewan children. 

And we can’t understand, on this side of the Assembly, with the 

largesse we have in terms of a government getting a great 

amount of wealth, why can’t they do something to help those 

that are less fortunate than many of us in our province. 

 

But a fundamental difference I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, in the 

last minute that I have, is that if you look at the callous attempt 

by the government to divert the attention of people to what the 

NDP did or didn’t do versus what they’re trying to do today, the 

fundamental difference that I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan 

and why we’re calling for an anti-poverty strategy, Mr. 

Speaker, is today, 2014, the Saskatchewan government enjoys a 

$14.2 billion budget. They enjoy a $14.2 billion budget. That 

was their budget this year, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you that 

that is a phenomenal amount of money to have at your disposal. 

 

When the NDP assumed government in 1991, Mr. Speaker, we 

had a deficit of $15.5 billion. So it’s almost a $30 billion 

difference. So our point is and my point is, you can stop playing 

the games of saying, why didn’t you guys do this? And our 

response is, because the province was flat broke. Now we’re 

saying, you guys do this because you’ve got $14.2 billion to 

work with and, Mr. Speaker, they’re failing. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — “We believe that the fundamental objective of 

public office is to serve our fellow citizens with integrity in 

order to improve the economic and social conditions of all 

Saskatchewan people.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, this direct quote is 

taken from the Legislative Assembly’s code of ethical conduct 

for members of the Legislative Assembly as found on our 

website at legassembly.sk.ca. These are not just words on a 

website. They’re an inspiration for action, action that helps 

maintain a strong economy, action that puts money back into 

the pockets of those that need it; action that provides traditional 

assistance for those who need it, and action that focuses on 

programs that help people make the transition from poverty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it truly is an honour to participate in this debate. I 

thank the member opposite for bringing up the issue of 

reduction of poverty in Saskatchewan. It really provides me the 

opportunity to highlight the many actions that we have taken to 

improve the economic and social conditions of all 

Saskatchewan people. Together my colleagues and I have taken 

a multi-pronged approach and made a commitment to holistic 

cross-government solutions. 

 

The message from Kelvington-Wadena member, who is our 

Minister of Social Services, says it so eloquently, and I quote 

from the document From Dependence to Independence that 

says: “We are also measured by our efforts to ensure the needs 

of the most vulnerable members of our society are met.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can talk about taking action 

now. Well we’re two steps ahead of them all of the time. The 

caseload, our member opposite said the caseload is horrendous. 

Well let’s compare the results of undisciplined rhetoric to our 

disciplined action. The child welfare caseloads when the NDP 

were in government rose by 53 per cent. And we’ll just 

compare those seven years, from 2000 to 2007. 

 

What we are doing is we are working on four pillars: sustaining 

a strong economy, ensuring our citizens have more disposable 

income, removing barriers to independence, providing financial 

support to our most vulnerable citizens. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our actions are fulfilling a commitment of 

our growth plan. We have purchased an additional 300 training 

seats. Now in the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade 

Certification Commission, we now have 6,700 training seats. 

We have increased training allowances and income support to 

support 1,000 new apprenticeship and ABE [adult basic 

education] opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from, my colleague that just finished 

talking in the House here, indicated . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Coronation Park. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Coronation Park, thank you . . . indicated that 

we have been increasing all of these helps for our most 

vulnerable. Well now we have 6,700 opportunities for 

apprenticeship training funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca can talk about 

whether we pay attention to First Nations or not. Here are some 

statistics that’ll help him understand just where the First 

Nations and Métis are participating in Saskatchewan’s bright 

future. We have 68 per cent of adult basic education learners 

that are First Nations and Métis. Well we have put 25 per cent 

of our ABE budget for on-reserve programming. We have 

Aboriginal participation increasing in apprentices to . . . We 

now have 13.8 per cent of total apprentices are First Nations. 

Our First Nations are part of our Saskatchewan economy. Note 

that that is almost the same as the ratio of First Nations in our 

province. So our disciplined action speaks far louder than any 

undisciplined rhetoric the NDP will throw around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have what I like to call the Hub and COR 

[centre of responsibility] in Prince Albert. It is a model that is 

being recognized around our province and across the world. 

Because of the leadership that is shown by our city, we have 10 

active Hubs in the province in Prince Albert, Yorkton, La 

Ronge, North Battleford, Moose Jaw, Estevan, Weyburn, 

Nipawin, Lloydminster, Swift Current, and Saskatoon. 

 

I would like to point out that since the implementation of the 

Hub in Prince Albert we have seen an overall crime rate 

decrease by 18 per cent and violent crime rate decrease by 38 

per cent. Not only that, we are being recognized around the 

world. Just yesterday The StarPhoenix highlighted — on the 

May 6th StarPhoenix — highlighted that P.A. [Prince Albert] 

serves as a role model. And this is a quote: “Its ability to get 

results comes primarily from a willingness to look at evidence, 

weigh and adopt those measures that are deemed successful, 

and adjust those measures that fall flat.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are full of action, not undisciplined rhetoric 

like the opposite members like to . . . Mr. Speaker, we also have 

taken actions to increase the minimum wage over 25 per cent. 

What that means is that we are now going to have a minimum 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5371 

wage that is over $10 per hour compared to $7.95 in 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2008 and again in 2011 our government 

increased the basic spousal exemption amounts and the 

dependent child tax credit amount. What that means is that a 

Saskatchewan family of four or more with an income of 75,000 

is expected to pay less in total provincial taxes and utilities than 

their counterparts in any other Canadian province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the North those people that need a little helping 

hand up, are income assistance recipients, receive an additional 

$50 per person per month in recognition of higher food costs. 

Again actions speak louder than undisciplined rhetoric. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, our citizens are pulling together. We are working 

shoulder to shoulder to reach Saskatchewan’s full potential. We 

are looking at a bright future that includes the most vulnerable. 

It helps people make the transition from poverty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the senior income plan, we see that we have 

increased benefits under the senior income plan. We have 

constructed long-term care facilities in Biggar, Kelvington, 

Kipling, Maple Creek, Prince Albert. We have increased 

funding for urgent issues and we call it the Urgent Issues Action 

Fund. And this will continue to improve services and long-term 

care facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can keep going on and on and on about how our 

record clearly indicates our government’s propensity to act. Our 

actions speak louder than words. We are creating a reduction in 

poverty. We are helping the people of our province — all 

people of our province. 

 

When I talked about the seniors’ income plan, let’s compare the 

failure of the NDP with their undisciplined rhetoric and the 

success of disciplined action. The NDP failed to increase the 

senior income plan between 1992 and 2007, and they have the 

audacity to say that they are taking care of the most vulnerable. 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the third-lowest percentage of 

seniors living in low income in Canada. Disciplined action 

versus undisciplined rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Coronation Park indicated that 

we have reduced the percentage of persons on low income. The 

headline in The StarPhoenix on December 5th indicated 

Saskatchewan NDP fails to reduce child poverty. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

pleased to rise on this debate in regards to the motion that my 

colleague has made. And I think it’s a bit disappointing that 

some of the speakers haven’t taken time to actually address the 

motion itself and instead just provide a little list of things that 

they wanted to highlight. But they obviously missed the point of 

the motion, so I’m going to try and address that a little bit in the 

short time that I have. 

 

The motion reads: 

That this Assembly call on the government to develop and 

implement a comprehensive anti-poverty strategy. 

 

And I think that’s something that’s been highlighted and is 

certainly not something that . . . raging rhetoric from the 

opposition. It actually comes from the recently released annual 

report for the Children’s Advocate. So I don’t know if this 

untrammelled tendency towards ridiculous rhetoric is 

something we could apply to the Children’s Advocate. And 

that’s a very important role in our province that highlights some 

of the issues that many of our most vulnerable people are 

facing, and particularly children, which is always a huge 

tragedy as everyone knows. 

 

Now in his report — and this is on page 10 just so everybody 

knows what we’re talking about here — he made a comment 

about where this strategy is or whether it’s in place at all. And 

what he says on page 10, in the paragraph, he says, 

 

The provincial government has started developing such an 

overarching strategy, with investments in [things like] the 

Child and Family Agenda, and . . . the Joint Task Force on 

Improving Education and Employment Outcomes for First 

Nations and Métis People and the Mental Health and 

Addictions Action Plan. 

 

But what he goes on to say is that “A poverty reduction plan 

could provide an overarching framework in which to address 

poverty in a more focused, measurable way.” And this is the 

concerns that, I think, we’re trying to highlight and hopefully 

members opposite will take time to actually think about what 

the role and overarching plan would achieve in terms of 

bringing all these actions they talk about into a proper focus. 

 

The Children’s Advocate goes on to say in the next page . . . 

He’s talking about how children living on-reserve are not 

receiving the same level of services as those off-reserve. And he 

does commend the province and the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and the Métis Nation for 

publishing their report in 2013 on the joint task force. But he 

goes on to say, and I quote, “This work needs to begin in 

earnest now.” So there is work that needs to be done on all 

these activities that the province has indicated it’s working on. 

 

What I’d like to focus on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a report that 

came out, and it was a review of the plan that this government 

introduced in 2012. It’s called From Dependence to 

Independence, and this was a report released by the Ministry of 

Social Services in 2012. And in the introduction . . . The report 

itself is called Saskatchewan’s Anti-Poverty Plan, From 

Dependence to Independence: Does it measure up? And it’s 

written by Brian Banks and Paul Gingrich. And these two 

individuals took some time to look at the plan that the 

government released in 2012, and they point out a number of 

deficiencies that exist. And obviously the Children’s Advocate 

is also concerned about the way they’re approaching 

anti-poverty in this particular government. 

 

So in the introduction to the report, the authors write: 

 

In 2012 the Saskatchewan Ministry of Social Services 

published From Dependence to Independence, a lengthy 

report describing the policies and programs it has designed 



5372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

to attack poverty in Saskatchewan. The preface makes 

strong claims regarding its intentions, “Previous 

governments in this province should be acknowledged for 

their work on different aspects of poverty, but no previous 

administration approached the challenge with a 

comparable commitment to holistic, cross-government 

solutions. 

 

And it goes on to say, further down the page: 

 

From Dependence to Independence sets out four pillars of 

poverty reduction: sustaining a strong economy, ensuring 

citizens have disposable income, removing barriers to 

independence, and providing financial support to the most 

vulnerable; as such it appears to be Saskatchewan’s 

version of an anti-poverty plan. 

 

And the paper . . . That’s the end of the quote. And they go on 

in the paper to analyze these four pillars that are identified in 

this plan. And they point out some of the flaws I think that this 

government would do well to pay attention to. So the first pillar 

that they talk about is sustaining a strong economy. 

 

And before that, on page 6 of their report, they talk about the 

resource boom and how it has provided some economic results. 

But what they also talk about is the other side of the growth 

equation. And here’s what they have to say: 

 

On the other side of the growth equation housing prices 

have risen to unprecedented highs, the availability of low 

cost housing has reached historic lows and . . . [housing] is 

a growing public issue. And despite relative prosperity 

income inequality has not been reduced. In Saskatchewan 

inequality sharply increased from 2000 to 2006, then 

declined slightly, remaining above the level of the 1990s 

. . . Rapid growth of international immigration to the 

province, approximately 31,000 between 2007-2011, has 

added to Saskatchewan’s low income population. 

 

So the concern here that they express further on in the page, and 

I quote, is, “From Dependence to Independence is almost 

exclusively focused on an income approach to poverty 

reduction.” So this is a very ideological approach that I think is 

very classically reflected in many conservative governments, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this government of course is no 

exception to the rule. 

 

But the authors point out further: 

 

Poverty, however, is not just about income levels; it is also 

about lack of opportunity, provision of meaningful 

employment, and developing a sense of belonging and 

community. 

 

And we know there’s other groups that have highlighted these 

issues over the years, most recently a group called Poverty 

Costs. That was a campaign to raise awareness about the cost of 

poverty in Saskatchewan. And they continually point out that 

there are many, many factors involved in poverty that go way 

beyond the income level of the individual, and they talk a lot 

about the cost of poverty. That’s the main focus of the paper. 

But Poverty Costs indicated that in spite of a growing economy, 

poverty has not gone away; 11.9 per cent of Saskatchewan’s 

children are still living in poverty. So what doesn’t add up here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? And I think that’s the question that this 

anti-poverty plan would answer if it was taken, and if the social 

science research that was applied to an overarching plan like the 

Children’s Advocate is calling for, we would clearly, clearly see 

that it’s not just about income. There are all kinds of factors that 

factor in. 

 

The pillar one, which describes the economy, the authors point 

out it’s not usually a theme in an anti-poverty plan because 

those plans usually focus on anti-poverty measures. But he says 

by focusing on the economy, this plan . . . And I’ll quote them. 

They say, “By describing all low income persons as dependent, 

the plan establishes a negative frame of reference and creates 

stigmatization and a sense of ostracism from the rest of 

society.” 

 

And the second pillar is, to ensure citizens have disposable 

income, describes how this government is taking steps to 

provide more income. And the concern there is, “While these 

changes, particularly reduced taxes on the lowest income 

quintiles, have a positive effect on those with lowest incomes, 

many of these programs also provide superior benefits to 

middle and upper-class income earners, not the poor.” So I 

think that’s one of the flaws I think that this government needs 

to address. 

 

And then finally pillar 3 is about nine areas of government 

intervention. And pillar 4 describes financial support to some 

vulnerable populations, but the focus there is on seniors and 

those requiring extra shelter allowance and transportation 

allowance. And the comment here is, “Programming directed at 

improving opportunities for unattached individuals, single 

parents, First Nations, rural poor, and immigrants is difficult to 

identify. It is apparent from a later discussion the plan that First 

Nations education and employment are seen as a success 

indicator, but there are very few specific initiatives in the plan 

to address this long-standing issue.” 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there just isn’t enough time to 

go through the entire report. 

 

I’d spoke about, last week in the 75-minute debate about a 

project that my constituency assistant was doing last week. It’s 

a challenge called living below the line, and it’s a challenge for 

everyone to live on what welfare recipients would live on when 

it comes to their food. And this is from her blog, and I’m going 

to quote from her blog last week. It reads: 

 

A conversation with the husband this morning resulted in 

us adding up what $1.75 turns into when you look at a 

month. So $1.75 for 30 days is $52.50. A single person on 

the Saskatchewan assistance program gets $714 per month 

for every expense you can imagine. $459 of this is for 

shelter. 

 

And it goes on to say, you try and find a place in Saskatoon for 

that. 

 

And I’m going to run out of time. I won’t be able to read the 

whole blog, but I strongly recommend, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that you look at it. Her name is Erica Spracklin and this is her 

blog on her experience in poverty. It’s worthwhile looking at. I 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5373 

urge the Assembly to support this motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to yet again rise in this House to take part in a debate of this 

magnitude. This is a worthwhile discussion to have as we have 

a government who has in the last, first term . . . in these last two 

years of this current term has worked tirelessly, but not as just 

ministers in government, but working with the deputy minister 

level and the individuals that give every day of their lives to 

government and public service to try to make people’s lives in 

this province a better place. 

 

And it’s that note where I want to start in this debate, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, about the inter-ministerial work that’s being 

done and by the Minister of Social Services today, who along 

with other ministers are working with their deputy ministers and 

staff to ensure that the most vulnerable people in our population 

aren’t forgotten and left out. 

 

We’ve always said from day one that we believe that our 

government . . . Had we been lucky enough to form government 

in 2007, we’d talked leading up to the election that we believe 

in a hand up versus directly handouts. Now there are people 

who need our help, who will always need help of government 

because they are unable to crawl out of a situation due to 

limitations beyond their control, whether it be inherently just a 

cycle of perpetual violence they live in or it could be that their 

personal lives are just such that through mental health or 

addictions or through physical ailments they will never be able 

to get out of a situation without some hand up or maybe in some 

cases even a handout still. But that’s important to recognize that 

that’s the group that we’re talking about today, I believe. 

 

There’s a lot of individuals in this province who are seeing and 

. . . The economy in this province is actually thriving. It has and 

we’ve always said it’s . . . We don’t take credit for that. We’ve 

gotten out of the way of that economic boom, we’ll call it, or 

economic expansion in the province. The government has 

always, under our Premier, has always said we need to form 

policies and formulate action plans to encourage that growth. 

And from that growth, we see the direct benefits to the 

population of this province. We see that we have more people 

employed in the province than any other time before. We have 

more opportunities for people who are in fact in lower income 

families to do better. They can in fact address their education 

needs at a different level. They have more opportunities, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to experience a better way of life because the 

economy of the province is doing better than it was in the past. 

 

[12:00] 

 

You know, we’ve directed, ministers have directed to their 

officials that we are no longer going to work in silos within the 

concept of working together in collaboration. I believe for too 

long that previous governments, notwithstanding even ours 

when we first formed government, that everyone was focused 

on their end goal within their own ministry to ensure that their 

portfolio was managed and that their direction that was given 

within the mandate was followed. 

 

But there’s also been an enlightenment whereby we see people 

working together now, crossing over from ministry to ministry 

to ensure that we in fact have opportunities to use synergies, use 

ideas across ministries and across the bureaucracy to look at 

innovative ways. 

 

My colleague from Northcote talked about the Hub model and 

the COR model that’s being used within the Ministry of Justice. 

You know, that’s one fundamental working group that in 

principle, they work with ministerial colleagues from 

Education, Social Services, Health, Justice, Policing to assure 

that they address the most vulnerable people within, not just the 

demographic group, but have issues that are, as I’ve stated 

before, sometimes systemic within their own families that they 

need help to get out of those situations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And you know, that’s where the government of the day, our 

government has looked at other issues involving particular 

groups. We talk about seniors who in fact, when the minister of 

Social Services, the first minister, took over, she started looking 

at ways to increase their economic situation, their outlook. And 

the current Minister of Social Services has also done the same. 

 

We are always looking at opportunities to engage with groups, 

and the Human Services Committee has talked to the Seniors 

Mechanism group in this province. We heard from them loud 

and clear that there’s still more to do, yes. And we will 

definitely take on those challenges and work towards ensuring 

that that group, the group that built this province, the group 

whose shoulders we stand on every day, as the Premier has 

always said, and other colleagues have, are supported by this 

government. 

 

And on that note, the seniors’ income plan has been and will be 

looked at every year, budget to budget, to ensure that there is an 

economic advantage to those seniors who still require the hand 

up, not the handout because they are making their way in this 

province, and they are respected by us because of what they’ve 

given to our province. They’ve built this province for us. 

They’ve built it so we can stand here today and have the 

opportunity to in fact have this debate in the House, which is 

really important. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We had a moving 

statement today by a minister about those who’ve given their 

lives so we could have what we have today in this province. 

And that’s why we don’t ever, ever want to forget the sacrifice 

of those before us. And in that context, I mention seniors 

because they have built this province for us. We will always 

have them in our minds moving forward. 

 

Also in the whole issue today in the debate, we talk about, you 

know, getting people opportunities. And we look to this 

government’s . . . again an issue working with partnerships in 

the community, and we talk to and about Habitat for Humanity. 

We have groups in our major centres who see an opportunity 

and synergies with the government to pool resources, work 

together to provide families the security of a home, which gives 

them the hand up so they can actually have a secure 

environment so families can, mothers and children can in fact 

have the security of a home whereby they can then engage in 

other processes in the government and in the province to ensure 

that they have security and well-being. 



5374 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

So in this purpose, you know, we have a sense of need still. We 

understand that and we’re going to work towards that. And the 

government and Minister of Social Services has provided 

money for Habitat and will continue to provide money for 

Habitat homes in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

You know, we talk about the record of what the NDP has done 

in the past, what we’re doing now as a government under the 

Sask Party. And you know, there’s an interesting statistic — I 

hate to dwell on this sometimes — but we see that children 

living in low-income families declined by 12 per cent in NDP’s 

last seven years. That’s a good record. That by itself, that’s 

nothing wrong with that. 

 

But because of the fact we’re able to have an economy in this 

province that’s doing better now, we’re seeing that we have less 

children living in low-income families because it’s declined by 

nearly 36 per cent in our first four years as government. So it 

shows that there’s still things that are working. We’re 

addressing the needs because the economy’s doing well. And 

we see that comparison back and forth across caseloads from 

the past to caseloads of today. 

 

We see that there are opportunities because we’re reinvesting 

dollars that are coming from our resource revenue sector back 

in social programs. We’re not forgetting about those needs, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We have a social conscience, as any other 

government should, and will have in the future, to show that we 

are addressing the needs of the most vulnerable in this province. 

 

Now having said that, we have a dedicated corps of men and 

women who work in public service who are always trying their 

best and working their best to give everybody the opportunity to 

thrive in this province. And you know what, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? We have more work to do and, you know, we’ll never 

stand on our laurels. We’ll always strive to do better because 

we want everyone in this province to have a great quality of 

life. And we are doing everything possible by looking at other 

jurisdictions, looking at new, innovative ways to engage with 

other partners in the province. 

 

We’re looking at innovative ideas to ensure that we can see . . . 

we can maximize our dollars to give everybody in this province 

the benefits that are inherent to living in a democracy where 

they can come forward, they can ask, they can give advice to 

our Human Services Committee, to ministers, to other 

committee members as well as MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly], to see what in fact we could do better in 

this province. We are always going to engage those groups, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We see that happening in more and more times 

here. And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? This 

government will always strive to do what we can to make their 

lives better. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 

Questions. I recognize the member from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s one 

thing to talk the talk, Mr. Speaker. It’s another to actually walk 

that talk. You know, it’s an unfortunate reality, Mr. Speaker, 

that those living with disabilities or are suffering from mental 

health and addictions are more likely to live in poverty. But our 

government is taking actions to change that. $446.2 million in 

funding has been allocated for people with disabilities; $238 

million is allocated to mental health services. There’s been a 34 

per cent increase for funding for mental health services in the 

last seven years. To the member from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, 

where are the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Saskatoon what? 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Saskatoon Centre, sorry. Where are the NDP 

plans to improve the lives of those living with disabilities? 

Where are the plans to improve the lives of those suffering from 

mental health and addictions? What are your plans to walk the 

talk? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it is a 

good question. We’ve been very clear that we have been very 

supportive of DISC’s initiative and it’s resulted in SAID. And 

while there may some things we would have done differently, 

generally we are happy with that program. We are supportive of 

the mental health initiative that’s happening right now. 

Unfortunately, we think it’s a little too slow, that it should have 

been announced sooner. And we’re going to get the results a 

little too . . . Well it should have been quicker because we know 

there are issues that should have been done right now. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what our position is though is that what we 

need to do is connect the dots. We need to connect the dots. 

And this is what we’re seeing the problem with this 

government, is that they’re not connecting the dots. We see The 

StarPhoenix. We see the Children’s Advocate, Poverty Costs — 

all calling for us to connect the dots. That’s our stuff. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m just wondering if 

the government has read some of the comments on their From 

Dependence to Independence paper. And I want to ask whether 

or not they’re concerned about the gaps that are in that report. 

Particularly their whole approach lacks a foundational base and 

a well-thought-out definition of poverty that sees poverty in 

terms of power, asymmetries, or human rights. And secondly, 

the gap in the plan is that it avoids the discussion of how social 

exclusion and stigmatization act as a barrier to reducing 

poverty. And so my question is for the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton: is he concerned about those gaps in their 2012 

report? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Of course we 

are. Any government that gets a report from an independent 

body or from anyone that says that we could do better, we will 

look at those comments. We want to see if we can address those 

deficits to make sure that we could do better in the future, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. That’s important. You know what? And the 

member from Athabasca yawns. He mocks my answering, 

mocks the process today. Shameful. Shameful for that member 

to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when in fact the member . . . 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5375 

His colleague asked a very good question. And the answer is 

like, it’s too bad, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This government could always do more. Our ministers have 

said that. We will always take advice from those in the 

community, and we will always work to make this province the 

best place ever to live, raise a family, and thrive. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government is in 

action when it comes to helping those living with little or with 

no income. In 2008 this government increased the basic and 

spousal personal tax credit by $4,000 and the Saskatchewan 

dependent child amount by $2,000. In 2011 we further 

increased the basic and spousal personal tax credit amounts by 

$1,000 and Saskatchewan dependent child amount by $500. In 

total this government . . . Increases to these personal credit 

amounts are providing over $300 million in annual tax savings 

and have eliminated provincial income taxes for almost 112,000 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Centre: do you agree this is a 

good step to reducing poverty, and if not, what exactly would 

you do? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s about connecting the 

dots, connecting the dots. And this is what The StarPhoenix, 

Poverty Costs, poverty-free Saskatoon, many, many 

community-based organizations are calling for things that make 

sense. But one of the programs that he didn’t talk about is our 

basic living allowance for people on social assistance. Do you 

know when the last time that was increased, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? The last time it was increased was 2007. That’s a 

shameful record on their side. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 

the independent officers of this legislature, we look to them for 

a great deal of guidance on many different issues. So when the 

Children’s Advocate comes forward and says that this 

government should be providing a comprehensive anti-poverty 

plan, you’d think the government would listen to the Children’s 

Advocate. 

 

My question to the member from P.A. Northcote: why are they 

disagreeing with the Children’s Advocate in his call for a 

comprehensive anti-poverty plan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — I thank the member opposite for that question. 

Our actions speak louder than any rhetoric that the NDP throw. 

Our actions have, from Stats Canada information, indicated that 

between 2006 and 2011, there is now a 50 per cent reduction in 

the percentage of persons in low income. Our actions are 

creating a reduction in poverty in our province. We walk the 

talk. For example, we have a provincial training allowance 

which provides income support for adult students with low 

income in basic education and related studies. Mr. Speaker, we 

have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unlike the NDP, 

our government isn’t afraid of setting targets and implementing 

actions to achieve them. Our province’s population has grown 

and continues to grow and prosper. But despite this growth in 

numbers, there are over 23,000 fewer people living on low 

incomes and 8,000 fewer children living in low-income 

families. We’ve reduced the number of low-income people 

more than any other province in Canada. In fact since 2006, the 

number of low-income people has been reduced by half. On top 

of that, food bank usage rose by 94 per cent during the . . . 

[inaudible] . . . period under the NDP. Their record makes it 

hard to take lessons from any of those members. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: what was the NDP’s 

comprehensive plan to reduce poverty during their 16 years of 

government? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I thank the member for his question, although 

it was difficult to get to it, I guess, when he had his speech 

prepared. But what the problem here, and what we’re hearing 

from these government members is the complete failure to 

recognize the ideology that’s driving their whole approach and 

the fact that the Children’s Advocate has called them on that. 

And they don’t even want to address that issue. 

 

My colleague from Saskatoon Centre continually raises the 

issue. We see the Minister of Social Services’ failure to even 

comprehend what the problem is, and that’s what’s scary. We 

see that in their plans they talk about income levels, and they 

focus on income levels as the only solution to poverty 

amelioration. But clearly there’s no focus on prevention 

strategies. That’s the failure of this government and that’s what 

the Children’s Advocate is trying to point out. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the member from Prince Albert Northcote. And 

one of the things I think is important is we talked about home 

ownership. And we’re going to ask her to do a little bit of work 

here, in the sense of asking her if she’d lift a finger to walk over 

to the Minister of Social Services, use her finger to tap the 

Minister of Social Services’ shoulder and say, can you kindly 

restore the rental purchase option program for home ownership 

for northern Saskatchewan families that have been renting for 

years and years, and ask the same minister, can you restore the 

programs for many working men and women in northern 

Saskatchewan and their families can finally achieve home 

ownership? Will she do that, Mr. Speaker? 

 



5376 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — I thank the member opposite for the question. 

Our record clearly indicates our government’s propensity to act. 

Disciplined action produces positive results. Here’s one of 

them: Saskatchewan offers supports to working families 

through the Saskatchewan employment supplement, the 

Saskatchewan rental housing supplement, and the child care 

subsidy. These supplementary income programs lower the 

welfare wall by assisting low-income families to make the 

transition out of poverty while remaining in the paid workforce. 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 

government’s housing strategy of Saskatchewan sets out 

direction to provide better access to safe, quality, affordable 

housing for low- and moderate-income earners through the 

creation of new housing and improvement to existing housing 

in the 2014-2015 budget, included 9.2 million for first year of a 

five-year plan for the federal-provincial investment in 

affordable housing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This means that 

people within Saskatchewan will have an opportunity to live 

within safe, affordable housing conditions.  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a plan. That opposition does not 

have a plan. They stand and they talk, but they have never ever 

put forward a plan. This government has put forward a plan, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. To the member from Saskatchewan 

Centre: what is your party’s policy to provide adequate housing 

to Saskatchewan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I found that very 

interesting. First thing we’d do is have a minister who actually 

knew her file on housing. We have a situation where we have a 

minister who’s disseminating . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Motion No. 3 — Western Livestock Price Insurance 

Program 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At the end of 

my speech today, I will be introducing this motion: 

 

That this Assembly commends this government’s actions 

to support Saskatchewan’s growing agriculture industry 

and livestock producers through the implementation of the 

western livestock price insurance program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the road to livestock insurance has been long. So 

first, being a history guy, I feel I have to go back to the history 

of where Saskatchewan began. It has once been said, if you do 

not know your past, how can you know your future? By 1905 

when Saskatchewan became a province, we were booming. We 

had the third-highest population in all of Canada. We had a 

higher population than our sister province, Alberta. The people 

who came to Saskatchewan were mainly of European descent, 

but the vast majority weren’t farmers. They were such things 

like tailors, carpenters, jewellers. And they came and they had 

to learn a new way of life. They had to learn a new existence, 

and they became farmers. 

 

The farms of those days were strictly mixed farms. They were 

self-sufficient. The only items you bought were salt, sugar, and 

flour. Flour was usually bought on a grist account where you 

hauled grain in and took out bag by bag whenever you wanted 

flour. They also had all the livestock, the poultry, hogs. 

Everything was right there, and only the staples were what they 

needed too. And that was usually bartered for. 

 

Things were going great, but our weakness was we only had 

one industry, one lone industry, and that was agriculture. 

Everything that happened in the province was part of or 

attached to agriculture. 

 

Then came the dirty thirties. The land blew. Soil drifted like 

banks of black snow. The rain didn’t fall. The method of 

farming in those days was the plow, followed by harrows, 

which left the soil dry and powdered. The people of 

Saskatchewan suffered. Mr. Speaker, no people in Canada at 

that time, the dirty thirties, suffered more than the people of 

Saskatchewan. And it’s because we were strictly agriculture and 

only agriculture. The stories are endless, but the one I will relate 

to you . . . Many a livestock producer shipped his livestock and, 

instead of getting a cheque, they received a bill owing to the 

railways for transportation. To really finish off the prairie 

farmer, last of all, were the banks. And all was lost. 

 

Then in the mid ’30s comes Tommy with his save-you-all plan. 

By 1944 he became premier. Farming started to improve. The 

’30s were over. Tommy took the credit. And the point I am 

making, the real point I want to make is the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation], now the NDP, were born of rural 

Saskatchewan. They were born of agriculture. 

 

The roots of the NDP, now rotted and blowing away like the 

prairie soil of the ’30s, are no longer in rural Saskatchewan. 

They turned from rural Saskatchewan and became a labour 

party of urban Saskatchewan. Then they moved even further 

and became a union-controlled party. In order to hold power, 

they began to sacrifice rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Their record by the ’07 election is as follows. They closed 31 

rural agricultural offices. They cut extension services. They 

eliminated GRIP [gross revenue insurance program], tore up the 

contracts, increased crop insurance premiums without 

increasing coverage. They refused, refused to address the 

education portion of property tax. They cut spot loss hail twice. 

They ignored agricultural disasters such as the drought in the 

Southwest. They blamed and blamed the federal government for 

everything that went wrong. They closed 52 rural hospitals. 

They closed rural schools, ignored rural roads and highways, 

offloaded costs on their RM [rural municipality] and the farm 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5377 

families. 

 

The only interest they had in agriculture was the growing of 

potatoes; 35 million lost there. Well maybe not the only. Here 

are a few more ag-related fiascos of the NDP: 8.9 million lost 

on agdealer, a farm equipment Internet site; Big Sky hogs, a 

hog production, 26 million lost there; Thomson Meats, 7.9 

million writeoff; World Wide Pork, 1.5 million writeoff; 

Canadian livestock services, 750,000 writeoff; Northern 

Genetics, 500,000 writeoff; Melville Seed Processors, 384,000 

written off; Canadian Select Grains, 57,000 written off. Mr. 

Speaker, what couldn’t have agriculture done with that money? 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, came one of the cruellest blows of all — the 

education portion of property tax. The then-government of 

Lorne Calvert kept downloading property tax onto rural 

Saskatchewan until the RMs of Saskatchewan started a tax 

revolt. They couldn’t take anymore. They said, we can’t afford 

it. And then at the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] convention, the then-premier, Lorne Calvert 

said, “The status quo is not on.” But it was. It stayed the same. 

The taxes weren’t fixed. So finally in ’07, the Saskatchewan 

Party came to power and cut property tax by 60 per cent. 

 

Now in opposition, they haven’t changed. Here’s a quote from 

the member of Regina Lakeview when he was asked if there 

was more money needed for Saskatchewan filmmakers, where 

would that money come from out of the budget? The member 

for Regina Lakeview said, and I quote: 

 

Well practically, there are a number of areas where they 

could have left money for films. And one of the things 

they could have done is looked at some of the initiatives 

around agriculture and look at some of the things they’ve 

done for municipalities. And I think they forgot how much 

money is generated in something like the film industry.  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s atrocious. I would like to quote John 

Webster, the author of Webster’s dictionary. And he once said, 

society is based on agriculture. When agriculture flourishes, all 

the arts follow. All the arts follow. And this is so very true in 

this province of Saskatchewan, which is still so very much 

agriculture based. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the old adage, kill the goose that laid the golden 

egg, applies for the NDP. They were killing agriculture. They 

were bleeding it dry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as the livestock industry was finally getting 

back on its feet in 2003, the biggest livestock disaster of the last 

quarter century hit. That was of course BSE [bovine spongiform 

encephalopathy]. It destroyed our markets to the USA [United 

States of America]. It destroyed our markets to Europe, and it 

destroyed our markets to Asia. BSE sent livestock producers, 

many of them into bankruptcy. Many a livestock operation was 

auctioned off reluctantly by a disheartened producer. Many 

livestock producers quit, never to rebuild again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what help did the livestock producers of 

Saskatchewan get in such a crisis, the biggest crisis in 25 years? 

Zero. Nothing. Ignored. No help was given. And Mr. Speaker, 

now they have the audacity to say they have the answers to 

agriculture. They know what should be done. Mr. Speaker, my 

response is a quote by my late father, who was often using this 

one. And he was quite a cattleman. So his quote was, “The NDP 

know as much about livestock as the cow knows about 

Sunday.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve spent enough time on the negative and now 

dwell on the positive. I will start with the Saskatchewan Party’s 

ag initiatives. I will not list them all, just the ones that are 

livestock or livestock related. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party’s initiatives include the largest 

education tax reduction in Saskatchewan’s history; western 

livestock price insurance program available this spring here in 

Saskatchewan; programs to increase market access for products; 

farm and ranch water infrastructure programs; compensation for 

livestock killed and injured by predators; increased agricultural 

research funding by 104 per cent over the NDP; gopher control 

rebates, not available under the NDP; beaver control programs, 

also not available under the NDP; 10 new extension service 

offices — remember, the NDP closed 31. Introduced the five 

largest ag budgets in Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. Speaker, in 

our entire history; the 2009, 2010, 2011, ’12, and ’13 largest ag 

budgets in Saskatchewan history. 71 million to 18,000 cattle 

and hog producers in 2009. Increased funding for rat control; 

Crown land sales programs. 

 

[12:30] 

 

This year is the sixth-highest agricultural budget ever 

announced. Our budget supports a growth in the agricultural 

industry. We’ve even done things for the small sections of 

agriculture. Like we have now the new bee mortality insurance 

pilot program. 

 

Agriculture research budget is 26.7 million, includes 2 million 

for Global Institute for Food Security. 

 

We’re growing forward: 78.8 million investment for strategic 

initiatives, increase of 7.5 million; rural water infrastructure, 

23.6 million; agriculture innovation and research, 26.7 million; 

pest control and disease surveillance, 3.4 million; farm business 

management; trade and market development; agricultural 

awareness; value-added business development; continuing 

support through industry grants, 4.2 million. And of course our 

government still supports one of the cornerstones, 4-H Ag in the 

Classroom. 

 

And then we go to Agribition. Mr. Speaker, our government 

supports Agribition. And the word Agribition is like music to 

my ears. I’ve shown cattle at Agribition for a lot of years. I’ve 

shown cattle at the first Agribition 43 years ago and many times 

since. Agribition is a world-class show, one of the top shows in 

the world. To the Canadian livestock producers, it is the most 

important show in our entire country, with over 4,000 head of 

livestock, 450 trade show exhibitors, visitors from over 40 

countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall Agribition hosted over 120,000 visitors. 

The dollars left behind in our province is over 37 million. This 

year our government is proud to support such a great show and 

very proud of the volunteers and exhibitors from our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of the dedication our livestock 



5378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2014 

producers have created, and have developed a great reputation. 

Our livestock producers are some of the most innovative in the 

world. 

 

Trade is very, very important to Saskatchewan, particularly in 

agriculture because we produce way more than we can 

consume. We are a producing province and we depend on 

exports. Exports are our cornerstone. Over 40 per cent of the 

arable land of Canada is in our province. We grow what the 

world needs. We have a reputation as a reliable producer of 

safe, high-quality agricultural products. 

 

The American country of origin labelling program, or COOL, 

has caused significant damage to our livestock industry. We 

have to search out new markets. One of the new markets that 

we are looking at is the European Union. It is the world’s 

largest importer of agriculture and ag food products, importing 

more than $130 billion worth in 2012. 

 

The federal government has penned a deal with the European 

Union. The trade agreement is the comprehensive economic and 

trade agreement, CETA [Canadian-European Union 

Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement]. The benefits 

for Saskatchewan are more than we could have hoped for. 

There are so many that I will once again only list those that will 

benefit the livestock industry. 

 

CETA established tariff rates quotas for each product, giving 

Canadian farmers yearly duty-free access for up to 80 000 

tonnes of pork, 50 000 tonnes of beef, 3000 tonnes of bison. In 

addition, CETA will give farmers duty-free access for 

high-quality beef under the existing quota of nearly 15 000 

tonnes. Hilton beef quota, currently duty at 20 per cent, and for 

processed beef, pork, and bison products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is our present supply at? We know that since 

2007, ag imports have increased by 83 per cent, Mr. Speaker — 

since 2007, 83 per cent increase. That’s phenomenal. But what 

are our livestock numbers at today? Total Saskatchewan hog 

inventory numbers as of January 2014 are 1.055 million head. 

Saskatchewan sow and bred gilt numbers as of January are 

91,900, up 3.1 per cent. The size of the Saskatchewan cow herd 

has been relatively steady in 2013. With strong feeder cattle 

prices in the fall of ’13 and current record Saskatchewan feeder 

prices, we could start to see more positive growth movement, 

momentum in the industry. 

 

Saskatchewan cattle farmers had 2.4 million cattle on their 

farms as of January 1st, 2014. That’s down 3 per cent from 

2013. The Saskatchewan inventory of beef cows was 1.2 

million head, up point two per cent from 2013. The number of 

beef replacement heifers was down point nine per cent from last 

year. 

 

On the American side of the coin, which is our biggest 

consumer, competitor, and on and on, United States cattle 

supplies continue to decline. Cattle on fed numbers in the 

United States for February 1st, 2014 were 3 per cent lower, year 

over year. Cattle on feed numbers have continued to decline 

year over year since late 2012. United States beef production is 

estimated to decline 5.3 per cent in 2014 from 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now to the real meat of my speech, and that is the 

livestock insurance program. I’ve given you our history of how 

we got here. Now where are we going and how will we get 

there? 

 

An innovative new livestock price insurance program will be 

available this spring to help cattle and hog producers in Western 

provinces manage price risk faced by the industry. Federal 

Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz, Saskatchewan Agriculture 

minister, Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan have all got into 

the program. The pilot will help livestock producers protect 

themselves against unexpected price decline by allowing them 

to purchase insurance on an insured price selected by the 

producer from the available coverage levels, premiums fully 

funded, fully funded by the producer. 

 

As to date the livestock price insurance highlights are: on 

January, announced livestock price insurance for Western 

Canada cattle and hogs. It was a Throne Speech promise 

collaborated with the federal government, the Alberta 

government, the BC [British Columbia] government, and 

Manitoba government. It is based on Alberta’s current livestock 

price insurance program that is already in operation. Industry 

asked for this and we have worked with our western 

counterparts and feds to make it happen. It offers protection 

against unexpected drop in price over a defined period of time. 

 

Four insurance products are available: for calf, for feeders, for 

finished cattle, and for hogs. It will be administered in 

Saskatchewan by our crop insurance offices. Premiums will be 

100 per cent producer funded. The federal government and the 

provincial governments will share administrative costs. Policies 

will be able to be purchased early this spring. 

 

To explain the program more, there are four areas of available 

insurance. The calf product is offered in the spring and covers 

the price risk as a cow-calf producer faces selling calves in the 

fall market. The settlement index is based on the average price 

of a 600-pound steer. The feeder program product covers the 

price risk a cattle feeder faces when marketing. The settlement 

index is based on the average price of an 850-pound steer. 

Finished cattle, the fed product is offered year-round for cattle 

being finished in Western Canada. The settlement index is 

based on the weekly Alberta fed cattle price using Canfax data. 

The hog product offers hog producers protection against the 

decline in price over a defined period of time. Hog producers 

choose from a range of policy lengths and price coverage. 

 

So how does it really work? If a producer plans to sell 75 calves 

in November weighing about 600 pounds, he’s going to insure 

4,500 pounds. And when you work that out, his premium cost 

would be $949.50. So if the producer now has a floor price of 

$1.58 and the market price is $1.47, the producer is going to 

receive a cheque for $4,950. 

 

So this is the heart of the program and it is truly a wonderful 

program. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was born of agriculture 

and still is agriculture. Today in the Saskatchewan economy, 

agriculture is still second only to oil. I have related to you the 

lows and the highs of agriculture in Saskatchewan. We are now 

assisting the livestock producers of our province to help 

navigate the lows. With the higher prices of today, it is the right 

time to start an insurance program that is producer-driven. Not 

when the industry is at an all-time low is the time to start a 



May 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5379 

program, but when it’s high. I believe that this could be one of 

the building blocks that would help rebuild the livestock 

industry and keep it profitable well into the future. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker, and I will now present my motion: 

 

That this Assembly commends this government’s actions 

to support Saskatchewan’s growing agriculture industry 

and livestock producers through the implementation of the 

Western livestock price insurance program. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Batoche: 

 

That this Assembly commends this government’s actions 

to support Saskatchewan’s growing agriculture industry 

and livestock producers through the implementation of the 

Western livestock price insurance program. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move 

that we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — There is a motion before the . . . The 

Government House Leader has moved that the House do now 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, you adjourned the debate of 

the . . . Okay, sorry. Okay. The member has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the House to accept 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Now I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:44.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5355 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5355 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5355 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5355 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5355 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5356 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5356 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5356 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5356 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5356 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5357 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5357 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5357 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5357 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Mental Health Week 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5357 

 Women of Distinction Awards Gala 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5358 

 Special Olympics Event in La Ronge 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5358 

 National Day of Honour 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5358 

 Youth Business Excellence Awards 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5359 

 World Ovarian Cancer Day 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5359 

 A Mother’s Day Tribute 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5359 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Utilization of Saskatoon City Hospital 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5360 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5360 

 Ministerial Relationship With Board Members 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5361 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5361 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5361 

Living Skills Program 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5362 

 Closure of Liquor Stores 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5363 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5363 

 Social Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5363 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5363 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 National Day of Honour 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5364 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5365 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Anti-Poverty Strategy 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5365, 5374 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5367 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5368, 5375 

  Jurgens ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5370, 5375 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5371, 5374 

  Hickie ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5373, 5374 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5374 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5375 



 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5375 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5375 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5376 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 3 — Western Livestock Price Insurance Program 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5376 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


