




















































Hansard: March 18, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 35A  TUESDAY, MARCH 18, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4747 

 March 18, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

House a special guest who was the subject of a major 

announcement from the Saskatchewan Roughriders yesterday. 

It was a bittersweet announcement. The Riders announced, 

along with Rey Williams, that Rey would be retiring from 

active play in the CFL [Canadian Football League]. 

 

The good news, Mr. Speaker, is that the Riders have created an 

exciting position that we want to highlight today in the 

legislature, the first one like it in the CFL, a director of player 

development, and announced that Rey Williams would be doing 

that work, Mr. Speaker, to assist players on the team with 

transition issues, to help them plan indeed for life even after 

football, and to ensure the Riders can be basically the class 

organization that they are in the CFL. And they picked the right 

guy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think if you talk to anybody associated with the 

Roughriders or frankly the Hamilton Tiger-Cats where Rey 

played for a period of time, his teammates, the front office, the 

coaches, I’d say even all of the coaches of those two 

organizations would say that he was a player with great 

integrity, a class player, and one that was well liked by his 

teammates. So as director of player development, this is a great 

choice that the Riders have made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very quickly, Rey played in the NFL [National 

Football League] as well for the San Francisco 49ers, time in 

Miami with the Dolphins, as well as with the Pittsburgh Steelers 

where he was very highly regarded but where an injury I think 

kept him from staying with the Steelers for a long period of 

time. That turned out to be good news eventually for the Riders 

because he made his way back to Saskatchewan, was on his 

way to an MVP [most valuable player] season last year before 

he was hurt I think in the ninth game of the season. And in any 

event though, he is a two-time Grey Cup champion both in ’07 

and last year with the Riders. We welcome him here to the 

legislature today, but also we welcome him as a resident and a 

new executive with the Saskatchewan Roughriders. We 

acknowledge this position they’ve created. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Rey to his 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the Premier to welcome Rey Williams to 

his Legislative Assembly here today, to thank Rey for his place 

on our team for some time. And of course all will know that 

Rey was an incredible and fierce linebacker on our squad, a big 

part of Rider nation’s success. We thank you for all those 

efforts and contributions on the field, and we really look 

forward to all that you’ll offer our team in the role of 

developing players for many years to come in your new role 

with player personnel. So to Rey Williams, to our Rider 

organization, I say thank you, and it’s a pleasure to have you 

sitting in our Assembly here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave for 

an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I would like to recognize members of 

Saskatchewan’s long-serving volunteer crop reporters who are 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for me to 

recognize their commitment and service to the agriculture 

industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

These crop reporters have reached tremendous milestones of 25, 

30, and 35 years of service. Each week for at least 30 weeks a 

year, these individuals have collected valuable information for 

the ministry. From seeding to harvest they provide important 

reports about crop development and progress and precipitation 

in their respective RMs [rural municipality]. Mr. Speaker, their 

work delivers a timely and accurate crop report for all the 

producers in the province. 

 

I want to recognize and thank these individuals for their 

dedication to the Saskatchewan crop reporting service. And I 

would like to ask crop reporters and their spouses to stand as I 

announce their names: Bruce Durie and his spouse, Elanor, RM 

of Pense; George and Delores Riche, RM of Dufferin; Terry 

and Helen Helgason, RM of Emerald; Brett Meinert and his 

wife, Rana, RM Bone Creek; John Slabic and his spouse, 

Norma, RM Gull Lake; Delwyn Jansen, RM of LeRoy; Lloyd 

Wagner and his spouse, Ruth, RM of Kelvington; Larry Kuntz 

and his spouse, Rita, RM of Buffalo. 

 

There are some crop reporters and spouses who are not able to 

attend today: Daniel Ruest and his spouse, Gilberte, RM of 

Wise Creek, 25 years; Brian Spence, RM of Mayfield, 25 years; 

Louise Hale, RM Wolverine, 25 years; Terry Macfarlane, RM 

of Mount Pleasant, 25 years; Neil Manson, RM Milden, 25 

years; and Dale and Elita Moberg, RM of Webb, 30 years. 

 

I would ask all members in joining me to thank these crop 

reporters for their dedication to our agriculture industry and our 

province, and welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 

you and through you and on behalf of the official opposition, I 



4748 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

too would like to welcome all the crop reporters and their 

spouses here to the Legislative Assembly and congratulate you 

on the service awards that you’re receiving, and for the many, 

many, many years of effort that you’ve put into this important 

volunteer work that is, as the minister indicated, so important to 

the producers of Saskatchewan. So on behalf of the official 

opposition, I too would like to welcome you to your Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to 

join with the other members in welcoming Rey Williams to the 

Legislative Assembly. I had the pleasure of playing with Rey. 

It’s not so much of a pleasure to play against him. He’s a very 

. . . He’s a great competitor, very fast player, and it was always 

a challenge to try and block him for sure. 

 

So congratulations on your new role. Glad you are staying in 

Saskatchewan. There’s more and more alumni that, after their 

playing days, are finding opportunities here in our great 

province. And wish him the best in his new role. And later this 

spring, Mr. Speaker, he’ll be part of a very select group of 

players from the Roughriders’ great history. There’s a small 

group that will have two Grey Cup rings as players, so we’re 

looking forward to that. And so welcome, Rey. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join with 

our Agriculture minister in welcoming some guests that are here 

with the crop. They are very good friends of mine and 

neighbours from up in my country, Larry and Rita Kuntz. I’m 

very pleased to see you in your Legislative Assembly today. 

 

They are very active farmers up in my community, and 

excellent Simmental breeders. And actually we have pastured 

some of their cattle in the past. I look forward to that again 

someday, perhaps. I’d like to welcome you to your Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery it’s my pleasure to introduce 

Mr. Lee Sebastian who’s joined us here today. Lee, give us a 

wave. Lee drew the short straw and was stuck with me as his 

intern, or he’s my intern. He’s working with me through the 

political science 100 program. It’s been a pleasure working with 

Lee. He’s a geography student. He’s from Regina. He’s been 

out to some community activities, cultural in nature, also to 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] last 

week. He’s going to be around here for budget here tomorrow 

as well. It’s a pleasure to be working with him. I’ll ask all 

members to welcome Lee to his Assembly. 

 

But he’s seated with Kaytlyn Criddle who is the Saskatchewan 

legislative internship program intern who also drew the short 

straw and has to work with me, Mr. Speaker. It’s been a 

pleasure to continue to work with Kaytlyn. I know she was a 

busy woman this last weekend; she was competing in the 

provincial ringette competition. 

 

So I ask all members in this Assembly to welcome Lee and 

Kaytlyn to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Now that we’re out of short straws . . . 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of anti-bullying initiatives. And we know 

that bullying causes serious harm and the consequences of 

bullying are devastating, including depression, self-harm, 

addictions, and suicide. And we know that other provinces have 

brought forward legislation and various tools and programs 

showing swift and effective government action. And we know 

that this government is not doing enough to protect 

Saskatchewan youth. We know that bullying is a human rights 

issue, one of safety and inclusion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives 

of young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan that are concerned with the failure of the audit by 

that government and the management of our finances by that 

government. They are concerned that the government has, for 

the first time ever in Canadian history, failed an audit as a 

provincial government, and they’re calling for nothing short of 

books that they can trust. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4749 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 

ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 

the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 

destroyed for many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option 

program for responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, 

allowing them the dignity of owning their own homes and 

building community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many good northerners. I so present, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

stand today to present a petition on highways, Mr. Speaker. And 

there are many, many petitions from all throughout 

Saskatchewan, but this particular petition is in the Cumberland 

House area, and their prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that upgrades, repairs, and 

maintenance on Highway 123 serving Cumberland House 

Cree Nation and the village of Cumberland House is 

important to all Saskatchewan residents and northern 

residents and must be undertaken immediately. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from La Ronge but many, many other petitions have 

been signed from all throughout Saskatchewan. And I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 

the school and the community have raised this issue with the 

Sask Party provincial government since 2007 without 

resolution. 

 

They point out that the gym at Sacred Heart has played an 

important role in the school’s efforts to become a literacy 

leader, having served as the gathering place for the very 

successful reading assemblies and reading nights. They point 

out that Sacred Heart Community School is the largest school in 

north central Regina with 450-plus students, 75 per cent of 

whom are First Nations. They point out that enrolment has 

increased by 100-plus students over the past four years and that 

attendance and learning outcomes are steadily improving. And 

they point out, as a matter of basic fairness and common sense, 

that Sacred Heart Community School needs a gym. 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the Sask 

Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 

replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 

Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is part of a larger petition effort 

representing over 1,000 signatures. This petition has been 

signed by citizens from Assiniboia, Balgonie, Birch Hills, 

Buchanan, Carievale, Canora, Coronach, Cupar, Cut Knife, Earl 

Grey, Edenwold, Emerald Park, Estevan, Fort Qu’Appelle, 

Gravelbourg, Hagen, Humboldt, Kindersley, Kronau, Liberty, 

Little Pine First Nation, Lumsden, Maple Creek, Melfort, 

Milestone, Moose Jaw, North Battleford, Pasqua First Nation, 

Perdue, Punnichy, Rapid View, Regina, Regina Beach, 

Saskatoon, Sedley, Sintaluta, Strasbourg, Swift Current, 

Tisdale, Weyburn, White City, Wilkie, Wood Mountain, 

Wymark, and Yorkton. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Gymnasium at Sacred Heart Community School 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, since the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School was closed for safety reasons last spring, 

the friends and supporters of Sacred Heart have been busy 

calling for action. The community and the Regina Catholic 

School Board have raised this issue with the Sask Party 

government without resolve over the past seven years. And 

while there is a temporary solution in place with the use of the 

old Sacred Heart Church sanctuary, this school and these 

students need a solution. They especially need a gym. 

 

The need for action at Sacred Heart has been communicated to 

this government by the Regina Catholic School Board. It has 

been communicated to this government by the school’s 

community council through 50-plus letters of support from 

parents and council members. It has been communicated by 

over 1,000 individuals from across Saskatchewan in the petition 

I have had the privilege of presenting here in the Legislative 

Assembly. Together with these petitions, Sacred Heart 

Community School has been raised with this government about 

50 times in this Legislative Assembly since last spring by Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

As we look to tomorrow’s budget, the question begs to be 

asked: will Sacred Heart get the action that it deserves? Will 

this year be different from the past six budgets, and will this 

Sask Party government finally listen and act? Mr. Speaker, the 

students and staff and supporters of Sacred Heart Community 



4750 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

School certainly hope so. They are looking for help and support 

in doing the tremendous work of Sacred Heart Community 

School, and they should get it. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Sochi 2014 Paralympic Winter Games 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise in the House today to remark on the amazing efforts of 

Canada’s Paralympic team which competed in Sochi over the 

past few weeks. I am proud to say that Canada was third in the 

overall medal standing with seven gold, two silver and seven 

bronze, which is a total of 16. 

 

It was a nail-biter going into the weekend with Canada low in 

the medal standing, but our Canadian athletes pulled through. 

Canada picked up two medals on Saturday with para-alpine 

skier Mac Marcoux and the wheelchair curling team both 

winning gold. The Canadian team ended the games on Sunday 

by winning another two gold medals that day, one from 

cross-country skier Brian McKeever and another from team 

member Chris Klebl. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a top moment for the Canadian team was when 

cross-country skier legend Brian McKeever made Canada’s 

Paralympic history on Sunday by winning his third gold medal 

in the men’s visually impaired 10-kilometre race. He is the first 

Canadian Paralympic to win a whopping 10 medals throughout 

his Paralympic career. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are extremely proud of each and every one of 

our athletes who compete in the 2014 Sochi Paralympics. I ask 

members to join me in congratulating our Canadian Paralympic 

athletes on their great success at the 2014 Winter Games. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Social Work Week 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week marks 

Social Work Week in Saskatchewan. This year’s theme is 

Social Workers Promoting Equity for a Stronger Canada. 

 

This theme is shared with the Canadian Association of Social 

Workers’ National Social Work Month, which aims to highlight 

the profession’s growing concern with the rising social and 

economic and health inequities in Canada. In this province, the 

efforts have been spearheaded by the Saskatchewan Association 

of Social Workers, established in 1962. 

 

Mr. Speaker, social workers in Saskatchewan and across 

Canada are concerned that the lessons of histories on the 

benefits of broadening public investments are overlooked. 

Unfortunately, the debate is too focused on budgeting and costs 

rather than what is best for people. 

 

Several events are being held in the coming week by local 

chapters of the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers to 

raise awareness. Today in Prince Albert, Glen Frank, security 

intelligence officer from the Saskatchewan Penitentiary, will be 

discussing gangs in our community. And on March 24th, Alison 

MacDonald, the executive director and registrar for the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers, will be speaking 

here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to thank and 

recognize the importance of Social Work Week and to thank the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers for their good 

work representing the interests of social workers in this 

province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

in the House today to proclaim Social Work Week in 

Saskatchewan. This year’s theme is Social Workers Promoting 

Equity for a Stronger Canada. 

 

Social workers are trained professionals who play a vital role in 

ensuring the safety, health, and well-being of our most 

vulnerable citizens. They provide their services in a variety of 

settings including family service agencies, child welfare 

programs, hospitals, mental health clinics, schools, correctional 

institutions, long-term care homes, federal and provincial 

departments, and in private practice. 

 

Social work is not an easy job. In fact it’s one of the most 

complex and challenging occupations imaginable. Workers are 

faced with difficult situations on a daily basis and are required 

to make tough decisions, decisions that help people through 

difficult times. Despite all of this, social workers continue to 

serve those in our society with the greatest need, and they serve 

them with tireless dedication, performing their duties with the 

utmost professionalism. Mr. Speaker, social workers counsel 

and support those in need and in crisis. Most importantly, they 

recognize the worth and dignity in those they serve. 

 

In closing I want to thank social workers across this province 

for their dedication to children, families, and other people in 

need. Thank you for making a difference. Thank you for 

making lives better. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Remembering an Agricultural Pioneer 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with sadness that 

I rise today to recognize the life and contribution of Chris Sutter 

who passed away last Friday at the age of 94. Chris was a 

family friend and livestock producer from the Redvers area and 

is known as a great leader in the Saskatchewan agricultural 

community, most notably for his role as one of the founding 

fathers of Canadian Western Agribition. 

 

Chris was the first president of Agribition and the visionary 

behind the show, which became a reality in 1971 with the 

opening of the first ever Canadian Western Agribition. With 

over 5,000 head of livestock, it is now one of the world’s 

biggest agricultural exhibitions and attracts over 100,000 people 

annually. 

 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4751 

In 1988 Chris was honoured with the Saskatchewan Order of 

Merit, and in 1990 he was appointed to the Order of Canada in 

recognition of his contribution to the preservation of rural life, 

to the cattle breeding industry, and to the agricultural 

community of Saskatchewan. Chris has also been inducted into 

both the Saskatchewan and Canadian Agricultural Hall of 

Fame, the Northern International Livestock Exposition Hall of 

Fame, and most recently the Canadian Western Agribition Hall 

of Fame. 

 

On behalf of the livestock industry and of all of Saskatchewan, 

I would like all members to join me in remembering Chris 

Sutter, one of Saskatchewan’s true agricultural pioneers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Pharmacist Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise today to recognize March as Pharmacist 

Awareness Month. Pharmacists are highly skilled, dedicated 

professionals who are a vital part of our health care team. You 

will find them working in Saskatchewan’s hospitals and 

community pharmacies both big and small. And they are the 

health care professional most knowledgeable about drugs and 

their effects. Often they are the patient’s first point of contact 

with the health system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recent years we have collaborated with 

pharmacists on many significant initiatives and programs to 

improve patient care. A recent achievement is the introduction 

of the Saskatchewan medication assessment program. This 

program helps seniors living in the community to better manage 

their medications and ensure the best possible outcomes. It 

recognizes the ability of pharmacists to improve health care 

delivery in the province, working in collaboration with doctors 

and other health care professionals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pharmacists are valued health professionals in 

Saskatchewan. We support them working to their full scope of 

practice. On behalf of my colleagues and Saskatchewan 

citizens, I would like to thank the 1,400 pharmacists of this 

province for the work that they do each and every day. They’re 

making a real difference in the lives of Saskatchewan residents. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Tax Savings for Low-Income Families 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today to recognize the work of the community volunteer 

income tax program which is run out of the Saskatoon Food 

Bank. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people living on a low or fixed income could face 

many obstacles to filling out their income tax returns, such as 

poor literacy, English as an additional language, or complex tax 

forms. Through this program, volunteers help people with low 

incomes to complete their tax returns at no cost, thus giving 

them the opportunity to receive much needed income of tax 

credits and benefits. The Canada Revenue Agency works with 

local community-based organizations to train volunteers for this 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year in Saskatoon alone $7 million were 

returned in tax refunds to clients of this program. That’s a 

significant amount of tax credits and benefits for low-income 

families. Since 2008 Saskatchewan families have also been 

receiving help through the government initiatives which have 

removed 112,000 residents from the provincial tax rolls. 

Overall Saskatchewan people have saved more than $400 

million through lower personal income tax and indexation. 

Lower taxes for Saskatchewan residents is something that we 

can all be proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 

recognizing the great work that the Saskatoon Food Bank and 

its volunteers are doing through this community volunteer 

income tax program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Consultant Fees and Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday after 

question period, the Premier was asked about the $40 million 

cash cow consulting contract that his government signed. And 

the Premier said this: 

 

The other thing that I think is frustrating is the NDP leader 

characterizing this lean process as sort of providing a 

Japanese culture within the health care system. There is no 

cultural teachings about any culture, Japanese or any other 

culture. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he stand by this statement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Interesting, Mr. Speaker. I wonder whether or 

not he’s actually read the $40 million contract that his 

government signed. If he read through the $40 million contract 

with John Black and Associates, he would see, Mr. Speaker, 

that it talks about Japanese sensei, and it specifically says 

“Japan cultural training.” 

 

My question to the Premier: what is Japan cultural training? 

Why is it in the $40 million contract, and why do Saskatchewan 

health care workers need it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not in the contract. It’s 

part of a template, that this particular consultancy offers to all 

of its clients who are engaging in lean, as an option. And so 

there could be cultural training for those who are participating 

to actually, in some cases, go to Japan for it or stay here. 



4752 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, that option was presented to the then minister of 

Health. The then minister of Health said, we’re not interested in 

that part of this consultancy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here is the information provided 

by this government that it gave as a FOI [freedom of 

information] to the opposition and which the media has seen. 

Schedule B — fees, contracts, Mr. Speaker — Japan kanban 

seminar, consulting fee of senseis and interpreters invoiced 

separately. It says, Mr. Speaker, clearly, Japan cultural training 

and the amount, Mr. Speaker, is redacted. 

 

So here we go again. The Premier, Mr. Speaker, does not 

recognize the questions around . . . that health care workers 

have about the use of language that is being forced upon health 

care workers. And then, Mr. Speaker, after question period he 

goes in the rotunda and chastises me and others who simply 

want to ask questions about the fundamentals of this contract. 

 

My question to the Premier: what is Japan cultural training? 

Why is it in the contract, Mr. Speaker, and why do 

Saskatchewan health care workers need it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, not everything that happens in 

the legislature is about the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. 

Speaker, in the document the term optional is used to describe 

the cultural aspect of this. Mr. Speaker, that option was 

presented to the then minister of Health when we were 

engaging in the $40 million over four years project that, by the 

way, has already found more savings than it will cost in just two 

years. 

 

But that option for cultural training was presented to the then 

minister. The then minister said no, we’re not interested. It’s not 

part of the contract, Mr. Speaker. That’s why I said those things 

in the rotunda. It had nothing to do with the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s $40 million 

cash cow contract is flying in Japanese senseis to the province, 

Mr. Speaker, at $3,500 per day. And it also involves health care 

workers learning Japanese phrases. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s kaizen promotion provides 

a handy Japanese-English dictionary on its website for health 

care workers. It includes words, Mr. Speaker, like chaku-chaku, 

gemba, heijunka, hoshin kanri, jidoka, kaikaku, kanban, muda 

and, Mr. Speaker, poka-yoke. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: this is getting 

ridiculous. Why, why is his government spending $40 million 

on a contract that requires health care workers to learn terms 

like chaku-chaku? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if any of those 

involved in lean training are uncomfortable with the 

terminology, they need only bring those forward and there can 

be adjustments.  

 

In fact there have been already, I believe, with respect to the 

Wascana Rehab, that particular lean initiative. And we had an 

individual here yesterday that is very supportive of lean that’s 

been involved in that process. They looked at this particular, at 

lean, they looked at this particular component of terminology 

and decided to change it. Mr. Speaker, they, the front-line staff 

have the flexibility to do that. The NDP [New Democratic 

Party] don’t like the use of Japanese words. If others don’t as 

well, we can certainly accommodate that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would point out that this project is $10 million per year 

for four years and then it ends. I would point out that the total 

costs of lean are point two per cent of the entire health care 

budget. And I would point out that all of the money we’re going 

to invest in lean over the four years has already been recovered 

in savings in two years, Mr. Speaker. Forty million dollars over 

four years, all of that has been recovered. Never mind the cost 

avoidance at the children’s hospital, 20 to $30 million because 

of lean design. Never mind what’s happened at Moose Jaw 

Hospital. The new one there will operate less in terms of annual 

cost because of lean. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve already saved more than we’ve invested, 

and with respect to flexibility on terminology, we’ll leave that 

to those delivering the lean across the system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The news now that 

the Premier says they’re willing to remove the Japanese terms 

from the lean process is a very different story than what was 

communicated by the deputy minister of lean just yesterday. 

 

On a radio show the deputy was asked, we certainly hear about 

this. And he said, “We certainly hear that as one of the 

criticisms.” It went on to say, “The use of Japanese language 

has been helpful and we are sharing our experiences in learning 

with other corporations and other industries that have adopted 

lean.” It goes on to say, “When we’re speaking the same 

language, that’s hugely beneficial to share learning.” 

 

The question was asked to him, but does it have to be Japanese? 

“Well if they’re using Japanese terms, then we’re talking the 

same language.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hear from front-line health care workers that 

this is complicating matters. This is frustrating members. And 

now we hear, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier is willing to walk 

back from that. My question to the Premier is this: does he 

agree with his deputy minister, or is it now the policy that 

they’re removing the Japanese terms from lean? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, why does the Leader of the 

Opposition object to the use of Japanese terminology where that 

in case is happening? 

 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4753 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we hear from the Premier is 

that he’s spending more time focusing on what health 

bureaucrats are saying, as opposed to what front-line health 

workers are saying. When you listen to front-line health care 

workers, Mr. Speaker, we hear that they’re frustrated. We hear 

that they’re afraid to speak up. We hear, Mr. Speaker, that 

they’re afraid to share their views because of the orthodoxy that 

is being shoved and pushed by this government, right from the 

top. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just moments before question period, the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses issued a statement. And it was 

titled — it came from the president, Tracy Zambory — and it’s 

titled “The real story about lean.” And in this statement, they 

talk about how they were once hopeful about this process. The 

statement says, “SUN was hopeful at the outset that lean 

concepts would be effective. It’s very disappointing this is 

turning out not to be the case in practice.” The president goes 

on to say, Mr. Speaker, “We are now at the point where we 

must look at whether we should be proceeding with lean or 

changing course.” 

 

My question to the Premier: does he agree with the president of 

the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses representing some of the 

front-line health care workers, the people who are expressing 

concerns with his lean process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

didn’t answer the question that I posed earlier. However I’ll try 

to answer his question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I stated yesterday in the scrum with the media that we would 

want to hear concerns from front-line staff about lean or 

anything else in the health care system. In fact the lean, the 

application of lean has been very much about hearing from 

front-line staff and having front-line staff inform the health care 

system. 

 

It’s also why one of the first projects of lean was the releasing 

time to care so nurses could focus more on the patient and less 

on administration. If now SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses] is saying that that’s not happening because of lean, you 

bet the government is concerned. And we have already 

contacted SUN, officials of the government, and we’re going to 

be meeting on Friday. Officials will meet on Friday to 

determine exactly what those concerns are. 

 

In the meantime, in the letters to the editor section of The 

StarPhoenix today, we hear from Dr. Dennis Kendel, the past 

registrar of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, who says: 

 

Rather than engage in partisan debate about the cost of 

these consultant services, I would suggest we focus on the 

issues. There is compelling, persistent international 

evidence that none of Canada’s provincial/territorial 

health-care systems are “high-performing” systems that 

deliver optimal value for money. 

 

He goes on to describe exactly what lean is about and how it is 

needed in the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be different point of views. We 

had SUN supportive earlier on. Now they have concerns. We’ll 

hear about them. But make no mistake, we’re going to continue, 

Mr. Speaker, to find efficiencies in the health care system and 

focus on the patient, Mr. Speaker. That’s why there are more 

doctors practising today than under the NDP, more nurses, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s why we’re opening facilities and long-term care 

beds instead of closing them like the NDP did for years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when this government signs one 

contract for $40 million with one US [United States] consultant, 

when they’re flying in Japanese senseis to give training, Mr. 

Speaker, at $3,500 a day, when the president of the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses says that they no longer support 

this process . . . And here’s another quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Lean is supposed to be an inclusive process and when the 

largest provider of direct patient care says it’s not 

working, we have to go back to the drawing board, and we 

have to do this together. It’s time to put patients first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we have senseis being flown in from Japan 

at $3,500 a day, when front-line health care workers are 

frustrated because they’re being forced to use a 

Japanese-English dictionary, when we have the president of 

SUN, Mr. Speaker, saying that they need to go back to the 

drawing board, it’s time for this government to pull the plug on 

these cash cow consultant contracts. Will the Premier do that 

today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this government, like all 

governments across Canada and North America, are looking to 

find efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve demonstrated where we’ve found $40 

million in efficiencies in just its first two or three years of lean, 

Mr. Speaker, with more work to do to embed lean within the 

system and change the culture of health care in Saskatchewan, 

as opposed to the members opposite. And I’ll quote from the 

newspaper The StarPhoenix from almost 10 years ago, April 

1st, 2004, and I quote: 

 

Health Minister John Nilson warned the health regions 

needed to change how they deliver health care to find 

efficiencies, including changes in staff mix, facility 

closures or conversions, and reductions in long-term care 

beds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were looking for efficiencies. How did they 

find them? A month later, Mr. Speaker, in The Western 

Producer, the headline says, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: “More 

health cuts in Saskatchewan.” Ninety beds closed including 50 

long-term care beds, 92 jobs cut including 40 nurses — that’s 

NDP efficiencies in a budget that increased 6.3 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



4754 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s shocking that the Health 

minister, after hearing from the president of the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses with her statement that they need to go back to 

the drawing board, that the Health minister would stand in this 

Assembly and say that they need to further embed lean in the 

system when the largest front-line provider of care is calling 

into question the whole process. 

 

Let’s look at the actions of this government, Mr. Speaker. It 

was just recently that this government rejected urgent requests 

from care facilities for $8.5 million for desperately needed 

repairs, equipment, and staff. They plead poverty on that, Mr. 

Speaker. They didn’t have $8.5 million for front-line health care 

for seniors and people in this province. 

 

Then they turn around, Mr. Speaker, spend $40 million on a 

contract to one US consultant, a contract that’s now being 

called into question by the unions. In the last two years, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve spent $3.6 million flying consultants to 

Saskatchewan. They have spent, Mr. Speaker, well over 

$210,000 flying senseis to Saskatchewan from Japan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what the Japanese terms are for 

minimum care standards, for fixing health care, for appropriate 

staffing levels, Mr. Speaker, but those are the things that this 

government should be focused on. They should be listening to 

front care health care providers. Will they pull the plug on these 

fat contracts that we’re seeing for lean? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, through the work of this 

government in working with the lean methodology, Mr. 

Speaker, which other jurisdictions are looking at what 

Saskatchewan is doing, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has indicated 

and I’ve indicated, we’ve saved to date $40 million, including 

$35 million in how we inventory blood and plasma, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Massey Place ran for the 

leadership of his party on a platform that said, and I quote, “Our 

focus needs to be on establishing a more efficient system that is 

centred on patients and their families,” Mr. Speaker. He’s been 

the Leader of the Opposition for a year, and I don’t think he 

could name five things he’d do to make the system more 

efficient. Mr. Speaker, I could name you dozens of things that 

we’re doing right now to make the system more efficient. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we should have an efficient 

system, and here are some things: (1) stop flying senseis to 

Saskatchewan from Japan, (2) stop wasting resources having 

Japanese-English dictionaries on websites, (3) Mr. Speaker, 

listen to front-line health care providers when they tell you that 

the approach that you’re following is flawed, (4) Mr. Speaker, 

pull the plug on John Black because Saskatchewan taxpayers 

are not getting good value for their resources, (5) allow health 

care professionals in health regions to actually do their job and 

not go to workshops where they learn how to fold paper 

airplanes. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he agree with the statements 

that have been provided by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, you know it’s difficult 

days in NDP land when cancelling a contract constitutes a 

health policy for the NDP. You know it’s difficult days, Mr. 

Speaker, when that amounts to health policy in the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen savings of $40 million through lean 

already in early days, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen efficiencies 

over a 20-year period of what we expect to see in terms of the 

operation of the Moose Jaw Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the number of cancelled appointments 

at Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s mental health and 

addictions clinic go from 42 per cent cancelled appointments to 

zero, Mr. Speaker. That’s reduced their wait-list for people that 

are looking for mental health and addictions from 400 people, 

Mr. Speaker, down to 70 clients. Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to put a 

number on what the efficiency is in terms of that one savings 

alone, Mr. Speaker, but to those people who are now getting 

appointments quicker, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think you can put a 

price on what lean has done for those people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, central to this discussion needs to 

be the focus on the patient. And I realize the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, has passed the baton to the Health minister, but in 

talking about the approach, here’s what Tracy Zambory, the 

president, says about the approach: that “. . . it fails to take into 

account patient . . . [safety] . . . and complexity and is 

unfortunately proving to have little impact on direct care at the 

bedside and patient outcomes,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Patients, Mr. Speaker, are not cogs in some Toyota assembly 

line. They are people, Mr. Speaker, who deserve attention, who 

deserve care. My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is this: 

he has lost focus on the patient. He has focused on fat contracts, 

Mr. Speaker, focused on looking at only the savings and not 

looking at the people that matter, Mr. Speaker. At the same 

time, when they’re going for savings, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

signing the fattest contracts imaginable, flying in senseis from 

Japan for $3,500 a day. 

 

My question to the Premier: SUN has called for this 

government to go back to the drawing board. Will the Premier, 

not the Health minister, will the Premier stand in the Assembly 

and say he will go back to the drawing board? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder in 2004 if the 

member from Lakeview, when he was the Health minister, did 

he talk to the patients in the 12 communities that lost beds, Mr. 

Speaker? When 50 long-term care beds were closed in 12 

communities, did he talk to those patients, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what patients are saying, Mr. Speaker, 

about lean. We have Heather Thiessen: “I am now a believer in 

these processes our hospitals are using to make things better for 

patients and families.” Louise Frederick: “This experience is 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4755 

very empowering. I am confident patients are being . . . 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — There is enough conversation going on for 

more than one legislature. Can we please listen to both the 

answer and the question? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

these are what patients are actually saying because in all of the 

work that we do in lean we always, always, Mr. Speaker, 

involve patients. We always involve family reps. We always 

involve front-line workers, Mr. Speaker, unlike the decisions 

that were made in the past to find efficiencies in the health care 

system which never involved the patients, which never involved 

the front-line staff, Mr. Speaker. That’s a big difference with 

what we’re doing here in Saskatchewan now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Here is some more of what Tracy Zambory, the 

president of SUN says. The question will be for the Premier 

again, Mr. Speaker. She states: 

 

Naturally SUN and front-line registered nurses shared 

government’s initial optimism that lean would be the 

answer to improving patient care in our province. Sadly, 

this has not been the case. 

 

She goes on to say: 

 

It’s not always easy admitting a mistake, especially for 

governments who are at the mercy of their voters and 

constituents. But when it comes to health care and the very 

safety and well-being of those who have entrusted us to 

lead, we must put political motivations, ideologies and 

rhetoric aside and work together. 

 

My question for the Premier: will he listen to the president of 

the nurses? Will he admit that they made a mistake? Will he 

admit that they need to go back to the drawing board on lean? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

have had the opportunity to meet with Ms. Zambory on a 

number of occasions just recently in the last number of months 

as we look to form a new partnership that has been very 

successful for the province of Saskatchewan, that has seen this 

government hire 800 additional nursing positions and in fact 

exceeded that to an additional 200, Mr. Speaker. So we are in 

discussions with SUN around a partnership as well as a new 

collective bargaining agreement that is going to need to be 

re-signed soon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would again go back to the differences 

between how this government finds efficiencies while focusing 

on patient care, on quality care, on reducing errors and defects 

in the system, Mr. Speaker, and improving outcomes to the 

system, as opposed to the members opposite. We’ve talked 

about $35 million in blood savings, Mr. Speaker. We find 

savings in how we inventory something like blood and plasma, 

Mr. Speaker. 

How the NDP found $35 million in savings: $10 million to 

close the Plains hospital; $25 million to close 52 rural hospitals, 

Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan, particularly rural 

Saskatchewan, cannot afford the efficiencies of the NDP. The 

cost was just too high, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the concerns that front-line health 

care workers have, that patients have, and that families have, 

Mr. Speaker, is that this approach, this over-the-top, overboard 

approach that we’ve seen from this government when it comes 

to lean, has been at the expense of good Saskatchewan common 

sense, has been at the expense of the expertise that is on the 

front lines of those who’ve been providing work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was actually yesterday the deputy minister said 

in an interview about the good aspects of lean, he said, “We’ve 

only started with respect to this lean journey. The work that’s 

been done to date has been small tests of change. These ideas 

have come from the front lines, those in the know, those who 

are working in these environments every day.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, why do we need a $40 million contract with John 

Black and Associates? Why do we need senseis from Japan 

coming at $3,500 a day when their deputy minister of lean 

himself says that the real lessons are from the front lines? 

 

My question to the Premier: will he listen to those on the front 

lines? Will he listen to the nurses, admit that they’ve lost their 

way with lean, admit that they’ve signed fat, fat, generous 

contracts to US consultants? Will they pull the plug and go back 

to the drawing board? My question is for the Premier. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, lean 

engages the front-line staff, engages the patients and their 

families, Mr. Speaker. It engages, as I said, patients. That is 

always at the heart of what we do with lean, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a number of ways and choices that we 

can find efficiencies within the system. We can take the old way 

of doing things within health care system, when in a year the 

health budget went up by nearly six and a half per cent it 

resulted in the closure of facilities, in beds, and the firing of 

staff, Mr. Speaker. Or we can look to see another way to find 

efficiencies within the system that actually improve the care, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here’s just another example. Regina Qu’Appelle, using lean 

methodology, Mr. Speaker, reduced cancelled MRIs [magnetic 

resonance imaging] from 12 per week down to 1, allowing them 

to do 650 more MRI scans in a year — a 7 per cent increase in 

productivity without adding one single dollar in additional 

resources, Mr. Speaker. I think that that makes sense. That’s 

Saskatchewan common sense. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we have had an entire 

discussion this question period about the wasteful contracts of 

that Premier and that government with no contrition from that 



4756 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

government. And this is in set-up to what tomorrow is supposed 

to be budget day, a budget that we understand might have some 

tough choices in it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are wondering how can they 

be serious about pretending to be making some tough choices in 

their budget if they can’t even cut waste as obvious as that 

before us in these fat lean contracts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the results of lean that have 

been achieved already within the system, I’ve talked about 

mental health and addictions, Mr. Speaker. I’ve talked about 

MRIs and increasing the capacity within the system without 

actually adding additional resources. Mr. Speaker, being more 

effective with the dollars. Those are just two examples, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In Victoria Hospital in Prince Albert Parkland Health Region, 

the lab achieved zero defects, Mr. Speaker, in reporting results 

and reduced by 96 per cent the overall time it takes to release 

test results, Mr. Speaker. This is using the additional resources 

. . . using the same resources within the system, Mr. Speaker, 

without having to go to closing beds, laying off staff, Mr. 

Speaker, closing facilities, closing hospitals like the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, at a time when we’re bending the cost 

curve, seeing real results for the people of Saskatchewan, real 

results for our patients across the system. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Funding for Research Projects 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this morning I had the privilege of being in Saskatoon 

to announce that the Government of Saskatchewan through the 

Ministry of Advanced Education is providing more than $2 

million to the University of Saskatchewan and the Canadian 

Light Source for nine research projects through the Innovation 

and Science Fund. These funds are meant to help match federal 

dollars that come from the Canadian Foundation for Innovation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize the value and importance of research 

and innovation and its lasting effects on our province, on our 

country, and right around the world. 

 

The Speaker: — Well I believe that there is a ministerial 

statement being presented to the House. Unfortunately it’s 

impossible to hear it. I would appreciate it if members would 

listen to the statement and to the response. And we don’t need 

to be pointing fingers to figure out who was doing it. I 

recognize the Minister of Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Innovation and Science Fund promotes excellence 

in research, and there are some key objectives that we have 

associated with this fund. First and foremost this fund helps to 

ensure that Saskatchewan is competing nationally for valuable 

federal dollars and also those from the private sector. Secondly 

it helps to promote research partnerships with the private sector 

and with community-based collaborators. And third, Mr. 

Speaker, it helps in the recruitment and retention of some of 

best and brightest, not simply from across the country, but 

around the world. And in fact today we had a fine example in 

that when we were able to hear from Dr. Graham George, 

originally from Stanford, who’s now in Saskatchewan helping 

to ensure that we’re doing world-leading research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this investment will further enhance 

Saskatchewan’s growing reputation for innovative research and 

world-class life science facilities. Mr. Speaker, one of the nine 

projects included in today’s funding announcement includes 

$1.3 million for the BioXAS [biological X-ray absorption 

spectroscopy] life science beamline for X-ray absorptions 

spectroscopy at the Canadian Light Source synchrotron. The 

BioXAS beamline will investigate the molecular form and 

microscopic location of metals in biological systems with 

unprecedented accuracy and sensitivity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some key examples of the work that’s 

going to be undertaken as a result of this investment. For 

example, the researchers are going to be looking at the role of 

metals in brain diseases like Alzheimer’s and MS [multiple 

sclerosis], Mr. Speaker. Secondly they’re going to be working 

on treatments for toxins, helping to make sure that people have 

a higher quality of life. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re working to 

develop new drugs to help fight cancer and other diseases that 

affect and afflict so many Saskatchewan families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, research and innovation projects are helping to 

ensure that not simply is the Saskatchewan economy continuing 

to grow, Mr. Speaker, growth that’s recognized from across the 

country and well beyond, but it’s also helping to ensure that 

there’s a higher quality of life, not simply for today but for 

future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are investments in our future, and they’re 

making a difference today. Mr. Speaker, these nine research 

projects will support the growth plan that has been obviously 

put forward and is being promoted right across the province. 

It’s also helping to meet the future needs of people across the 

province, especially when it comes to health care and health 

research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was delighted to be at the Canadian Light Source 

synchrotron at the University of Saskatchewan this morning to 

help make this announcement and this investment. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 

pleasure to rise in response to the minister’s statement, and 

thank him for providing an advance copy of the statement. 

 

Again it’s sort of a good news, bad news story here, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of we’re glad to see the dollars being 

extended for innovation and research. We’re glad to see the 

continued great work at the University of Saskatchewan and the 

Canadian Light Source synchrotron being built upon. We’re 

interested to see what’s happening with BioXAS and the 

potential that that project has. The $2.1 million over the nine 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4757 

research projects, Mr. Speaker, we’re glad to see that 

happening. 

 

We can’t help but be interested though in the timing, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of coming on the eve of a budget and what 

this might mean for the news to come in terms of institutions 

that are already under considerable duress in terms of the 

University of Saskatchewan or the University of Regina. 

Certainly the role they play in the research agenda of this 

province and innovation and growth is very valuable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so we’re glad to see the dollars flowing today in terms of 

continuing to build on that work at the Light Source 

synchrotron. But we can’t help but wonder what’s going to 

come tomorrow in terms of the announcements that will be 

contained in the budget and how it will impact institutions like 

the University of Saskatchewan that are already under 

significant duress. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I’d again thank the minister for the 

advance copy of the notes, and we’ll look forward to the budget 

for further news surely. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee . . . No, Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 108, The Athletics 

Commission Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice report that the Bill No. 

108, The Athletics Commission Act be reported without 

amendment. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair that the . . . 

Okay. We have a new script and I went a little too close to the 

top here. 

 

When shall this Bill be considered in Committee of the Whole? 

I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 

and that the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 108, The 

Athletics Commission Act without amendment and that the bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

[14:30] 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 108, The Athletics Commission Act be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 106, the legal professionals 

amendment Act, 2013 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — And when shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 106, The 

Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 without amendment 

and that the bill be now the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 

 

 



4758 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on the Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 113, The Powers of 

Attorney Amendment Act, 2013. This is a bilingual bill, without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les 

procurations 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole and that this bill be 

now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 114, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 114, The 

Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision 

Makers Amendment Act, 2013 and that the bill now be read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 114, The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 

Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4759 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2013 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall we consider this bill in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave be waived 

on consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 115, 

The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 

without amendment and that the bill be now read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 

2013 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize . . . Why is the member on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — In routine proceedings the Opposition 

House Leader named a number of communities in his petition. 

We’ve reviewed that petition and don’t find the names of a 

number of the communities which he had referred to, and we’d 

ask that Mr. Speaker review the petition in that regard. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I had said that the communities 

that I was naming regarded the individuals that signed a number 

of petitions, including documents that I’ve provided to the 

Minister of Education. So in terms of the documents that they 

have that have been properly received, and in addition the 

petitions that have been signed by other communities, that was 

the content for the list of communities that were presented. So 

that’s what was presented, Mr. Speaker, and I await your ruling. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the Government House Leader 

on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Standing 

order 16(3) is very clear as to what the requirements are for a 

petition. 

 

The Speaker: — Both sides have made their presentation on 

the point of order. This is not a matter of debate at the present 

time. I will take this point of order under advisement, review 

the petitions and the statements that have been made, and come 

back with a decision at a later date. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 124 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 124 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) 

Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la 

loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 

(No. 2) be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise to 

speak to Bill No. 124, An Act to make consequential 

amendments resulting from the enactment of The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2). This is bilingual legislation 

and so there’s also a full French version of this bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, normally when I’m preparing to respond to bills I 

look at the speech given by the minister as it relates to the 



4760 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

particular bill. And in this case the House Leader for the 

government rose to speak on behalf of the Minister of Health in 

moving Bill No. 124. And so when I then read what the House 

Leader said about this bill on December 2nd, on page 4341, I 

couldn’t recognize that it has anything to do with the particular 

Bill 124 that we have here. And so, Mr. Speaker, this is a bill 

where we don’t actually have an explanation for the bill that’s 

being introduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my understanding of the bill, looking at the bill 

and looking at The Co-operatives Act that this particular bill 

relates to how the previous bill, No. 123, affects a bilingual 

piece of legislation, The Co-operatives Act, and makes some 

changes in that Act to reflect that, there’s nothing in what’s 

been said by the House Leader on the bill, on behalf of the 

Minister of Health, that references anything about this. 

 

So what is this bill? And I guess they’re leaving it up to the 

opposition to define what they’re trying to do as a government. 

Effectively what we have is a situation where community 

clinics have been incorporated under what was called The 

Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Associations Act as one of 

the ways that community clinics could be incorporated. And 

when the previous legislation proposes to get rid of that Act, 

there needs to be amendments to The Co-operatives Act to 

reflect that, and these amendments have to be in both English 

and in French. And so what we have in section 2 of this bill is 

basically changes made to The Co-operatives Act. And it’s not 

clear, unless you actually go to The Co-operatives Act, what’s 

happening. 

 

And so the first thing is under section 2. It says The 

Co-operatives Act is amended in a manner set out below. And 

then it says, subsection 2(2) of this Bill 124, that the section 

198(2) which is in the present Act which is Act c.C.-37.3, The 

Co-operatives Act, 1996 has been repealed and a new Act put in 

place. 

 

And basically the new Act says this: 

 

No person shall use the words ‘community clinic’ or 

«clinique communautaire» as part of its name or on 

premises that it operates unless it: 

 

was incorporated pursuant to The Mutual Medical and 

Hospital Benefit Associations Act; or 

 

is incorporated pursuant to this Act as a community 

clinic as defined in section 263. 

 

And so effectively what it says is, any community clinics that 

were set up before are going to be allowed to be continued, and 

then any new ones would have to be incorporated under The 

Co-operatives Act. 

 

It then goes on in section 2(3) to say that section 265 of The 

Co-operatives Act is repealed. And section 265 of The 

Co-operatives Act is a section which effectively allows for 

community clinics that are created under The Mutual Medical 

and Hospital Benefit Associations Act to be continued under 

The Co-operatives Act. Since the clause in 198(2) covers all of 

that, you don’t need that other particular clause. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have a bill here that’s an amending 

bill of a bilingual bill, The Co-operatives Act. And I think the 

point that needs to be emphasized here is that community 

clinics are co-operatives, that no matter how they were created 

in the past they will now be regulated and dealt with under 

co-operatives legislation. I think that’s a good thing. But I think 

it’s important that when a minister puts forward information 

into the House that it’s accurate, and especially if he passes it 

on to the House Leader to put that in for him, and that we 

appreciate, and I know the courts appreciate, when the 

minister’s statements on second reading are an accurate 

reflection of what is actually happening with a particular bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, after spending some time sorting out exactly 

what could happen here, I know that some of my colleagues 

may have some comments about the legislation as it relates to 

The Co-operatives Act and community clinics. So at this time I 

will move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 124, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 

(Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 125 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 125 — The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to wade 

into the debate about Bill No. 125, The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

I’m particularly . . . It’s always a privilege to get on our feet and 

have the debate and discussion about bills before us. But this 

particular one, Mr. Speaker, is near and dear to my heart. I had 

the opportunity, with some of the colleagues in this legislature, 

to sit on the Traffic Safety Committee last summer that came 

out of the opposition’s push for the government to do 

something about our abysmal impaired driving rates. And the 

good thing about that committee, it wasn’t just focused on 

impaired driving. We did cover a whole bunch of other issues 

or concerns around child seats, booster seat safety, around 

wildlife, around intersection safety — many, many different 

areas. 

 

But for the purposes of today, I’m going to focus on two pieces 

that stand out for me, Mr. Speaker. The first piece I haven’t had 

much opportunity to talk about is the changes around child 

restraints. Right now in Saskatchewan car seats for infants or 

smaller children are mandatory, but not booster seats. And one 

of the recommendations that came before us, before the Traffic 

Safety Committee, was from Dr. Susanna Martin with the 

Canadian Paediatric Society. She’s the Saskatchewan director 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4761 

on the Canadian Paediatric Society, and she presented about the 

need for mandatory use of booster seats in Saskatchewan 

around saving lives. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And I know, I think this will be . . . I want to say that I think, I 

hope, that there’s an opportunity in committee for the minister 

to hear some of the evidence and make some amendments. But 

because we do have this piece of legislation before us, then this 

is the opportunity to do it right. And I think right now as it 

stands, this legislature is getting the booster seat piece wrong. 

 

As it stands now, as the minister points out, that she says, 

“That’s why we’re making booster seats mandatory for children 

up to the age of seven or who meet certain height and weight 

guidelines outlined in the legislation.” And you know I think 

there was in Dr. Susanna Martin’s presentation, she talked 

about two things, the importance of two things — height and 

weight criteria. And that’s so a seat belt, a lap belt, and a 

shoulder belt fit a young child or a young person properly, but 

the other piece of that was around age criteria. The Canadian 

Paediatric Society says the most effective legislation includes 

both an age criteria and a size criteria. 

 

And her recommendation that she brought before the Traffic 

Safety Committee was for those who, based on a review of the 

literature, the Canadian Paediatric Society’s injury prevention 

committee recommends booster seat use until a height of 145 

centimetres, or roughly 4 foot 9, at which time an adult seat belt 

will appropriately fit. They also use the age criteria of over 

eight years of age and the weight criteria of over 36 kilograms 

or 80 pounds. 

 

So the height and weight piece, and using the age of eight, was 

absolutely imperative. But right now, Mr. Speaker, this piece of 

legislation outlines height and weight guidelines and the age of 

under seven. 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, very clearly this legislation 

said it requires children under seven years of age who fall 

below the prescribed weight and height requirements must wear 

a booster seat. Well, Mr. Speaker, my daughter is six. She will 

be seven in December and currently weighs 50 pounds. And 

she’s not a small child. She is in fact probably . . . I don’t know 

where she falls on the percentile but I can tell you, in my 

experience of spending time with many other six-year-olds, that 

she is not small of stature. She’s not a petite little thing, Mr. 

Speaker, and there’s no way she will be reaching 80 pounds 

before her next birthday in nine months from now. 

 

So I know the reality is, in order to keep our kids safe we need 

legislation that supports the evidence, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

the minister, the minister has heard from both the Prevention 

Institute of Saskatchewan and the Canadian Paediatric Society, 

flagging this under seven mark as a huge problem. And I’d like 

to read into the record actually two letters. I know the minister 

has received them and I hope we have an opportunity to discuss 

some of this in committee, and that the minister might be open 

to changing the age criteria. But a letter from the Saskatchewan 

Prevention Institute, it says here . . . Just one moment, please. 

And this is actually directed to the Leader of the Opposition: 

 

Dear Mr. Broten: The Saskatchewan Prevention Institute 

fully supports the decision of the Government of 

Saskatchewan to take action on many of the 

recommendations put forth by the Special Committee on 

Traffic Safety. These new recommendations will help 

reduce the rate of injury and fatality on Saskatchewan 

roads. 

 

The Prevention Institute has been a strong advocate for 

child passenger safety for over 20 years. The institute 

takes on the lead role of child restraint education and 

certification in Saskatchewan. The implementation of 

booster seat legislation is a great step forward for the 

protection of child occupants in Saskatchewan. The use of 

age, weight, and height in the recommendation has the 

potential to make a very strong addition to The Traffic 

Safety Act. 

 

However, the Prevention Institute would like to 

respectfully encourage the government to re-examine the 

age requirement put forth in the proposed legislation. 

Research has shown that a child who is 145 centimetres 

tall and who weights 36 kilograms will achieve proper seat 

belt fit in most vehicles. The current recommendation for 

booster seat legislation uses the age of seven. A child who 

is seven years of age would have to exceed the 100th 

percentile on the Centers for Disease Control and 

Prevention clinical growth charts for stature and weight to 

meet these criteria. Children with normal growth will not 

reach these height and weight benchmarks until they are 

between the ages of 8 and 12 years. 

 

Most of Canada has some form of booster seat legislation. 

Of the eight provinces and one territory that have some 

form of legislation for children weighing more than 18 

kilograms, four provinces use the age of nine in their 

legislation and include the 145 centimetre height and 36 

kilogram weight restrictions as well. The critical factor in 

protecting children is how their bodies fit the seat belts. 

Serious harm can come to children who are placed in seat 

belts too early.  

 

And that’s again: 

 

Serious injury or death can be caused by improper seat 

belt use by a child who is not yet ready to wear one. To 

ensure proper belt fit, a child should be 145 centimetres 

and 36 kilograms. This does not coincide with a child of 

the age of seven. Changing the booster seat legislation 

from the recommended age of seven years to the 

recommended age of nine years will have more 

effectiveness in protecting children in the event of a crash. 

 

The Prevention Institute will continue to educate and train 

Saskatchewan residents and child passenger safety 

advocate partners in the importance of proper in-car 

restraint use. The institute will offer their services in 

public education to make this legislative change a smooth 

and positive one for parents and children in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  

 

That is signed by Noreen Agrey, executive director, and Travis 

Holeha, the child traffic safety coordinator. 



4762 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

So the age of seven . . . And I completely concur with the age 

and height. The fact that, as I’ve talked about Ophelia who will 

be seven and wouldn’t have to use a booster seat in nine months 

from now, Mr. Speaker, she is 50 pounds. She’s got 30 pounds 

to pack on and considerable height to grow and she will not 

make it there before her next birthday. And I can tell you, I will 

be using a booster seat for my child until she reaches this age 

and height requirement. 

 

Some of the stories, having sat on the Traffic Safety Committee 

. . . And I fully admit I looked at the recommendation in the 

traffic safety report and there was an oversight, Mr. Speaker. 

Recommendation 25, “The Traffic Safety Committee 

recommends booster seats be mandatory for children less than 

145 centimetres in height and 36 kilograms in weight.” We 

overlooked, Mr. Speaker, the age component. 

 

When Dr. Martin presented, I know we were all around that 

table and both sides or all members of the Traffic Safety 

Committee were in unanimous support of Dr. Martin’s 

recommendations. She described for us some of the injuries that 

can happen to children that she sees that are very real when a 

seat belt doesn’t fit. So in fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe that it was 

an oversight on the part of the committee. I know that it was 

certainly an oversight on my part. And I know when Dr. 

Susanna Martin made the presentation that she emphasized not 

only the height and weight but the age as well. And I think 

when this bill moves to committee, I hope that the minister is 

open to hearing the evidence. 

 

I’d also like to point out a letter by the Canadian Paediatric 

Society, actually again Dr. Susanna Martin who presented to the 

committee, and I just will find this letter here for you. And this 

letter is to Minister Harpauer, and I was cc’d [carbon copy] on 

this, Mr. Speaker. So this letter, I think it’s important to read 

into the record that this age criteria is very important so the 

people of Saskatchewan know that the recommendations that 

came before the committee are based on evidence, Mr. Speaker, 

and the reality of children and how they grow. 

 

And the point is it’s not about age. It’s about size and ensuring 

that a seat belt fits properly. If you’re 43 years old and 4 foot 9, 

Mr. Speaker, the reality is you should probably be sitting, the 

reality is . . . The members opposite find this quite funny, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m not quite sure why. The reality is they do 

recommend that adults who are smaller of stature, in order to 

make sure a seat belt fits you properly, use some kind of . . . 

something to lift you up as well. And I know many cars today 

have seats that rise and will make sure that you fit the seat belt 

better, but seat belts only work if they are fitted properly. They 

can cause a great deal of harm, Mr. Speaker, if they are not 

going across a person’s body in the right way, and I’ll talk 

about that in a minute. 

 

But I think it’s important to have these letters on the record 

when we go into committee to discuss this further. So this 

particular letter, dated November 20th, 2013, reads: 

 

Dear Minister Harpauer: I would like to commend you on 

your decision to implement some of the recommendations 

of the Traffic Safety Commission, particularly that require 

booster seats for young children. This is a great step in the 

right direction towards increasing safety for this 

vulnerable population, and it would put Saskatchewan in 

line with the majority of other provinces. 

 

I do, however, encourage you to broaden the 

recommendations to encompass all children under the age 

of nine, the age adopted by the majority of provinces with 

such legislation. Harmonization of legislation across the 

country would greatly facilitate enforcement and support 

parents making appropriate choices for their children. In 

actual fact, the average age at which a height of 4 foot 9 

and a weight of 36 kilograms are achieved is in excess of 

10. 

 

In support of this, I would like to call your attention to the 

enclosed Canadian Paediatric Society statement, 

“Transportation of infants and children in motor vehicles,” 

written by a committee of experts and supported by the 

best available evidence. 

 

The American Academy of Pediatrics, our sister 

organization, has also come out with similar 

recommendations for this age group, again derived by 

detailed analysis of the literature. As pediatricians, we 

regularly discuss safety with parents of children we see 

who universally want what is best for their children. 

Frequently they look towards legislation for what 

represents optimal practice, often assuming this is guided 

by expert opinion. This opportunity offers the province of 

Saskatchewan to align itself with other jurisdictions in 

legislating the optimal evidence-based protection shown to 

significantly reduce mortality in this age group. I would 

welcome any further conversations you would like to have 

in support of this recommendation. 

 

And that is written by Dr. Susanna Martin who is the director of 

the Canadian Paediatric Society representing Saskatchewan.  

 

So two voices, pretty strong voices there, Mr. Speaker, saying 

that evidence should inform policy. And I hope that when this 

moves to committee again that the minister will be open to 

making the amendments and changing the age from under seven 

to under nine to better reflect the growth of children and the 

safety of children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are a few points . . . Just have to organize my papers here. 

In the attached brief that Dr. Martin sent to the minister it goes 

on again just to basically explain the height and weight criteria 

and why those are important, and actually some of the results of 

not using a booster seat. So I’d like to read this piece — booster 

seat legislation advocacy — again this is from the 

“Transportation of infants and children in motor vehicles” from 

the Canadian Paediatric Society, page 3, booster seat legislation 

advocacy. 

 

The CPS supports booster seat legislation. Booster seat 

legislation is crucial to closing the gap for children who 

are too big for car seats and too small for the vehicle’s seat 

belt assembly. Between 1997 and 2001, the death rate due 

to motor vehicle collisions dropped by 52% among 

children younger than five years of age, and by 25% 

among children 10 to 14 years of age, but did not drop at 

all for children [from] five to nine years of age — those in 

the booster seat age group. Additionally, a recent two-year 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4763 

Canadian Paediatric Surveillance Program study of 

lap-belt syndrome (a medical term for the pattern of 

injuries to a child’s internal organs and spine caused by an 

ill-fitting seat belt), identified that 12 of the 28 confirmed 

cases occurred in children younger than eight years of age, 

with only one child restrained in a booster seat wearing 

only a lap belt. Almost one-third (30%) of children 

wearing a seat belt or a three-point restraint at the time of 

their motor vehicle crash suffered from lap-belt syndrome, 

with spinal fractures and permanent cord lesions occurring 

43% and 25% of the time, respectively. The province of 

Quebec was the first to implement booster seat legislation 

in June 2002. Ontario, Nova Scotia, British Columbia, 

Newfoundland & Labrador, Prince Edward Island and 

New Brunswick recently passed booster seat laws. The 

new Ontario booster seat law came into effect on 

September 1, 2005. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The bottom line here, Mr. Speaker, is injuries that occur if 

you’re not wearing a seat belt properly because you don’t fit in 

the car properly. The goal . . . And again having sat on the 

Traffic Safety Committee, I was there for Dr. Susanna Martin’s 

presentation. All my colleagues concurred with her 

presentation. It was actually quite surprising. This was day three 

I think of the committee, day three or day four of our committee 

hearings, and there was unanimous support for her. She left the 

room and we all were quite astounded by what she had to say. 

 

And many of us are parents, new parents, grandparents. I know 

my colleague from Cumberland who is a grandparent was 

completely shocked to hear that he’s been putting his grandkids 

in car seats . . . improperly belting them, not in car seats, not in 

booster seats. They’re over the age of the use of a need for a car 

seat, but he left that meeting saying, I have learned a pretty big 

lesson here; it’s scary thinking what could happen to my 

grandchildren if we had had an accident. 

 

And I know the members, every single member around that 

table thought that there was huge merit in this proposal. So I 

think it’s important that we try to get it right, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and meet the criteria of effective legislation that’s 

based on evidence. And as it stands now, again, children under 

seven, they will not meet that height criteria. Like again, I just 

want to mention Ophelia who will not make the height or 

weight criteria before her seventh birthday next December and 

could feasibly be out of a booster seat. 

 

And I think it’s important and it’s incumbent upon this 

legislature to ensure that families who are looking for 

guidelines or best practice, that we can look to legislation as 

being best practice, and that is what will keep our children safe. 

So I look forward to the opportunity for committee and to have 

the chance to raise that with the minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another piece of the legislation are changes — again The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act — around impaired driving. And 

I’ve had several occasions to get up in the legislature since 

these changes have come forward to talk a little bit about this. 

So last summer when we had our hearings there were some very 

good ideas presented to us on how to reduce impaired driving. 

And many of these changes . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, it was 

great to work on this bipartisan or multi-party committee, or 

bipartisan committee, I guess. It’s an all-party Traffic Safety 

Committee, and for the most part I think things . . . It moved 

along quite smoothly and respectfully and collaboratively, and I 

think we’ve come up with some good recommendations. But I 

think the members on the committee and then subsequently this 

government has chosen to ignore evidence that was put before 

them when it comes to keeping people in Saskatchewan safe, 

Mr. Speaker. So I want to talk a little bit about the record here 

in Saskatchewan when it comes to impaired driving before I 

speak specifically to the legislation. 

 

So SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] statistics: 

between 2002 and 2012, alcohol was responsible for 41 per cent 

of the fatalities and 12 per cent of the crashes here in the 

province. And SGI presented to the committee and we heard 

that Saskatchewan has “stagnated” when it comes to reducing 

impaired driving. And compared to other jurisdictions, 

“Saskatchewan is over the top in death and injuries.” 

 

Mothers Against Drunk Driving estimates that Saskatchewan 

has the highest per capita rate of alcohol-related road crash 

deaths among the provinces. An estimated 9.76 of every 

100,000 people die because of impaired driving here. Almost 10 

per 100,000 die here in Saskatchewan because of impaired 

driving, Mr. Speaker, and we need to compare that to the 

national average that’s 3.17 per 100,000, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 

a considerable difference. So an estimated 9.76 out of every 

100,000 people die because of impaired driving here in 

Saskatchewan, but the national average is 3.17 people in 

100,000. And we have managed to maintain this dubious record 

for more than a decade. So we have clung on to this awful 

record for quite some time. 

 

So I’m very glad that this committee did take some of the 

recommendations around impaired driving, whether it’s of 

alcohol or other substances, and have incorporated them. But 

backing this up, I think the members from the government side 

of the House on the Traffic Safety Committee missed some key 

evidence or chose to ignore some key evidence that was before 

us. 

 

So the reality here, the Canadian context and the Saskatchewan 

context here a little bit: impaired driving death rate has been 

going down across Canada and up here in Saskatchewan. 

There’s a slide from a presentation of MADD [Mothers Against 

Drunk Driving] Canada that shows that between 2000 and 

2009, our impaired-related crash deaths have gone up by almost 

23 per cent while Canada’s has gone down by 17 per cent. 

Clearly we’re doing something wrong here in Saskatchewan, so 

this legislation is a welcome change, but it doesn’t go far 

enough. I think some of the things that the minister, both the 

Chair of the Traffic Safety Committee talked about and the 

minister talked about, is first steps. We’ll start here. Well 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t good enough. This isn’t just a 

place to start . When we’re going from having the most dubious 

record in the country, just taking an incremental approach is not 

satisfactory. 

 

So we have an opportunity here to do some really, really 

positive things that can save lives, save people’s families from 

being shattered. Anybody who’s lost a loved one to the 

senselessness of impaired driving . . . I can’t even imagine, Mr. 



4764 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

Speaker. But we have an opportunity to help keep people in 

Saskatchewan just a little bit safer through common sense. And 

this government has chosen not to do this in this bill. 

 

So the opposition members, we put forward a minority opinion 

— the opposition representatives on the Traffic Safety 

Committee. And why did we put forward this? I will tell you a 

bit about the minority opinion, but I want to talk a little bit 

about what’s happened in two of the Western provinces, our 

neighbours in Alberta and BC [British Columbia] and what 

we’ve heard from the presenters before the Traffic Safety 

Committee. 

 

So Doug Beirness from the Canadian Centre on Substance 

Abuse has been involved in road safety research, mainly 

focused on impaired driving for the past 30 years. And Andy 

Murie, he’s the executive director from MADD Canada; Fay 

Rorke, she’s with the driving without impairment program since 

1995. So she works with those who’ve been caught with blood 

alcohol levels not allowed, some in the administrative range, so 

that’s over .04 and up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we heard from policy experts. We heard from people whose 

business it is to know about impaired driving. We heard from 

people who work with impaired drivers. And they all said that 

. . . and others who were before the committee as well, but I 

think those three people are of note here. But they had all said 

that short-term vehicle impoundments in the warning range 

were absolutely imperative. So the warning range is from .05 to 

.08 in other provinces. Here the warning range is at .04. But 

both Alberta and BC have implemented short-term, three-day 

vehicle impoundments in the warning range. 

 

So when you hit .08, Mr. Speaker, you are federally criminally 

impaired, but provinces have the ability to put in place 

legislation to try to nip that behaviour in the bud in the warning 

range. And every province has done that, Mr. Speaker. And 

Alberta, well BC actually was the . . . I want to tell you a little 

bit about in 2010, BC implemented a range of measures to curb 

impaired driving accidents and fatality which included these 

immediate vehicle impoundments for both those impaired in the 

warning range and those who blew over .08 which, as I said, is 

a criminal offence. 

 

And so last year, Alberta followed suit with a three-day vehicle 

impoundment for those caught on the first offence in the 

warning range. So in the first two years, the fatality rate 

involving alcohol dropped by 50 per cent. In Alberta, fatal 

crashes . . . And it was early on. Alberta had only been in this 

process for a short while, but in Alberta fatal crashes where 

alcohol was involved dropped by 46 per cent between July and 

December 2012 compared to the five-year average for those 

same months. 

 

And those, I’ve been told by people who work in this field, are 

incredible early results. In a conversation, one of the presenters, 

Doug Beirness, had this to say: “The world changed in British 

Columbia.” So we have evidence presented before us by people 

who know this well. They know this field well. There’s people 

who know people well. As I said, Fay Rorke works with those 

who have been caught with impaired . . . caught because of 

impaired driving. So I don’t know why, I still cannot fathom 

why the members on the Traffic Safety Committee refused to 

accept that the three-day impoundment in the warning range 

was effective. 

 

Some of the other evidence that we heard, and this is included 

in our minority opinion, is the reality is that we were provided 

with evidence that those who get caught with a lower blood 

alcohol concentration and issued a short-term suspension are 

almost eight times more likely than the average driver to be 

charged with a Criminal Code driving-while-impaired offence 

within two years. So those people who are caught in the 

warning range are eight times more likely than you and me, Mr. 

Speaker, to be charged with a criminal offence in the next two 

years. So catching people in the warning range and again, 

nipping this behaviour in the bud is the opportunity to save 

lives. 

 

So those warning range, those caught in the administrative area, 

the .05 to .08, or the warning range, are in fact considered to be 

riskier drivers and at risk for more dangerous offences. So the 

thing about a three-day impoundment, and this is what we’d 

heard, Mr. Speaker, is that it sends a clear message that our 

province wants to prevent fatalities and injuries on our roads. 

The thing about a three-day impoundment in that warning 

range, you can issue a licence suspension, which is included in 

the recommendations, and that’s being changed, increasing the 

licence suspension, but the reality is a licence suspension is a 

pretty easy thing to hide from your partner, from your parents, 

perhaps the person who owns or shares the car with you, but it’s 

pretty hard to hide a vehicle impoundment. So if you go out on 

Friday night and you drink too much and are below .06 and you 

lose the car for three days, you’ll have to deal with the 

consequences of how you make work work, how you make 

family commitments work. I know in my own family, to be 

without a vehicle would be a big deal. I’m constantly running 

my children back and forth. A vehicle is a pretty important tool. 

It also is the shame and the embarrassment of being caught in 

the warning range. It’s a pretty strong signal to send. The goal 

is to change behaviour and to keep people from driving while 

impaired. This should be a culture-changing opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And nobody is saying that you can’t have a drink with supper. 

In fact I know in the minister’s comments . . . I just need to find 

. . . In a scrum, Mr. Speaker, she had made the comment that 

that’s two glasses of wine at supper; that doesn’t make people 

high risk. Well in fact that is not . . . A blood alcohol 

concentration chart that was provided by Mothers Against 

Drunk Driving, you can have up to two drinks in a three-hour 

period as a 140-pound female and not be over the . . . Well two 

drinks will put you at .02 in three hours, Mr. Speaker. For a 

man, three drinks, a 200-pound man will put you at .02 as well. 

And then women, it starts to go up slightly more exponentially. 

Three drinks in a three-hour period puts you at .06. But a man 

could have, a 200-pound man could have four drinks in a 

three-hour period and still be below the administrative range, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this isn’t about saying you can’t have a glass of wine with 

dinner, but this is about recognizing that at .05 you start to be 

impaired. That’s why we put sanctions in place, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think it’s interesting that this . . . The recommendations 

that were made were very harsh at .08 and rightfully so, Mr. 

Speaker, rightfully so. But I need to point out that there is a 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4765 

one-drink difference for a 200-pound man between the 

administrative and the criminal range, so at five drinks for a 

200-pound man puts you at .06 and six drinks puts you at .08. 

So there’s a very little difference, and we’re willing to be 

incredibly tough on those people who take that one extra drink 

but are not willing to be quite so tough on those who are still 

considered in the warning range, Mr. Speaker. The goal should 

be about stopping behaviour before it gets there. 

 

[15:15] 

 

I think one of the other things that the minister pointed out that 

some of these changes are all about saving young lives and 

changing behaviour. But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, and Doug 

Beirness presented this to us, drinking driver fatalities 

according to age, the 20 to 24 and 25 to 34 is the highest 

percentage, Mr. Speaker. Actually the 16- to 19-year-olds . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Perhaps the bullpen at the back would like to 

take it out someplace else to carry on their conversations. I 

recognize the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the reality is, 

one of the most problematic age groups is the 20- to 34-year 

age range when it comes to drinking driver fatalities. And so 

we’ve put this . . . This government has put the emphasis on 

those under 19 — which is important; there needs to be some 

effort there — but is ignoring where some of the real problem 

is. And putting in place an administrative sanction where you 

lose your car for three days could address some of that piece, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s incredibly disappointing that both the members on the 

Traffic Safety Committee ignored key evidence, and the 

minister had an opportunity to take a look at the minority 

opinion and act on that and chose not to do that. And I honestly 

. . . I do not understand why. It makes absolutely no sense to 

me, Mr. Speaker, when the evidence is before you that can save 

lives and has had dramatic effect. You’ve got people who have 

worked in traffic safety for 30 years saying that these laws in 

Alberta and BC have changed the landscape dramatically. 

Saskatchewan doesn’t have time for incrementalism. People 

and families don’t have time to continue to lose loved ones 

because of impaired driving. 

 

I have in fact a letter from the Saskatchewan Association of 

Chiefs of Police around Bill 125. And when we were looking 

for feedback on some of the legislation, as we always do in 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Association of 

Chiefs of Police responded to us. And with respect to Bill 125, 

An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Act, so this is: 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police is 

supportive to the amendments proposed. We do have 

comment on the following sections: over .04, sections 146 

to 146.4. We suggest vehicle impoundment on the first 

offence over .04. The legislation does have provisions for 

impoundment for the second offence for seven days. We 

believe impoundment on the first offence is similar to the 

Alberta and British Columbia models which have proved 

successful. 

 

So the Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police support 

the minority opinion that came with the traffic safety report and 

agree that this is an opportunity to save lives and prove to do 

some really good things for the people of Saskatchewan. Again, 

MADD Canada was happy with some parts of the legislation, 

but we have a letter — again as we reach out to stakeholders to 

find out what their perspectives on legislation — and MADD 

Canada wrote us a letter saying that: 

 

With respect to Bill 125, we are very pleased with the 

majority of the proposed changes. We believe these 

improvements, once implemented, will lower the number 

of impairment-related crashes, deaths, and injuries in the 

province. 

 

We were, however, disappointed to see that a matching 

vehicle impoundment for 72 hours was not included in 

section 146 to 146(4). We believe that vehicle 

impoundment, particularly with the first warn range 

licence suspension, has contributed to more than a 40 per 

cent reduction in alcohol-related road crash deaths in both 

Alberta and British Columbia. 

 

And that is a letter dated February 11th, 2014, from Andrew 

Murie, the chief executive officer of MADD Canada. 

 

So those are I think two of my bigger concerns with this 

legislation. Mr. Speaker, the fact that booster seats . . . It’s great 

to have some booster seat legislation before us, but as we’ve 

heard from people who know the issue well, it’s missing the 

mark and will not do what it could do, Mr. Speaker. And when 

it comes to impaired driving, this government has completely 

missed the boat on changing behaviours in that warning range, 

making sure that people who again are at high risk, those again 

caught in the warning range are eight times more likely than 

you and I to get a Criminal Code offence within two years. 

 

Do we not want to stop that behaviour, Mr. Speaker? I believe 

that we do. I know, as a mother of a daughter who will 

hopefully have her licence in two weeks, Mr. Speaker, I think 

about her being out on the road, and the last person I’d want to 

see come in her direction is someone who’s been drinking and 

driving. 

 

So I look forward to, once this bill is in committee, having the 

opportunity to discuss with the minister the booster seats piece 

and some of the impaired driving pieces as well, but we’ll have 

that chance in committee. And with that I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 125, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 

(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 128 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 128 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 



4766 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise in my place and join debate on Bill No. 128, An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Employment Act and to repeal The 

Public Service Essential Services Act. 

 

This is an interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, because 

it speaks to the immediate sort of history of this province. It 

speaks to relationships that I think have been damaged by this 

government. And it speaks to matters that are as we speak, Mr. 

Speaker, before the Supreme Court. And I guess the interesting 

thing about this legislation, on the minister’s second reading 

speech he talked about the need to balance off collective 

bargaining rights and labour rights, which of course are 

guaranteed under the Charter, with public safety concerns. 

 

And you know, on the face of that it’s, you know, that in and of 

itself is a fairly agreeable statement of the terms. But when you 

place that in the context of actions taken by this government 

and the way that the relationship has been allowed to deteriorate 

with working people in this province and the way that this 

government came out of the gates in 2007 with the battle cry of 

a fair and balanced labour legislation, Mr. Speaker . . . Of 

course, you know, for the news fans out there, that’s the slogan 

for Fox News, and it was not surprising that, you know, Fox 

News’s idea of fair and balanced seemed to find its way into 

this government’s approach to labour legislation. They took a 

level playing field and rolled back and forth across it with a bit 

of a bulldozer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course, we see that that set in play a series of events that 

found their way to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. We find 

that that has continued on to the Supreme Court of Canada.  

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what a waste of time and 

effort that represents in terms of on behalf of the resources that 

working men and women pool together to advance their cause, 

to protect their rights under the Charter, Mr. Speaker, the way 

that the legislation has, you know . . . What has preceded Bill 

No. 128 that we’re considering here today, the various 

misadventures that this government has gotten up to in terms of 

taking a run at the rights of working men and women in this 

province, it’s again the legislation in and of itself, you know, a 

mix of some good, some bad. But you place it in that broader 

context, Mr. Speaker, and it doesn’t near begin to repair the 

damage that this government has wrought upon the . . . in terms 

of the relationship that a government should have with its 

public service and with working men and women in this 

province. 

 

So in terms of the failure to consult on the part of this 

government with those whose rights are most directly affected 

by labour legislation, working men and women, this 

government has shown itself, historically over the past several 

years, Mr. Speaker, not capable of doing a great job. Now I’ll 

give the current Minister of Labour this, Mr. Speaker. He gets 

common courtesy. He gets the notion that you should pick up 

the phone if you’re going to be taking steps that have a dramatic 

impact on the livelihood and well-being of working men and 

women. You know, there’s some other files outstanding, Mr. 

Speaker, that we await action on. But certainly we’ve got other 

things to say about that, Mr. Speaker. 

But the bottom line being, as much of a charm offensive as is 

mounted by this government to try and repair the damage done, 

well again, it’s something that finds its way into loss of 

productivity in terms of, you know, further instability in what 

has been a situation where there’s been relative labour stability, 

labour peace which in terms has . . . It’s been good for 

productivity in the economy, but it’s also been good for 

productivity and prosperity for the families of those working 

men and women, and that that has been jeopardized. And again 

we see, you know, a partial attempt to repair that damage here 

in Bill No. 128 is unfortunate to say the least, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of striking that balance between, you know, collective 

bargaining rights and the concerns for public safety, there have 

been different approaches taken to that question historically, 

Mr. Speaker, and different questions in different jurisdictions. 

Certainly there were, if the government wanted to move in that 

regard, there were other models to seize upon. But it’s telling, I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that Justice Dennis Ball struck down The 

Public Service Essential Services Act and the way that again 

this government’s, this unwillingness to listen, its stubborn 

character, Mr. Speaker, its refusal to look to other jurisdictions 

to see what might be working better. And of course the way that 

this winds up is in the courts, Mr. Speaker, that really serves no 

one’s interest. 

 

There is a great deal of taxpayer money that’s I’d say wasted in 

that regard in terms of a hugely unproductive endeavour 

flowing from the fact that this government didn’t do its due 

diligence in the first place, didn’t consult properly in the first 

place, and then, you know, makes it up on the taxpayer’s dime. 

And then for working men and women, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of the way that they have worked together to advance their 

interest to protect their rights, it’s not productive for them in 

any event either. 

 

And then in terms of the broader economy, in terms of society, 

again it’s, you know, when you take what had been marked by 

relative stability, relative of labour peace, that is not served well 

either, Mr. Speaker, by the record of this government. 

 

I know that our Labour critic has done a tremendous job of 

consulting, to reaching out, and will have more to say in the 

debate as this proceeds, Mr. Speaker. And I know that other of 

my colleagues as well are very interested in this piece of 

legislation, but we’ll await those observations for the days and 

weeks ahead, Mr. Speaker. And with that, I would move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 128, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act and to repeal The Public 

Service Essential Services Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 128, The Saskatchewan Employment 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 129 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4767 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 129 — The 

Executive Government Administration Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

pleased to rise today to enter into the debate on Bill 129, The 

Executive Government Administration Act. This was introduced 

I believe earlier, on March 3rd, 2014, so fairly recently it came 

to our attention. And it’s a very complex and complicated piece 

of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and certainly we will need some 

time to really absorb all the impacts that are to be felt by a bill 

of this sort. What we see is the minister is attempting to, along 

with the next bill I’m going to speak to which is Bill 129, is 

attempting to consolidate the provisions of a number of Acts 

which relate to the organization of this government. 

 

[15:30] 

 

These are probably not something that the ordinary citizen of 

Saskatchewan spends a lot of time worrying about or thinking 

about, but it does affect the way our government is organized 

and run. A large part of the Act is some very mundane type of 

amendments changing the name of the word department to 

ministry, which was the choice of this government is to change 

the name. That’s a semantical change and I would say maybe 

two-thirds of this Act deals with removing the word department 

and substituting the word ministry. There’s a whole multitude 

of clauses that deal with that. 

 

So those are sort of housekeeping type changes that don’t 

require a lot of comment, Mr. Speaker, but there are some 

interesting changes in terms of the organization of government 

that we have to wonder where this is coming from. And I’ll 

speak a little bit about those today, Mr. Speaker, although I 

think that, you know, we’ll need some time to really fully 

understand the impact of these changes and exactly what it is 

the government’s trying to accomplish by changing the 

organization of the government and the Legislative Assembly 

and also the executive. And you know, each one of those . . . 

The executive has a very particular role, and they have 

significant, in fact I would say almost all of the power of 

government is located within the executive. 

 

So we have to look at these changes very carefully just to make 

sure that the public is being well served and that the interests of 

democracy are being served. And that should be paramount and 

first and foremost in the minds of any government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the role and the importance of the democratic 

process when you give power to any elected officials. And so 

these are things that require close scrutiny, and I think we’re 

going to want to be able to avail ourselves of some expert 

advice on these types of changes to see what the real 

implications will be. 

 

Some of the things the minister is trying to do is to do some, 

perhaps, clarification and consolidation of some of the powers 

of ministers. Grant-making authority, for example, and 

agreement-making powers are being changed and consolidated. 

I think redundancy in some Acts, they’re attempting to get rid 

of redundancy by locating a lot of this into The Executive 

Government Administration Act, this new bill. And they’re also 

doing things like changing the names of certain bills which start 

with the word department because we don’t use department 

anymore. So those are again some more semantical changes. 

 

I think for me, and this is something I find myself commenting 

on quite frequently in these debates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 

regulation powers that this government has and how there 

seems to be a trend to use that more rather than have scrutiny in 

the legislature and by the public of the actions of this 

government. And I think this bill represents one of the most 

egregious examples of that removal of scrutiny that I have seen 

since I took up this position, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And in particular, I want to refer to section 9 of the new bill, 

which refers to executive government. And I’d like to share that 

section with you. So section 9, the marginal note says it’s the 

organization of executive government. So we’re talking here 

about the organization of the most powerful body in the 

province of Saskatchewan, which is the executive government. 

And 9(1) reads: 

 

Notwithstanding any Act or other law, but subject to the 

other provisions of this Act, the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council may, by regulation, [so here we have the 

regulation power of the Lieutenant Governor in Council] 

on the recommendation of the President of the Executive 

Council, determine the organization of the executive 

government and of its various ministries, and for that 

purpose may: 

 

(a) establish, continue or vary any ministry and 

determine the objects and purposes of the ministry; 

 

(b) disestablish any ministry; 

 

(c) determine or change the name of any ministry. 

 

Now on the face of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that makes probably 

a lot of sense, and it reflects the way things have been. 

 

I think the change here that’s very notable, and that the public 

needs to take account of, is subsection (2) because tucked in 

this clause is a subsection that reads as follows: 

 

Sections 15 to 17 of The Regulations Act, 1995 do not 

apply to regulations made pursuant to subsection (1). 

 

So okay, what does that mean? We see in here that something 

else doesn’t apply here when we see the executive government 

establishing ministries. So what are those sections that are being 

referred to? Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at The Regulations 

Act, 1995, you will see that section 15 requires the registrar to 

give the Clerk a copy of every filed regulation. So all of a 

sudden there’s no longer a requirement to give a copy of these 

regulations to the Clerk. That’s concerning. 

 

Secondly, section 16 which doesn’t apply anymore says: 

 

Every filed regulation stands permanently referred to any 

committee that the Legislative Assembly may appoint for 

any purpose directed by the Legislative Assembly.  

 



4768 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

So here we have these regulations now not being referred to a 

committee. That’s really concerning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

it’s something that people should be looking at closely to see if 

the interests of democracy are being served here. 

 

And I think the most concerning is the fact that section 17 of 

The Regulations Act is now not in play. And in that one, we 

have the power of the Legislative Assembly to “disapprove of a 

regulation or any part of a regulation,” and also that the 

Legislative Assembly can “require a regulation or any part of a 

regulation to be repealed or amended.” 

 

This is a very important, essential feature of democracy, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s what comes into this Assembly and what 

is actually reviewed publicly by this Assembly. And if we have 

an executive government that is not revealing the regulations 

and actually amending the Act so that they don’t have to reveal 

these regulations and that they don’t come up for discussion in 

the Legislative Assembly, I think we are seeing an erosion of 

democratic principles here that are quite concerning and should 

be reviewed very carefully by, I would say, legal experts and 

constitutional experts and experts of democracy who can point 

out to us whether or not this can erode the actual democratic 

process. 

 

This government has a very large majority. That’s very obvious 

for anybody walking into the Chamber. We see a government 

that has a lot of people sitting in the backbenches who want to 

have a piece of the action. And we see this type of bill is giving 

way to allowing more people to have roles I guess in executive 

government that aren’t traditionally viewed as appropriate. And 

I think those are concerning as well. 

 

We have changes made to the legislative secretaries’ 

appointments. Now they don’t have to be renewed. Somehow 

there was a paperwork problem for this government. They had a 

lot of difficulty with the paperwork involved in getting a 

Legislative Secretary reappointed. I’m not sure what kind of 

paperwork we’re talking about here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

again, this is something that seems to water down the role of 

executive government. It’s watering down the role of cabinet 

and the role of the ministers to their ministries, and it’s 

something that I think we should take a very careful look at. 

 

Another part that’s interesting in this bill is some changes to 

The Federal-Provincial Agreements Act. And this is an Act that 

I dealt with frequently as a federal lawyer back in the day. And 

it was a bit of a frustration and I think sometimes questionable 

because every time the provincial government was required to 

sign an agreement with the federal government, it would have 

to go under this Act and it required an order in council. 

 

I know this is a real frustration for people from an 

administrative point of view or the bureaucrats have a lot of 

difficulty with this because it’s complicated. And often the 

types of agreements that are entered into may not require an 

actual scrutiny by Executive Council or the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. However, you know, and again in the 

balance of transparency and accountability, those are the types 

of things that can be reviewed then by the public when the 

regulations require the Lieutenant Governor in Council to pass 

an order approving any agreement entered into federally and 

provincially, so now won’t require approval unless it’s more 

than $50,000. That probably is a fair mark for this type of 

agreement. And again it’s bringing it in line with other types of 

agreements that ministers have authority to sign under their own 

Acts or under The Executive Government Administration Act. 

 

So I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, we haven’t had a 

chance to really look at this in any great detail, it having only 

been introduced less than a week ago. And certainly we’re 

going to want to be able to examine it with some detail and 

consult with constitutional experts and experts in terms of 

government organization to see if this is appropriate or if it’s 

merely an approach on the part of this government which is 

very heavy on the backbenches to provide some busy work for 

some of the backbenchers to keep them satisfied, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So again I think other of my colleagues are going to want to 

have a chance to comment on this, and we certainly want to be 

able to reach out and discuss this with some experts in the area. 

So at this point I would like to move to adjourn the debate on 

Bill No. 129, The Executive Government Administration Act. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member has 

moved adjournment on debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 130 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 130 — The 

Executive Government Administration Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government 

Administration Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

This is a bill following up on the bill I just spoke to, which is 

Bill 129, The Executive Government Administration Act. And 

this one is some consequential amendments that also arise out 

of the previous Act. Obviously these are bills that are bilingual, 

and therefore the government has to treat them separately when 

doing the amendments. 

 

In Bill 129 there were a number of amendments that were 

required to . . . many, many Acts. And I didn’t really get into 

that in the previous discussion, but if you look at the table you 

will see all the amendments that are required. But we had to 

separate out ones that are in English and French, so the bills that 

are being amended here for whatever reason are in English and 

French. That includes The Adoption Act, The Co-operatives Act, 

The Evidence Act, The Interpretation Act, the Legislative 

Assembly Act, 2007, The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991, and 

then it goes on to a few more different types of Acts, Queen’s 

Bench Act, Vital Statistics Act, Department of Health Act, and 

so on and so forth. 

 

So these are basically further administrative changes that arise 

out of the various amalgamations and consolidations that we see 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4769 

in the previous bill. As the minister indicated in his comments 

last week, this is the bilingual companion to the previous bill. 

And he indicates in his comments that the most significant 

changes are the amendments to The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, 2007. 

 

It’s an interesting note, that I’m not sure the full impact of this. 

But we note that members of the Legislative Assembly will 

now be allowed or permitted to be marriage counsellors. So 

that’s maybe something new that we hadn’t been able to do 

before. And also I think again, to give some of the 

backbenchers a little more things to do, it allows them to 

become members of Crown corporations without being a 

member of Executive Council. So it provides the backbenchers 

with a few more duties that will keep them busy and occupied 

in their efforts as backbenchers. So that’s a good thing. I think I 

would like everyone to be busy, and it’s probably a good thing 

for backbenchers to have some things to do. 

 

It goes on to say how it removes part of The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act and incorporates it into 

The Executive Government Administration Act which was out 

of the main bill, Bill 129, and it deals with some name changes. 

 

So basically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are some consequential 

changes that come out of the previous bill that I just spoke to. 

Again, it’s fairly recent that this bill was introduced, only on 

March 3rd, so we haven’t had a lot of time to consider it fully 

— a couple of weeks. But we will be taking a closer look at it. I 

know that other members of my caucus are going to want to 

wade in on the debate. So at this point I would like to move that 

we adjourn the debate on Bill No. 130. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member has made 

motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 122 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 122 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 

réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Another bill that’s come up for debate today, Bill 122, and I’m 

happy to be part of the debate and privileged to be able to enter 

into debate on this bill. Bill 122 is The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Amendment Act, 2013. And it’s a fairly, again, 

another complex Act, and we’re certainly going to have a series 

of questions for the minister in relation to some of the details in 

this Act. Today I will intend to take a more cursory view and 

review of what the minister’s been saying, but certainly we’ll be 

looking at this in much more detail in committee. 

[15:45] 

 

The minister’s indicated there’s four primary themes. And in 

the changes in this Act, it’s a bilingual Act, and we see fairly 

long. So it’s a 64-page Act. So you know, there’s a lot of details 

in this and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I won’t propose to go through 

all of those today here in the Assembly, but would certainly 

want to be able to take a look at it when we’re in committee. 

 

The minister’s indicated some of the themes that are found in 

this Act. First is an authority for First Nations gaming licensing 

authority to register on-reserve charitable gaming employees 

and suppliers. So I think this is something that is a follow-up 

and a commitment through the various gaming framework 

agreements that have been entered into with First Nations and 

the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. So for 

example, we see the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] has created Indigenous Gaming Regulators, or IGRs, 

since 2007, and they’ve been responsible for regulating gaming 

on-reserve. 

 

I think the view of the government here is that the regulation of 

the games on-reserve are important in that Indian gaming 

regulators have been doing a good job along with SLGA, Sask 

Liquor and Gaming Authority, to have a co-operative 

relationship that would be beneficial to both parties. So I think 

the discussions with IGR and SLGA are ongoing and the 

agreement and the provision of authority to the IGR requires 

some amendments which are found in this Act. And as the 

minister indicated, the authority would be to provide a First 

Nations gaming licensing authority as an IGR to register 

on-reserve charitable gaming employees and suppliers. 

 

So I think this is something that recognizes the good work that’s 

been done by FSIN and the Indian Gaming Authority in 

becoming experts really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the field of 

gaming and providing good oversight and good direction and 

good employment opportunities as well for First Nations people 

in the gaming industry. 

 

Another thing that this is establishing is the ability for SLGA, 

the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, to create 

subsidiaries. And it’s not exactly clear why the SLGA is 

looking for this. The minister indicated that these subsidiary 

corporations are common accounting and management tools 

used to manage assets and corporations. She indicated that this 

would allow SLGA to fully explore options and ensure savings 

and benefits are present. There’s no clear indication on the part 

of the minister how that is desirable and what it is in the 

operations of SLGA that require this type of division of 

bookkeeping and accounting. And so certainly, Mr. Speaker, we 

are going to want to ask those types of questions of the minister 

and her officials when we get a chance in committee to do so. 

 

She also talks about removal of outdated legislation. Now this is 

something I found interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 

apparently SLGA has the discretionary ability at this point to 

require a permittee to stock beer manufactured in 

Saskatchewan. And so what the minister is saying is that 

because it’s not being enforced in recent memory there’s no 

need to regulate. But that is kind of an out-of-sight, out-of-mind 

approach, and I worry about that when we see regulations being 

eliminated because they’re not being enforced. I think that begs 



4770 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2014 

the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why aren’t they being 

enforced? And certainly that’s something I think that is the role 

of government, is to ensure oversight and management of 

different areas, including of SLGA, Sask Liquor and Gaming 

Authority. So if they have the regulations and they haven’t been 

enforcing them, they’re getting rid of them? I’m not sure that 

that makes a lot of logical sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

certainly we’ll want to quiz the minister a little bit more on that 

area if we have the chance in committee. 

 

There’s again a . . . seems to be a focus here on getting rid of 

red tape for business and the role of government in the effective 

regulation of alcohol. So she’s indicating that in this bill there’s 

an amendment that puts “increased responsibility on permittees 

to not only refuse to serve alcohol to persons who appear to be 

intoxicated but to ensure that those persons are not in 

possession of beverage alcohol.” 

 

Again, that’s an interesting provision, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we’re going to have more questions on in terms of how it would 

be enforced, because to require a person that’s permitted to 

serve alcohol . . . And I think about maybe a baseball 

tournament in a small town. The local host organizing 

committee gets a liquor permit to serve beer in the rink. They 

set up a cabaret-style beer gardens. And so these are volunteers 

that are putting on an event for the community.  

 

And we all know that we shouldn’t provide alcohol to someone 

who appears to be intoxicated. There’s sort of an objective test 

that can be applied there when you look at someone and decide 

whether they’re intoxicated. Again it has fuzzy lines around it, 

but I think it’s a little easier to refuse to serve alcohol to 

someone who appears to be intoxicated, but for me as a 

volunteer to ensure that they’re not in possession of beverage 

alcohol, that gets a little trickier, you know? 

 

And I think of maybe a hockey dad who is responsible for the 

permit, and there may be some young women who are drinking 

and he’s not sure. Is he going to insist on finding out whether 

they have alcohol on their person? It could be a really touchy 

little situation for some of these folks, and I think this puts a 

pretty heavy onus on the permittee to regulate what people are 

choosing to do with alcohol. 

 

So again we’re going to have a lot of questions for the minister 

on how that exactly will roll out and what are going to be the 

responsibilities. And I think really of permittees who are doing 

this as a community organization or for community events. 

Obviously it also applies to regular permittees who operate 

beverage rooms or hotels, bars, and things like that, restaurants.  

 

And you know, those people are more I guess used to serving 

alcohol and realize the implications of what happens when you 

have a liquor licence. But even then to ask a permittee to ensure 

that somebody isn’t in possession of alcohol almost, you know, 

makes me think there may be some sort of searches involved. 

And I think then we get into a whole issue of privacy and 

concerns from that perspective. So this may not actually stand 

up if there are challenges to it. So we’ll want to ask a lot of 

questions around that too, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And finally the minister indicates that there are quite a number, 

a large number of smaller housekeeping amendments that are 

just looking at consistency and ensuring redundancy doesn’t 

exist. So those are the types of things that we know that the 

good folks over at Justice take time to look at, when they have 

an opportunity to review a bill, then those little details that 

sometimes need to be reviewed from time to time and fixed up 

are being looked after. So I won’t go into a lot of detail or 

comment on that at this point in time. 

 

She also indicated that some of these changes would be putting 

definitions for terms used in the gaming sector to better allow 

SLGA to respond to changes in the industry. So just updating 

the language. Better organization of clarification of sections 

related to the Liquor and Gaming Licensing Commission. So 

some reorganization of sections in the Act, things like that. 

 

So I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to want to be able 

to ask a lot more specific questions about that to the minister 

when we have an opportunity in committee. So that would be 

the extent of my comments at this time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 

Assembly is a motion by the minister that Bill No. 122, The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 2013 be now read the 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 

shall this bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

designate that Bill No. 122, The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — This bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 123 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 123 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Athabasca.  

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to join in on 

debate of Bill No. 123, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2013 (No. 2). And I guess just some opening comments and 

looking at some of the stuff that’s being repealed in this Act. 



March 18, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4771 

And we look at the dental program that did do some great work 

in the schools and young people in our province. Our children 

had dental programs that were there. And what they’re doing by 

repealing this . . . And I want to talk about that because I think a 

lot of, even myself, was fortunate going through the programs. 

You had that in your schools when you had problem with your 

dental. And we know that, you know, a kid suffering with 

dental, we see that going on even today: some families, you 

know, cannot provide the dental, don’t have dental programs for 

their employment. The place where they’re employed doesn’t 

have a program. 

 

This had provided an opportunity for those students to have a 

dental program in the school or they were taken from the school 

to a dental therapist and, you know, their teeth were taken care 

of back then. It was a good program. A lot of people benefited 

from it. I guess if you’re a child and you’re having toothaches it 

would have been hard. So this was a good program ran at that 

time. I wish, you know, we continue a program like this. I guess 

with record revenue the government could have done something 

like this, but unfortunately that’s not their priority. 

 

But having said that, there are dental programs out there that 

through your own, I guess, insurance, private insurance through 

your employer where you can get coverage to have basic dental 

and stuff. Some of these programs are still running, and there’s 

opportunities for students to get dental programs. So having 

said that, we wish, with the record revenue, the government 

would have continued or would have thought to introduce 

something like that. Who knows with all the revenue that come 

in. But having said that, they’re repealing that. They no longer 

need it on the books so they’re taking a . . . 

 

There’s also talking about some of the I guess religious groups 

that used to operate our hospitals and provide health services to 

many Saskatchewan families. I think about St. Paul’s. I think it 

was one run by nuns, you know. There was an organization, 

you know, Holy Family Hospital in Prince Albert. It’s closed 

now, but it was run by the nuns. And you know, I remember 

going there when I was a young kid and the service you 

provided and the service that they had provided to many 

residents. 

 

And those are some of the areas where we had those religious, 

you know, congregations looked after the health services. And 

it had to be in an Act, and this Act that they’re repealing gave 

the powers to those groups, to organizations to operate our 

health services at the time. But now we have the health regions, 

and they operate that way. So they’re repealing this Act saying 

that no longer they’ll service . . . 

 

There’s a few other things that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re 

repealing in this provision to repeal. Some of the heritage stuff 

they’re talking about, they’re repealing that, and seniors . . . So 

these are Acts I guess at the end of the day the government feels 

that they don’t need to be on the records. Maybe they’re not 

using them. They’re not needed anymore to be on the books, so 

they repeal them. They remove them from legislation so they’re 

not there carrying on. We’ve heard people talk about that. 

 

They may say from a government side that they’re repealing 

these because they don’t use them. They’re not needed 

anymore. But I guess at the end of the day, you know, we don’t 

always agree on those things. There might be some of the Acts 

that they could continue to move forward on this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and could implement and keep those Acts, and I guess 

use that Act to continue the dental program if they wanted to. 

So there’s provision for government, but this time the 

government has decided to repeal it. 

 

And at this time . . . In committee there might be some more 

questions that we have to ask, but at this point it’s repealing 

some of the legislation in the Acts that the government thinks it 

doesn’t need anymore or it’s not warranted, and there is no use 

and there’s no way that they go back. So that’s kind of what 

repealing this Act is. So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

have no further comments, so I’ll adjourn debate on this bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member has 

adjourned debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. I recognize 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — It has been moved that 

this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. This Assembly 

now stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4747 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 4747, 4748 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4747 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4747 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4748 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4748 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4748 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4748 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4749 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4749 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4749 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Gymnasium at Sacred Heart Community School 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4749 

 Sochi 2014 Paralympic Winter Games 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4750 

 Social Work Week 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4750 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4750 

 Remembering an Agricultural Pioneer 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4750 

 Pharmacist Awareness Month 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4751 

 Tax Savings for Low-Income Families 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4751 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Consultant Fees and Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4751 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4751 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4753 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4755 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Funding for Research Projects 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4756 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4756 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4757 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4757 

 Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4758 

 Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4758 

 Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4758 

 Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4759 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4759 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4759 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4759 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4759 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4759 

 Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4760 

 Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4766 

 Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4767 

 Bill No. 130 — The Executive Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government Administration Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4768 

 Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4769 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4770 

 Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4770 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


