




















































Hansard: November 03, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 7B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5681 

 November 3, 2014 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. I 

recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 

Lawrence, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was ragging 

the puck a little bit earlier there. Sorry about that, but it’s an 

honour to rise today and respond to this, my first Throne 

Speech as Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Before I begin, as always I like to thank Lisa, my friends and 

family for their support in embracing the excitement over my 

new role. I want to thank my constituency assistants, Kristy 

Shaw, Bonnie Donison, for all their hard work that they do in 

the busy office, probably one of the busiest offices in the 

province. And I want to thank the Premier for the opportunity to 

serve the people of Saskatchewan in this role. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues joke that my portfolio should really 

be called the ministry of fun. And you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? They are right. My ministry is responsible for some of 

the greatest experiences Saskatchewan has to offer. Our 

breathtaking parks, amateur sport, the performing arts, and 

Saskatchewan’s vibrant cultural communities make my job one 

of the best around. 

 

This summer I was lucky enough to be able to visit eight of our 

province’s beautiful provincial and regional parks. From Echo 

Valley to Lac La Ronge, from Nickle Lake to Rowan’s Ravine, 

our parks are truly incredible. The natural scenery, the wildlife, 

the lakes, all combine to offer some of the best recreational 

experiences in Canada right at our doorstep. 

 

But you know what really sets Saskatchewan’s parks apart from 

the rest? It’s our campers, Mr. Speaker. At each and every stop 

I made, whether in a large provincial park or in a smaller 

regional park, the one thing that was always constant was the 

passion of our campers, who are always there with their friends 

and family. 

 

The people who use our parks are truly our greatest asset. They 

utilize our parks, and they’re absolutely unprecedented in terms 

of nationally. Our parks are utilized by people of our province 

more than any other jurisdiction in the country. We should be 

proud of that. They are the ones whose feedback help park staff 

make sure that our parks are enjoyable for campers of all ages. 

This summer I met young families excited to be starting a new 

vacation tradition that they will share with their children for 

decades to come. 

I also met a group of retired women who have been camping 

together for decades, 20 years at least. Each year they spend 

part of their summer at the same park renewing their lifelong 

friendship and having just as much fun now as they did when 

they started out. They were happy to share their camping stories 

with me. 

 

We are blessed, Mr. Speaker, to have campers in Saskatchewan 

who are lifelong parks enthusiasts. They make our parks better 

places to be, and they show the next generation of campers just 

how lucky we are to have so many beautiful parks, to spend our 

summers making memories that will last a lifetime. 

Saskatchewan campers are doing their part, Mr. Speaker, and so 

is our government. 

 

Our job is to make sure the Saskatchewan park system is here 

for campers to enjoy not just today but for generations to come. 

That’s why since 2007 we’ve committed $71 million to our 

parks system. Great Blue Heron Provincial Park, the first new 

park in over 20 years, Mr. Speaker. We’ve added 1,400 new 

electrified camping sites to our existing parks. We’ve upgraded 

the waste water treatment systems. We’ve improved both 

potable and non-potable water systems. We’ve built new 

service centres. We’ve partnered with the private sector to 

update marinas, docks, and docking systems. These are all 

pieces of the park infrastructure that allow campers to make the 

most out of all the parks have to offer. 

 

I’m proud of these investments, Mr. Speaker, but I’m even 

more proud of the progress they represent. And what do I mean 

by that? Well let’s step back in time. Let’s go back a decade, all 

the way back to 2004. That was a pretty dark year for our park 

system, Mr. Speaker. You might remember it as the year the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] tried to cancel summer. They 

tried to delay the opening of many of the parks that year. Why, 

Mr. Speaker? Did they hate summer? Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

guess only the member for Saskatoon Centre can truly say for 

sure, but whatever the reason, it was a disastrous policy that 

outraged campers across the province. 

 

And while the NDP finally backtracked after public outcry and 

pressure in this Assembly, they decided to go ahead with an 

equally absurd plan to make campers pay for firewood. I’m sure 

you remember that one, Mr. Speaker, the infamous wiener roast 

tax. Well, those two strokes of genius sure made campers worry 

about the state of our parks. In fact, visitor satisfaction with 

Saskatchewan provincial parks was only 69 per cent that year. 

Shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can’t undo the mistakes the NDP made, but as soon as we 

took office we sure set about revitalizing our provincial park 

system. You know what the NDP invested in the last seven 

years they were in government? A paltry $20 million. I’m proud 

to report that our government has invested and committed $71 

million in capital funding for parks in our seven years in office, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s 244 per cent more. And what’s the result? 

A renewed infrastructure, a better camping experience, happier 

campers. In 2013 visitor satisfaction in our parks is back up 

where it belongs: 91 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s a record I’m 

proud to be a part of. 

 

I look forward to working with campers and park staff to make 



5682 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

sure we continue to make our parks the best places they can be. 

That’s my goal and that’s our government’s commitment to the 

people of Saskatchewan. And as the members opposite keep 

chirping away, they better buckle their seatbelts because there’s 

more coming. 

 

Now I would really like to compare that with the opposition’s 

plan, but I can’t, Mr. Speaker, because they just don’t seem to 

have one. There’s not a word on the NDP website about parks. 

We’ve been saying for a while now that it’s time for them to 

come up with some ideas of their own. But you know if the 

ideas they came up with back in 2004 are an example of what 

happens when the NDP pay attention to our parks, maybe we’re 

all better off without it. 

 

And speaking of the devoid record, would you believe that the 

words arts and culture do not appear once in the NDP’s 2011 

platform? Even I was a bit surprised at that, Mr. Speaker. Nor 

have I been able to find an NDP strategy on arts and culture. 

What about us, you ask. Well personally, Mr. Speaker, I’m a 

lifelong fan of our province’s fantastic arts and cultural 

community. Well that got them a little bit excited there, but too 

bad they weren’t that interested in mentioning arts and culture 

in the last election. 

 

Saskatchewan is blessed with an abundance of talent. We have 

some of the best musicians around. Just this past weekend, I 

was wowed by the Regina Symphony Orchestra Shumiatcher 

Pops “I Hear a Symphony: Motown’s Greatest Hits.” It was a 

dynamic performance, combining the awesome talent of the 

members of the symphony with guest vocalists, and it had 

symphony patrons dancing in the aisles, Mr. Speaker, 

something I don’t think I’ve ever seen before. And it’s just one 

example of what makes our arts community so unique — a 

magic combination of crazily talented artists and wildly 

enthusiastic audience. And that’s true of all of our arts, Mr. 

Speaker, from theatre in the round at the Globe to Shakespeare 

on the Saskatchewan, from breathtaking collections at galleries 

like the MacKenzie to local arts guild exhibitions. They’re 

endless showcases for Saskatchewan talent. 

 

Just last week I was thrilled to help honour the best and 

brightest talents in Saskatchewan at the Lieutenant Governor’s 

Arts Awards in Saskatoon, presented by the Saskatchewan Arts 

Board. It was quite simply a celebration of greatness. The array 

of talent, artistry, and creativity in the room was both 

breathtaking and humbling, Mr. Speaker. The artists honoured 

with awards have spent their entire lives devoted to their craft, 

and I was thrilled to be able to bring greetings and share such a 

special night with them. 

 

I’m happy to be the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board. And I’m proud to report to this Assembly that our 

government has increased funding to the Arts Board by 8 per 

cent in two years, almost $7 million per year. I’m just as happy 

to report that Creative Saskatchewan is now fully operational 

and has provided $7.7 million to Saskatchewan’s creative 

industries, including $3.4 million to the film industry, $2 

million to the music industry, $1.1 million to the visual arts 

sector, and $800,000 to the publishing industry. I want to thank 

Creative Saskatchewan team for their dedication to supporting 

the creative industries in our province through funding and 

support in finding new markets and new audiences. 

I’m proud of the work that Creative Saskatchewan is doing and 

look forward to working with them to support all 

Saskatchewan’s vital creative industries. And I’m not alone in 

being proud of the work that Creative Saskatchewan is doing in 

support of our creative industries. “In an area where 

independent musicians must also be entrepreneurs, Creative 

Sask’s support is vital.” That’s a quote from Saskatoon’s singer 

and musician, Alexis Normand. 

 

Alexis went on to say, “The Marketing Export and 

Development Grant I received allowed me to continue building 

industry and audience relationships which lead to commercial 

market growth outside Saskatchewan.” That’s just what one 

artist had to say about the value of Creative Sask, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Listen to this from ceramic artist and potter, Ken Wilkinson: 

“Creative Sask is helping me move to a wholesale business. 

I’ve gone to trade shows in Toronto and Edmonton, where I’ve 

taken orders, then filled, and shipped them. So I’m taking the 

next step in my career, and the grant money has helped a lot.” 

Ken went on to say, “It’s been wonderful, and I think Creative 

Sask will be a big help for a lot of artists.” 

 

And there’s this from SaskBooks: 

 

We’ve been producing and distributing in a catalogue of 

Saskatchewan books across western Canada for several 

years. In fact, SaskBooks has been promoting 

Saskatchewan publishers and their books for 25 years. It’s 

nice to finally have an agency that supports production, 

marketing, and promotion. 

 

Here’s one from the band Dead South: 

 

Thank you so much to Creative Saskatchewan for giving 

us the financial support to be able to compete on our very 

first German tour. Without the performing arts tour support 

grant offered by Creative Saskatchewan, we would not 

have had the finances required to have our first 

international tour to be such a success. 

 

And here’s one from Overtime Communications: 

 

I’d like to thank Creative Sask for the involvement in our 

television series entitled College TV. We greatly 

appreciated the investment which allowed us additional 

marketing dollars in our efforts in promoting the show. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those quotes showcase what Creative Sask is all 

about: finding ways to support Saskatchewan’s artists and 

bringing their talents to new audiences and new markets. These 

are exciting times for the arts and creative industries in 

Saskatchewan, and Creative Sask will continue to play a vital 

role in supporting Saskatchewan talent. 

 

I’m also proud of our government’s commitment to artsVest 

Sask. artsVest is a sponsorship, training, and matching incentive 

program designed to help small- and mid-sized art, culture, and 

heritage organizations build partnerships with local businesses. 

artsVest is in its fourth year of operation and it has already 

leveraged $2.4 million in private sector funding for our 

province’s arts, culture, and heritage community. I want to 

thank the team at artsVest for continuing to open new doors for 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5683 

the organizations that make up the backbone of Saskatchewan 

arts, culture, and heritage community. 

 

Leveraging private sector investment is also key to another 

program I’m proud to be a part of: Main Street Saskatchewan. 

Main Street is a community-driven approach to revitalizing 

historic, commercial, and downtown areas. For every dollar 

invested by the government, Main Street Saskatchewan has 

leveraged an astounding $10 in private sector investment. 

That’s a 10 to 1 investment ratio, and it’s a key component of 

the program’s success, Mr. Speaker. First piloted in the 

communities of Indian Head, Maple Creek, Prince Albert, and 

Wolseley, Main Street funding of $1.6 million combined with 

private sector investment to support the creation of 66 new jobs, 

22 new businesses that opened, $4.9 million in historic building 

and streetscape improvements, and $6.5 million in property 

acquisitions. 

 

This summer I was happy to announce that, based on these 

successes, Main Street has become an ongoing program to 

support Saskatchewan communities promote, conserve, and 

capitalize on the things that make their downtowns and 

commercial districts unique. In the words of Maple Creek’s 

Main Street program coordinator, Royce Pettyjohn, 

“Participating in the Main Street Saskatchewan program has 

helped our community better understand the connection 

between heritage conservation, first impressions, tourism, and 

economic development.” Not only that, Mr. Pettyjohn says, 

“Conservation of our community’s past is helping us build our 

community’s future.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, preserving Saskatchewan heritage is an important 

part of building a strong future for our province. So is 

encouraging Saskatchewan families and young people to 

become and to stay active and engaged in their communities. 

That’s why our government launched and expanded the active 

families benefit, a fully refundable tax benefit to help families 

with the costs of their children’s participation in cultural 

recreation and sports activities. Families are eligible for up to 

$150 per year per child under 18. 

 

That’s also why our province’s lottery system supports over 

12,000 non-profit sport, culture, and recreational organizations. 

Fifty-two million dollars last year alone; that’s an incredibly 

significant investment in communities across the province. And 

to promote funding stability, we’ve signed a new five-year 

lottery agreement between Sask Sport, SaskCulture, and the 

Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association. 

 

And it’s why we’re proud to offer the community rinks 

affordability grant for the third year in a row. This year we’re 

investing $1.7 million to support Saskatchewan’s municipal 

indoor skating and curling rinks. Mr. Speaker, we all know how 

important winter ice sports are to the life of any Saskatchewan 

community and the physical activity, health, and well-being of 

everyone from athletes to coaches to fans in the stands. I’m 

proud to say that in the first two years of the program, three 

point million dollars was invested to support more than 380 

Saskatchewan communities. The program is open to 

communities, schools, non-profits, and First Nations, and 

provides grants of $2,500 per indoor ice surface. I want to thank 

the folks at the Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association 

for partnering with us to administer the program. 

[19:15] 

 

So what does that leave me to talk about now, Mr. Speaker? I 

think I’d like to spend some time talking about leadership and, 

rather, lack thereof. Leaders should embrace new ideas, but the 

members opposite are out-and-out scared. And as I’ve said 

before, as Lothar of the Hill People from Saturday Night Live 

has said, “Son, that is a good idea. It might even be a great idea. 

But it’s a new idea. And because it’s a new idea, we must fear 

and reject it.” 

 

Well welcome to Lothar’s new channellers. The members 

opposite must be Lotharians. In past speeches, I’ve labelled 

them, the members opposite, as the Nostradamian nine, the nine 

prophets of doom, as well as Chicken Little, Henny Penny, 

Turkey Lurkey, Pinocchio, the boy that cried wolf, Gepetto, and 

Eeyore. And now we’ve got a new member, Sparky. Today 

though I’ll leave them as the last of the Lotharians. Oh maybe, 

just maybe I have it a little off. Maybe they’re channelling 

George Plimpton on Paper Lion, or Howard Cosell with his 

book, I Never Played the Game. 

 

To them I say this: criticize all you want. As for me, I’ve tried 

to spend my life living. I don’t look at things and say, well I 

can’t do that, or that will never work. Or if I try it or if I fail, or 

criticism should dissuade me, I’m not scared because I’m not 

afraid of starting over and re-evaluating. No, Mr. Speaker. I 

figure out ways to get things done, and I’m happy to say so do 

my friends, family, and all of my colleagues. Andy Warhol was 

not scared. I’m sure the members opposite have heard of him. 

“Art is what you can get away with,” he said, and he was right. 

 

In the words of Teddy Roosevelt, words those of us on this side 

of the House like to put into action: 

 

It’s not the critic who counts; not the man who points out 

how the strong man stumbles, or where the doer of deeds 

could have done them better. The credit belongs to the man 

who is actually in the arena, whose face is marred by dust 

and sweat and blood; who strives valiantly; who errs . . . 

because there is no effort without error and shortcoming; 

but who does actually strive to do the deeds; who knows 

[the great achievements and the] great enthusiasms, the 

great devotions; who spends himself in a worthy cause; 

who at the best knows in the end the triumph of high 

achievement, and who at the worst, if he fails, at last fails 

while . . . [he’s doing] greatly, so that his place shall never 

be with those cold and timid souls who neither know 

victory nor defeat. 

 

So that’s us, Mr. Speaker. We say what we mean. We mean 

what we say. We have a plan to keep Saskatchewan strong. 

 

But what about the members opposite? Who do they represent? 

What do they believe? What’s their plan? How would anybody 

ever know? Their entire plan seems to be to disagree with the 

things our government is doing to make Saskatchewan the 

strongest it can be. They’re not really for, they’re not really for 

anything it seems. If you ask them — and believe me, we have 

— the only thing they can come up with is criticism about what 

we do. And that’s just a sad state of affairs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite like to talk about the so-called glory 



5684 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

days of the left of Saskatchewan. And you know what? I really 

can’t blame them, because back in those days, they at least had 

leaders who led. Sure they led Saskatchewan into decline, but 

they did lead. You know what else they had back then, Mr. 

Speaker? They had honest-to-goodness policies. They had 

ideas. Now sure, many of those ideas were at best misguided. 

Channel Lake. Heck, Mr. Speaker, who am I kidding? Many of 

their ideas were also flat-out disastrous — closing rural 

hospitals, SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company], Murdoch Carriere — but at least they were ideas. 

 

So what do these nine offer for ideas? What does the NDP 

under the so-called leadership of the member opposite offer? 

Nothing but doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker, and fear. Fear of 

growth. Fear of new approaches of getting things done. Fear of 

things like partnerships with private sector to build new schools 

and transportation infrastructure like the Regina bypass. 

 

And here’s where it gets really shameful, Mr. Speaker. They 

don’t have policies or ideas of their own. And they just don’t 

want the people of this great province to realize just how 

abysmally they are lacking. So they try to sow the seeds of fear 

with the public. Luckily, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan are far, far smarter than the opposition gives 

them credit for. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan know that fear is not a policy. 

They know that it’s not an idea. They know it for what it really 

is — a sad, last-ditch attempt to disguise the fact that left to 

their own devices, the members across the aisle have absolutely 

zero to offer the people of Saskatchewan. Zero ideas. Zero 

platform. Zero policies. Zero plans. The P3 [public-private 

partnership] manifesto, Mr. Speaker, that’s just pitiful and that’s 

the exact opposite of what we’re offering the people of this 

province. 

 

We have ideas. We have policies. We have a plan. We have a 

platform. We have all of those. That plan is laid out in the 

Throne Speech, a Throne Speech I am thrilled to support. 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to support our 

government’s Throne Speech, and I won’t be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 

to rise this evening to speak to the Throne Speech and some of 

the things that our government is doing. But first I, like most of 

my colleagues, would like to thank a few people who make our 

jobs possible. To my constituency assistant, Whitney Friesen, 

who I’ve talked about many times before in this House, I want 

to say thank you. I’m not back home very much, and he takes 

care of things while I’m gone. And I really appreciate all the 

work that he’s done over his 21 years of service to the people of 

this province. 

 

To the staff of my minister’s office, to Cole, Adam, Annie, and 

David, I’ve been so very blessed. Regardless of the portfolio I 

had, I’ve had amazing staff in my minister’s offices. And this 

one is no exception, and I want to thank them for all the work 

that they do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and to my family. My family, through a series of 

circumstances, has become a little bit larger lately. And so I 

wanted to thank Jasmine, Sharmaine, Dylan, Ben, Adrienne, 

Lyle, and Anaisa for all that they’ve done to help me out, for all 

of their support, and more importantly than that, Mr. Speaker, 

for all of their understanding for me being gone so much and 

that they’ve spent the last several months taking care of each 

other as well as taking care of me. So I want to thank them. 

 

And I do want to thank my deputy minister, Nithi, and the staff 

in the Highways ministry for their patience over the last several 

months as they’ve taught another Highways minister the ropes 

and had patience as I learn my way around. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank a very good friend of 

mine. He has a vast history and experience with highways in 

Saskatchewan, both under this government and the previous 

administration. And he spent a lot of time this weekend . . . I 

asked him if he had some stories for me and he did. And so he 

spent a lot of time out on the weekend sending me some 

information, and I told him I was going to thank him publicly. 

And he didn’t want any kind of public recognition, so I’m just 

going to call him George. So to George, I want to say thank you 

for all of your help, helping me put this speech together over the 

weekend, and I hope I do justice to the information that you’ve 

given me. And I’ll get to some of that in a few minutes. 

 

I’d also like to thank the people of the Martensville 

constituency for seven and a half years of support from the 

constituency. My constituency has changed a lot, even the last 

seven years. It’s growing a lot. Martensville and Warman 

remain some of the fastest growing communities in our entire 

province. And it’s so exciting; it seems like every weekend 

when I go home there’s something new being built, whether it’s 

new houses or new commercial developments, new rec centres. 

There’s a lot going on. And I’m very thankful for the support of 

this government in recognizing that growth and the 

commitment to joint-use schools in both Warman and 

Martensville. The other communities I represent are growing as 

well, Mr. Speaker, and it’s exciting to see. 

 

Good things are happening. My constituency will be changing 

again. After the next election, the boundaries change because of 

the massive population growth. I’ll be losing four of my 

communities and two of my RMs [rural municipality]. I know I 

still have some time left with these folks, but to the mayors and 

reeves of the communities that I’m losing, I want to say thank 

you for all of your support and help over the last seven and a 

half years. 

 

I had mentioned in one of my last speeches in this House — it 

was before I was named Highways minister; I think it was to 

the great surprise of the then Highways minister — that I didn’t 

really have any highways issues in my constituency. Because I 

really don’t. Mr. Speaker, I recall when I was in opposition I 

wrote to the then Highways minister, the member for 

Athabasca. My highways were not in great shape in 2007, and 

so I sent him a letter and I asked him to come out to my 

constituency to drive some of those roads with me. And guess 

what, Mr. Speaker? No surprise. He didn’t show up. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the difference between our government and 

theirs is we’re not talking about highways, we’re actually fixing 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5685 

them. Connecting Warman and Martensville is Highway 305. 

It’s the main road that connects those two communities, and if 

you count the population in Warman and Martensville and the 

outlying areas, there’s probably getting close to about 20,000 

people. And 305 is this windy little goat path that goes from one 

community to the next. There’s no shoulders, and the edges of 

the highways were all crumbling. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have recently invested $22 million to 

move 305 north, $22 million . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 

Finance minister is having a bit of a meltdown. Twenty-two 

million dollars to move 305 farther north and completely 

rebuild it so that these two booming communities have a safe 

form of transportation between the two of them. And, Mr. 

Speaker, 305 is also facilitating access to a very large 

commercial development on the north end of Warman. 

 

Another road that was in serious disrepair when I was first 

elected was the access road off of Highway 16 into the 

community of Dalmeny. I had talked to many people over the 

years, folks who were interested in moving to Dalmeny who 

actually, after driving the road into Dalmeny to go look at 

houses, decided they didn’t want to move there because the 

road was so bad. And, Mr. Speaker, over the last couple of 

years we’ve invested $20 million in completely rebuilding that 

road so the people there have a safe road in and out of their 

community, and it will also facilitate growth in the community 

of Dalmeny. Mr. Speaker, improvements aren’t just in my 

constituency. We see them across the province. 

 

I do want to talk for a minute about the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford who is . . . This spring the Premier appointed 

him my Legislative Secretary with a focus on TMS [thin 

membrane surface] roads. And, Mr. Speaker, he has done a 

phenomenal job. I know that he won’t brag about himself, he’s 

not that kind of guy, but I’m happy to do it for him. Mr. 

Speaker, he spent the summer driving 14 000 kilometres on our 

highway system to check out for himself the state of our 

highways in Saskatchewan, and I want to publicly thank him for 

all the work that he’s done on behalf of the people of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he connected with RMs, with area transportation 

committees, with road crews, to get their opinions on what their 

priorities are. We have contacted all rural MLAs in this 

Chamber. I sent letters to the members for Athabasca and 

Cumberland as well to get their input, and I want to thank all of 

those MLAs for getting back to me with their input and 

responses. It will certainly help as we set our priorities going 

forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that there is a lot of work to do in 

this province. We have invested a record amount of money into 

highways since coming into office in 2007. And there still is a 

lot of work to do, Mr. Speaker, partly because of the state of the 

highways that the NDP left behind. 

 

Between 1991 and 2007, the NDP reverted 910 kilometres of 

TMS highway back to gravel. And, Mr. Speaker, under our 

administration we have a pilot project to turn TMS into super 

grids, which actually serve the people of this province better. 

The NDP didn’t do that; they didn’t turn these into super grids. 

They just shaved the pavement off, threw some gravel on and 

said, there’s your road — almost 1000 kilometres of TMS 

highway across this province, Mr. Speaker. And the reversions 

were necessary because the roads were so bad and they didn’t 

want to invest in those roads. And, Mr. Speaker, their attitude is 

so evident back then and I’m pretty sure it’s probably just as 

evident today. 

 

In 2007, when they were participating in a reversion back to 

gravel, Dwain Lingenfelter — and I know folks opposite don’t 

want to talk about Mr. Lingenfelter very much — but he said, 

and I quote, “I don’t see anything wrong with taxpayers fixing 

their own roads. This is what community building is all about.” 

Community building — taking a bucket of gravel and going out 

to your road to fill a pothole. That’s their definition of 

community building. I’m glad we’ve moved on from those dark 

days, Mr. Speaker, because that’s pretty pathetic. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, the roads in this 

province fell apart because of sheer neglect. We see now our 

roads falling apart — and I will be the first to admit that we 

have roads that need some help — but, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

falling apart now because of increased traffic on our roads and 

the fact that we have so many more trucks on our highways, 

beating those highways because of the increased economic 

activity in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, while there is still 

work to do, I guess I am glad that the work that needs to be 

done is because our province is doing well, not because we are 

ignoring our highway system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, improvements are happening across the 

province. In the constituency of Cumberland alone, they have 

seen a 75 per cent increase in highway spending in our first 

seven years as opposed to the NDP’s last seven years. So I 

know that the two northern members like to stand and, either in 

committee or in the House — when they get a chance to get up 

on their feet in the House because question period’s kind of 

taken over by two other individuals here — but when they do 

get a chance, they like to talk about northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And we are investing in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:30] 

 

On Highway 123, when I wrote to the opposition members, the 

northern opposition members asking for their priority list, the 

member for Cumberland had mentioned 123. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve invested over $2 million on 123. And this is a letter from 

the mayor of Cumberland House, and I’ll quote: 

 

We applaud your hard work and dedication that has kept 

the community safe during travels on these highways. We 

express our deep appreciation for the work that you are 

doing to maintain Highway 123 this winter season. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are investing across our province. Overall 

highway spending is up 80 per cent in our first seven years 

compared to the NDP’s last seven years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the member for Athabasca, who 

is the Highways critic, will say that they had no money for 

roads. We heard that, I believe, last week in response to a 

colleague’s speech. He’ll sit there and complain they didn’t 

have any money for roads, so how could we possibly expect 

them to have fixed anything? But, Mr. Speaker, in the very next 



5686 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

breath he will tell us that they left us $2 billion and we’re not 

supposed to mess it up. I’m pretty sure that’s what . . . which is 

what he said. They left us $2 billion. Actually I believe what he 

said is billions in the bank is what the NDP left us when we 

took office. Mr. Speaker, it obviously can’t be both. 

 

But if they had all that money, why didn’t they do something 

with it? Instead of building schools, they were closing them. 

Instead building hospitals, they were closing them. Instead of 

fixing our highways, they just let them fall into complete 

disrepair. So, Mr. Speaker, he can’t have it both ways. If they 

had all this money, they should’ve been doing something. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we understand that the NDP have a very hard 

time accepting blame for anything that they did or did not do in 

their time in office. They don’t like talking about their history 

very much. But what is even more shocking to me than them 

not accepting blame, Mr. Speaker, is taking credit for things 

that they actually never did do. 

 

I have been told that in 2011 when there were repairs going on 

on Highway 155, the member for Athabasca had stopped by, 

talked to some road crews. Guess what he said? That 155 in the 

year 2011 was getting fixed because he was Highways minister 

in 2007. And he stood there and took credit for the repair of the 

highway, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t do it; we did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know why the NDP didn’t fix highways. Their 

history shows that they completely abdicated rural 

Saskatchewan. And where are our highways, Mr. Speaker? In 

rural Saskatchewan. There was no political upside for them to 

fix those highways. They didn’t get votes out there and, Mr. 

Speaker, it was just one more thing to rural Saskatchewan, the 

NDP government completely ignoring the needs in those 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that in the last couple years the CAA 

[Canadian Automobile Association] worst road list has been 

released and, Mr. Speaker, I have to say it’s not actually 

necessarily a bad thing when those lists come out, for a few 

reasons. It reinforces what we’ve said all along that roads do 

need to fixed, Mr. Speaker, but as I’ve said, the difference is 

that under the NDP those repairs were necessary due to 

complete neglect. It also keeps us accountable, and there’s 

nothing wrong with a government being held accountable. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it allows taxpayers’ voices to be heard. 

 

And I will point out, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite — 

because they ignored a lot of roads along the way when they 

were in government — the 2012 CAA worst road list, there’s a 

top 10. One of them’s an RM road, so I’ll take that one out of 

the mix. So of the top nine, we have fixed seven of them, Mr. 

Speaker, in two years. The 2013 CAA worst road list, we have 

fixed a majority of those in just a year, Mr. Speaker, so we are 

paying attention to the people of this province and fixing the 

roads that they view as a priority. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have so many examples of roads that the 

NDP completely ignored. It’s interesting. I guess kind of the joy 

of the Internet, things never really disappear. You can always 

go find things. 

 

But I have pictures that the fine people who lived around and 

had to drive on Highway 368 to St. Brieux had put up over the 

years. There’s a whole lot of different descriptors for what NDP 

stands for: now destroying the province, new democratic 

potholes, and a few others that I can’t say because there’s some 

unparliamentary language in there, Mr. Speaker. And I’m told 

that prior to 2007, the good people of Lake Lenore and St. 

Brieux actually had outhouses put up on either side of the 

highway, spray-painted NDP toll road on them, Mr. Speaker, 

because the road was so bad. And I can say that those toll 

booths are no longer there. We have invested almost $27 

million improving 36 kilometres of highway in that area, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In 2006 there was a website set up having to do with Highway 

32, and you can still check it out. It’s still online. And I just 

want to read some of the quotes that I found on that website. 

 

Government’s lack of funding to build and maintain this 

highway is just another example of the rural people being 

shafted. Where are our tax dollars going? What about all 

the revenue the province collects from the oil and gas 

royalties coming from the Southwest? Why are rural 

people always treated like ‘third’ class citizens? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again that was from 2006. And another 

quote: “I agree this highway is a nightmare and to be avoided at 

all costs. What a shame and how embarrassing.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the quotes and the things that people were 

writing on that website ended in 2009, and do you know why? 

Because we fixed the road. We invested almost $48 million and 

improved 128 kilometres of highway on Highway 32. And the 

end result, Mr. Speaker, were headlines in local newspapers: 

“Highway 32 back in business;” “From goat trail to a highway;” 

“Highway 32, from travesty to legacy.” Mr. Speaker, I will say 

this again, there is still a lot of work to do but there was so 

much catching up to do when we took over in 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I anticipate getting a few questions from the NDP 

Highways critic, the member for Athabasca in this session, but 

in the meantime I have a couple of questions for him mainly 

about what roads does he drive when he goes home. Because 

there’s a few roads that he can take, whether it’s 155, where 

we’ve invested $115 million; Highway 155, where we’ve 

invested $14 million; Highway 4, which has been rebuilt, the 

Glaslyn, Meadow Lake, Buffalo Narrows area. And I just talked 

to the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Meadow 

Lake, and he confirms that that’s a pretty nice road now 

compared to what it used to be. Mr. Speaker, there’s more work 

to do. Or does he fly out of Buffalo Narrows airport which, Mr. 

Speaker, the resurfacing of that airport is in our fall tender plan 

for this year. So the roads that he drives we are fixing as well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that highways were not a priority 

when the NDP were in government, and it has become painfully 

obvious that they are not a priority when they’re in opposition 

either, Mr. Speaker. I would point out that the day before the 

Throne Speech was read, the NDP released out of their 

communications department, “NDP lays out Throne Speech 

must-haves,” a list of 25 top priorities for the NDP that were 

must-haves to be seen in the Throne Speech. You know what’s 

not in here, Mr. Speaker? Not one mention of highways, Not a 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5687 

word. Not a reference. In the top 25, nothing on highways. Not 

a priority in government, Mr. Speaker, obviously not a priority 

in opposition. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not even just the press release that they 

sent out before the Throne Speech. On March 18th of this year 

right before the budget, they sent out another must-have list. 

Apparently in March there was only seven things that they 

wanted. Now there’s 25. And in March, their seven must-haves 

for the budget, highways wasn’t mentioned. Not once. Not once 

at budget time, Mr. Speaker. The Opposition Leader’s 

leadership platform in 2013, again highways not mentioned. 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think they have any credibility on this 

issue, not just because of their history when it comes to 

highways, Mr. Speaker, but because they’re not making it a 

priority today either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not only just keeping up with repairs and 

maintenance, but we’re building for the future. And I have a 

long list of major projects that we’re undertaking in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. There’s passing lanes on Highways 7 

and 10, the new bridge at St. Louis that just opened a couple 

weeks ago, twinning projects on Highways 16 and 7. There’s 

design work under way for overpasses in Warman and 

Martensville, for which I’m quite thankful. There’s planning 

work under way for the perimeter highway around Saskatoon. 

There’s a Regina bypass, which is the biggest infrastructure 

project of our province’s history, Mr. Speaker. We provided 

funding for a new commuter bridge in Saskatoon, and the 

Premier recently committed to help fund the second bridge in 

Prince Albert. 

 

And I do have to point out, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty interesting, 

the member for Athabasca and his different viewpoints when it 

comes to the P3 project in Saskatoon versus Prince Albert. 

When we announced one in Saskatoon, the member for 

Athabasca said, and I quote, “Saskatoon needs a bridge . . . It’s 

good for the economy so we’ve got to take advantage of it.” 

Fully supportive apparently of that bridge but, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to exactly the same funding proposal for the 

second bridge in Prince Albert, the member for Athabasca said 

recently in a radio interview, and I quote, “That’s really a 

cop-out.” 

 

So it’s perfectly fine. He’s supportive when we take this 

approach in Saskatoon, but he’s not at all supportive of the 

same approach in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure the 

people of that city will be interested to know that the NDP don’t 

support a new bridge for Prince Albert funded under exactly the 

same model as the bridge for Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also outlined in the Throne Speech is an 

innovative proposal that we received from SARM, 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. I thought 

I’d spell out that acronym for the members opposite because 

they’re not probably familiar with what SARM is. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s to use Building Canada Fund money to help build 

rural RM roads that are servicing the resource industry, Mr. 

Speaker. And we look forward to continuing to work with 

SARM to examine that proposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are doing all of these things — all of the 

maintenance, all the repairs, all of these large projects that I 

have outlined — and, Mr. Speaker, we are doing it all within a 

balanced budget. And we are doing that because we have a 

plan, the plan for growth that was released by the Premier, and 

it guides the decisions that we make in government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t just have plans in government; we 

had plans in opposition as well. I know that when the Premier 

was named leader of our party, he came out with a plan for 

Saskatchewan and the people of this province judge us on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP haven’t figured out yet that they need to 

do more than just simply oppose. That is part of their job. I’ve 

been in opposition. I understand that the part of what their job 

is, Mr. Speaker, is to tell the people of this province what they 

want to do, how they’re going to do it, and what they’re 

planning on spending for it, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And we have seen absolutely none of that from the NDP over 

the last seven years. Mr. Speaker, not only are they not ready to 

govern, they haven’t figured out to be an opposition party. But 

luckily for them, they’ll have years and years and years to 

figure out how to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are seeing unprecedented growth in our 

province, and we are planning accordingly. We are building 

new schools, new hospitals, unprecedented money for 

highways, lower taxes, and programs for those who need our 

help. And, Mr. Speaker, as I said, all of this within balanced 

budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for all of these reasons I will be supporting our 

government’s Throne Speech, and I will not be supporting the 

opposition’s amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise in my place and join the debate this evening on 

the Throne Speech motion. Again there’s a certain approach to 

these things, Mr. Speaker, and I wouldn’t want to steer too far 

off that path, but as it is often said and is rightly said, to start, 

we’ve got a lot of reasons to be thankful as members serving in 

this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly the people that make this building work, the 

people that take care of the security of this place, we’ve had a 

very, very pointed reminder of the important work that gets 

done and how thankful we should be for all the different ways 

that people contribute to that. So to all the Legislative Assembly 

staff, to the folks at the Table, and in particular to the 

Sergeant-at-Arms and all the folks working in security and 

making sure that the people’s Assembly is safe and continuing 

to have that access from the people themselves, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to say very publicly, thank you very much for all that you 

do. 

 

I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the thanks that is 

due to friends and family, certainly we don’t get here by 

ourselves and we don’t — if you go at this with any kind of 

sustained effort, Mr. Speaker — you don’t do that by yourself. 

So in terms of my family, in terms of my family and friends that 

keep me going in this and keep me on the path and straighten 



5688 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

me out when the situation warrants, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 

thank you very much as well. 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of all the staff that we work 

with, be it on the constituency side or in the caucus office, I’ve 

got plenty of reasons to be thankful for there as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And certainly I want to say thank you very much to 

the folks in the constituency office, the folks in the executive 

association for the Regina Elphinstone-Centre NDP. I want to 

say thank you to the caucus office staff here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to say again, to start where this all begins, thank you 

to the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre for placing this task 

before me in terms of representing in this Assembly the hopes 

and dreams and aspirations of the people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. And in terms of trying to work and 

advance the issues that they bring forward and for their support 

thus far, Mr. Speaker, and for their, again, their continued 

feedback in terms of how to do this job and do it better, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m undyingly grateful for that. 

 

One of the things that I always find interesting is when different 

of us talk about the people that they encounter in their 

day-to-day life in their work either as a MLA or as a cabinet 

minister. And certainly there are people that stand out for me on 

a daily basis that inspire me when maybe I’m getting a little 

dragged down, Mr. Speaker, or when I’m thinking that, you 

know, what’s a way to do the job better. But I think of people 

like Winnie Stephenson, who lives on 1300 block Cameron, and 

who has had lots of ups and downs in life, but she takes care of 

13 block Cameron. She’s out cleaning the yard at Albert School 

when it needs it, Mr. Speaker. She’s one of those neighbours 

that is always there for the kids, for the seniors, and all points in 

between. And I think of somebody like Winnie Stephenson 

when I think of service. 

 

[19:45] 

 

I think of somebody like the folks that are on the Heritage 

Community Association, Mr. Speaker, that just this week 

before, while we were here, they were opening up two new play 

structures for which they’d raised upwards of $100,000, Mr. 

Speaker. And again, in terms of the work that is done by 

Executive Director Kathleen Wilson and by president and board 

with the community association, Mr. Speaker, president being 

Josh Haugerud, I think that they make their community a better 

place. 

 

I think about the community association over in my home neck 

of the woods, North Central, Mr. Speaker. I think about 

President Joely BigEagle-Kequahtooway. I think about 

Executive Director Michael Parker and Kari Herbert and the 

work that they do to make our community a better place. 

 

I think about all the folks in the Cathedral Village or in the 

Warehouse District, and I think about all these diverse 

communities that go to making Regina Elphinstone-Centre the 

wonderful, diverse, exciting place that it is. And I again am 

reminded of how fortunate I am to have been born and raised 

there, Mr. Speaker, and how fortunate I am to do work with 

these people in terms of the Legislative Assembly. I think about 

all the different organizations, the businesses, the institutions 

that are part of that constituency, Mr. Speaker, and again I am 

reminded of how fortunate I am. 

 

To the Throne Speech itself, Mr. Speaker, again it’s through 

that lens of how my neighbours and my constituents, how they 

respond to the issues that are raised by the Throne Speech, how 

I see some things that are resonant in the Throne Speech and 

some things that are perhaps absent in terms of the issues that 

they bring up with me on the street or in and around the 

community. 

 

And I think about things like again there’s some mention made 

of different education initiatives. I’m glad to see them. I think 

about things like the Regina revitalization initiative, and I 

wonder about how this will be advanced by the Throne Speech. 

I think about the North Central Shared Facility and the 

revitalization of Scott Collegiate and how this Throne Speech 

will either advance that or not. I think about the new schools 

that have been promised and that are needed, Mr. Speaker. I 

think about the announcement we’ve heard about Sacred Heart 

Community School being revitalized, and I think about all the 

work that was put into calling out loud and clear on the part of 

community for not just a replacement of the gym, but to see the 

response in terms of a promised revitalized school. 

 

I think about the work of people like Elder Mike Pinay. I think 

about Father John Weckend over at St. Cecilia’s. I think about 

the principal there, at Sacred Heart, Mr. Speaker, Starla 

Grebinski, an award-winning educator. And I think about the 

community council and all the folks that pitched in and said, 

you know, our kids deserve the best. They don’t need to be 

second-class citizens. They don’t need to have second-class 

education, Mr. Speaker. They deserve to have something as 

good as anyone else in this city. 

 

So I’m glad to see a promise on that coming, Mr. Speaker, but 

you’ll forgive me if I’ll hold off the hosannas until that day 

arrives. 

 

I was glad to see, Mr. Speaker, the Seven Stones opening. I was 

glad to be there with the Minister of Education, along with my 

colleague the member from Rosemont. Seven Stones, of course, 

is built on the site of the old Herchmer Community School. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s good to see Seven Stones coming 

forward, but it bears reminding that Wascana School and 

Herchmer School have been closed. There’s one new school, 

and Wascana now of course is site to the old Connaught, as that 

community undergoes this shuffle and square dance that is 

being undertaken. And, Mr. Speaker, again it’s good to see that 

Seven Stones school, and I hope that the new structure and 

some of the new approaches to learning inherent in that 

structure work out well and work out with the students’ best 

interests firmly at the fore. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that, you know, you’ve got to 

have two schools merge to get that one new school. And then 

with Scott Collegiate, Mr. Speaker, this is something that again 

I’m on record very clearly supporting steps of that government 

to recognize the importance of that project. This is a project that 

was put forward by the then Regina Public School Board and 

the Regina Health District, or the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region, Mr. Speaker, as a joint proposal. It was a proposal that 

was supported by the then government in February of 2007, 

with $2 million of planning money. And certainly, the City of 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5689 

Regina has proved to be a good supporter of that project and 

has been as good as their word on the different components 

therein. The health region has been forced to stand back from 

the initial proposal, which is a shame, Mr. Speaker. Albert 

Library is still an ongoing component of that project and we’re 

glad to see that, Mr. Speaker, again the city of Regina on this 

project being as good as their word. 

 

And then there’s the Regina Public School Board, which again 

has to work in concert with the Ministry of Education. And I 

know that there are plans out right now to be approved, and I 

hope to see the day sooner rather than later, Mr. Speaker, when 

the sod is turned on this and we’re finally moving forward, and 

that the kids at Scott Collegiate get a first-class education in a 

first-class facility like they so richly deserve. 

 

And it’s been a long time coming, Mr. Speaker, but I live in 

hope. I’m a positive person. And I look forward to the day 

when that happens, just as I was happy to salute the then 

minister of Education in 2008 when it was number two in the 

capital list of the province and when it was affirmed by the 

minister of Education. Just like I was there to say, you know, 

this is a good step forward before the 2011 election, Mr. 

Speaker, when another minister of Education made an 

announcement in the gym at Albert School. 

 

And I’ll certainly be there when they roll out the parade, Mr. 

Speaker, and you know, again, please do it sooner rather than 

later. Because it’s not just the way that the politics work in here, 

Mr. Speaker, but the games that are getting played with 

slow-walking a project like that affects the futures and the lives 

of the kids that are getting education at that school. And there’s 

a wonderful educational team there: tremendous principal, 

tremendous vice-principal, excellent teachers. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they should have the tools to do the job just like any 

other school. So I look forward to seeing that happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again there are a lot of things happening in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. There are a lot of things happening around 

housing. And some of the things that I’m really glad to see is 

the way that some of the different community-based 

organizations are able to pursue different initiatives. I’m glad to 

see the work being brought to bear by Silver Sage, the housing 

arm of the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council. 

 

I’m glad to see the work of Habitat for Humanity, Mr. Speaker. 

And again it’s referenced in this speech, the $7.54 million that 

this government has put into operational funding for that, for 

that great organization to date. And that’s great, Mr. Speaker. 

And again I’m on record saying, you know, thank God for 

Habitat for Humanity because for a long time there, Mr. 

Speaker, on this government’s watch, they were the only ones 

acting on housing. 

 

And so when we hear speeches like the one from the Minister 

of Social Services today where she talked about the NDP times 

and so on and so forth, well, Mr. Speaker, when we had surplus 

we put it into things like affordable housing. You know, 

February 2007, part of that announcement around Scott 

Collegiate or Mount Royal west or the funding that got the 

Regina Trades and Skills Centre started up, big, big segment of 

that money went to housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the first actions of this government when they came 

to power, that first budget, was to cut $8 million from Sask 

Housing Corporation, cut $8 million from Sask Housing 

Corporation. So they’ve just about made up that one-year cut 

from the Sask Housing Corporation side of the ledger, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again, lots of great things happening around housing: 

Namerind doing some good work, Ranch Ehrlo doing some 

great work, Street Culture Kidz are doing some good work. 

There are some great things happening in child care, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

There are some great things happening around community 

safety, around the old bylaw standards enforcement team and 

what used to . . . And we’ll see if this ever shows up, but this 

government talks about the work that’s being done around the 

Hub. Well in the city of Regina we used to have something 

called the Inner City Community Partnership that did a lot of 

valuable work around the inner city and around safer 

communities, around working in partnership with things like the 

safer communities and neighbourhoods enforcement officers in 

working with community, in working for better housing for all, 

Mr. Speaker. So there’s some great work that continues there. 

 

And again I’m so thankful for the great efforts of partners like 

the Regina Police Service, for the community associations. And 

you know, would the day come soon, Mr. Speaker, when we see 

the Hub come to Regina, if it takes renaming something to get 

their credit for it, Mr. Speaker, so that this government might 

participate, well then so be it, but make it happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes in these speeches you think about, you 

know, what are the good things in the Throne Speech, what are 

the bad things, and what are the ugly? I grew up watching a lot 

of Clint Eastwood spaghetti westerns, I guess, Mr. Speaker. But 

you know, those were some of the good things. 

 

Some of the other good things, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

work that we see in this Throne Speech, again it’s not . . . Far be 

it from all being bad, Mr. Speaker. We’re glad to see the 

increases to the number of adult basic education seats again and 

to apprentice training seats, Mr. Speaker. Again in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre we’ve seen community-based organizations 

providing very successful adult basic education programs, Mr. 

Speaker, that had their funding pulled by this government. But 

you know, I was glad to see it in the growth plan, and I’m glad 

to see the progress that’s again here today in terms of the work 

that needs to be done around adult basic ed. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, this is work that can’t come too soon. 

 

I’m glad to see the reintroduction of the Saskatchewan 

infrastructure growth initiative to assist municipal infrastructure 

development and expansion of the program to First Nations — 

to underline that, Mr. Speaker, the expansion of the program to 

First Nations. But again, Mr. Speaker, my hope is that this is 

broadly taken up by First Nations across the province and that it 

doesn’t wind up with different sort of pilots we’ve seen from 

this government before, Mr. Speaker, where there’s a very 

select few that wind up accessing the program. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, if this gets into helping First Nations, let alone the 

great work that can be done with this through other 

municipalities, if SIGI [Saskatchewan infrastructure growth 



5690 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

initiative] can help that out, we’re glad to see that coming 

forward. 

 

Other of the health legislation pieces, be it on privacy or 

reducing wait times for organ transplants or the scope of 

services around pharmacists, Mr. Speaker, these are fine things 

and we’re glad to see them in the mix. We’re glad to see the 

improvement to high-speed Internet and the cell phone services 

in hundreds of Saskatchewan communities. Well that is as it 

should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re glad to see the legislative changes to help police officers 

and the justice system better protect victims of domestic 

violence. And again, Mr. Speaker, this is as it should be. We 

look forward to seeing how this plays out, but this for me 

highlights the fact that in the province of Saskatchewan we’re 

one of the leaders in Canada when it comes to domestic 

violence. That’s not something to be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve got chronic overcrowding when it comes to the work 

that’s being done by Transition House and by shelters 

throughout this province. And again, Mr. Speaker, we’re glad to 

see this step forward here, but this is something that there’s a lot 

of work to be done on in terms of that answering the scourge of 

domestic violence here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m glad to see the development of a poverty reduction strategy 

that “. . . builds on the government’s significant efforts to 

reduce poverty.” Again, Mr. Speaker, this is sort of, this is one 

of these head-scratchers that the Sask Party likes to throw up 

every now and then because this is something that’s been called 

for from many quarters for a long time. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

funny. I hear the Minister for Social Services beaking from her 

chair about why didn’t you guys do it. Well there were different 

steps that we took to fight against poverty, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But one of the interesting things about this government, Mr. 

Speaker, is that you’ve now got a Minister of Social Services 

once again who’s back in the saddle at Social Services and 

who’s shot down many different previous requests for an 

anti-poverty strategy, and so we wonder what’s different this 

time, Mr. Speaker. Has there been some kind of road to 

Damascus conversion? Is that what’s going on? Are the calls 

that have come to the minister’s ears been so overwhelming? 

Well we hope it’s the latter, Mr. Speaker, but it’s interesting to 

see that now it comes forward, and again we hope that this 

bears fruit. And if this does reduce poverty, Mr. Speaker, then 

hallelujah — that’s great. But you’ll forgive us if we’re a bit 

skeptical as we wait to see how that minister works out again. 

 

[20:00] 

 

That minister who, you know, was talking about housing earlier 

this afternoon and who was part of that government that their 

first response on housing was to cut $8 million from the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation’s budget — the first Sask 

Party budget, 2008 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh we’re 

getting to that. We’re getting to that. 

 

So we carry on through this speech, Mr. Speaker. There are 

some good things there. I want to see how the mental health and 

addictions commission reports out. We’ll be very interested to 

see that, Mr. Speaker, because there are a lot of shortcomings in 

the system as it presents, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think that’s 

any great secret that I’m letting folks in on. Again with these 

commissions, we wait to see the implementation and how it 

plays out on the ground and again, how the SaskParty is or isn’t 

as good as its word. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, we had a lot of ballyhoo around the 

whole question of hot-spotting and the idea of dealing with 

people that have multiple barriers and the way that that impacts 

emergency rooms and the health care system generally, and 

whether or not they’re being properly addressed or 

appropriately addressed through the system. And I guess, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re still waiting to see the good deeds follow up the 

good words. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, be it on the commission or be it on 

different things that we hear from this government, we’ll see. 

We’ll wait for the proof to be in the pudding before we get into 

full sort of compliments on how it’s all worked out. 

 

In terms of the bad, Mr. Speaker, be it the good, the bad, and 

the ugly, well in terms of the bad, we continue to see the cost of 

living going up. We continue to see rate hikes in the Crowns 

while at the same time Crown debt is going up, Mr. Speaker. 

Again one of the things that’s guarded against the privatization 

instincts of this government, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that they 

figured out earlier on that they could stack the Crown debt up, 

you know, higher and higher and higher. So you know, they’ve 

got the billboards out there that say debt is down, but the Crown 

debt is going up and their own books prove, bear that out, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In terms of the emergency room situations, again from the 

Canadian Institute for Health Information, we see that situation 

getting worse. And in the case of city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, I 

know for a fact what’s happened over at Pasqua. Well the 

government held up the Meadow Primary Health Care Centre as 

one of the things that was going to solve this. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a centre that’s been having a lot of trouble 

holding on to the doctors they’ve got. Now there’s a nurse 

practitioner or two that are working there. And again they’re 

doing a great job, but again when this government is confronted 

with a crisis, Mr. Speaker, we often as not see the solution not 

really living up to the fine words that it’s introduced with. 

 

I’m glad to see the continued graduate retention program but, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that earlier on when this government 

extended it to out-of-province grads, at that time there was a 

call to extend it to graduate students as well, and they should 

heed that call. And you know, if they want to ignore the 

opposition in that regard, Mr. Speaker, fair enough. But listen to 

the graduate students in this province and how they are calling 

out for the kind of support that that program offers. And they’ll 

need it, Mr. Speaker, because of course tuition in 

Saskatchewan, we’re now . . . And again this is from a Statistics 

Canada report that comes out annually and that members from 

that government used in different connections over the years 

when it suited their purposes, Mr. Speaker. But Statistics 

Canada rates tuition as second highest in Saskatchewan, out of 

all the Canadian jurisdictions. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not 

second, we’re actually first in terms of the rate at which that 

tuition is going up. It’s, you know, Saskatchewan is leading the 

nation when it comes to the speed with which our tuition is 

going up. And again, Mr. Speaker, this is because the 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5691 

government has taken a pass when it comes to working with the 

sector partners to make sure that tuition remains affordable. 

And we’d seen it earlier on in their administration, Mr. Speaker, 

but when it comes to what is the approach to tuition, now we 

get silence or bafflegab or avoidance or all of it, Mr. Speaker, 

from this government. 

 

Again there are some good things going on throughout the 

sector but some of the bad things, Mr. Speaker, to skip around a 

bit here, there’s been some very serious calls coming out of 

what’s happening in our corrections system, Mr. Speaker. And 

in terms of the overcrowding that’s gone on in the system and 

the way that that’s gotten worse year over year, Mr. Speaker, 

this is a government that’s presiding over a situation that is 

increasingly dangerous for corrections workers and it’s 

increasingly . . . It doesn’t do the job in terms of what should be 

done in terms of the programming that will make the difference 

between reoffending or not, Mr. Speaker, in terms of giving the 

life skills tools or the educational tools that inmates need if they 

are going to equip themselves for something better than just a 

revolving door back into the system. And that’s nowhere in this 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again there’s some good, there’s some bad, but now we turn 

to the ugly, Mr. Speaker. And first off, there’s lean. And I guess 

the . . . And I hear the member from Moose Jaw North who just 

said the good, the bad, and the ugly, and he just asked me if I 

looked in the mirror. Now I don’t know if he’s going to start in 

on anyone in my family wearing combat boots next, Mr. 

Speaker, but again this is the kind of witty calibre of remark 

we’ve come to expect from the member from Moose Jaw North. 

So you know, just carry on, I guess, is my advice to him. 

 

But he’s actually providing sort of proof positive of a very 

interesting observation from political columnist Murray 

Mandryk when he was talking about lean. And this is from 

Leader-Post, October 29th, 2014, “Mandryk: Lean criticism 

can’t be dismissed.” And again, Mr. Speaker, this comes on the 

heels of a Throne Speech where this government all but ducked 

and ran when it came to valuing their lean record, but of course 

there’s nowhere to hide when it comes to question period. But 

Mandryk closes off his column about the severance of Maura 

Davies with this sentence: “A clear message in Davies’s 

dismissal is the Saskatchewan Party government seems only 

interested in cheerleaders.” 

 

Cheerleaders, Mr. Speaker. I can think of a few cheerleaders 

over there, Mr. Speaker. And again it’s borne out in some of the 

things that get tossed across. It’s been borne out in a number of 

the speeches that we’ve heard here today. I think on Thursday, 

Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from Arm River-Watrous 

talking about how the NDP ’70s were the same as the dirty 

thirties in Saskatchewan, and that’s what passes for sort of, you 

know, insightful comment over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now I hear the member from Martensville weighing in. 

And of course, you know, I’ve had the pleasure to follow her in 

this debate and, you know, I’ve had the pleasure of sharing 

platforms with that member in 2007 when, then as the Sask 

Party Environment critic, the member from Martensville took 

the pledge on the climate change action fund. And so that $300 

million that’s set aside for that, you know, good as gold. Again, 

Mr. Speaker, one of the first things they did in that budget to 

follow was to murder the climate change action fund. So again 

it’s interesting to hear what is said on their feet, but it’s 

interesting also to examine their record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So back to Maura Davies and the lean criticism can’t be 

dismissed. Again this is somebody that they’ve paid $400,000 

to sever out. This is somebody they’ve invested upwards of 

$135,000 in lean training. And the problem is, Mr. Speaker, 

apparently she wasn’t gung-ho enough about lean, or perhaps 

she was too good at her job and was pointing out the 

shortcomings in terms of the health care system. 

 

But again, be it the tens of millions of dollars that are being 

wasted, or hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, on lean 

by this government, or be it the way that, you know, 

everybody’s got to get on the bandwagon and the lean contracts 

are going to continue until morale improves, it’s either that, Mr. 

Speaker, or you get fired up and of course the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to pick up the $400,000 severance. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s because, again to quote Mandryk, 

“A clear message in Davies’s dismissal is the Saskatchewan 

Party government seems only interested in cheerleaders.” And 

again, Mr. Speaker, that’s similar to why, why did they re-up 

the John Black and Associates contract in the first place? Well, 

Mr. Speaker, because senior Health officials identified that 

there’s an overwhelming concern about optics on the part of 

this government. So when it comes to managing their own 

image, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the cheerleaders, when it 

comes to the echo chamber, that they just want to hear only 

good things about what they’re doing, and you know, the 

emperor’s wearing a real nice set of new clothes over there, Mr. 

Speaker, and I guess we should all just stand back and admire, 

but that’s not the job that we were sent here to do, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s not what people in Saskatchewan expect from their 

government. 

 

In terms of P3s, Mr. Speaker — back to the ugly — you know, I 

sometimes think that the P3s are the way that this government is 

going to do what they did in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. And you 

don’t hear about the 1980s from this government, of course, 

because it’s the sort of lost decade. It’s like whoa, what 

happened then anyway? But you know, you follow the lineage 

and there’s a whole lot of different connections on the org chart 

between them and this current government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the things that happened in the 1980s, of course, 

Mr. Speaker, was that there were decisions that were taken that 

were a legacy of destruction and debt that tied hands of future 

governments to come. So you know, so far they haven’t messed 

up the GRF [General Revenue Fund]. You know, we see them 

stacking up the Crowns’ debt very nicely, Mr. Speaker. But 

when it comes to P3s, Mr. Speaker, I think this is where they 

get to go legacy on it, and get to sign in for deals that go 25, 30 

years and then, you know, the hands of future governments are 

tied. And you know, when they’re called to provide 

transparency on these deals, and the member from Regina 

Rosemont brought forward a very sensible bill in terms of 

transparency and accountability for the public-private 

partnerships being proposed by this government, well, no they 

didn’t want that, Mr. Speaker. And this is a government that 

said they’re going to be the most open and accountable in the 

history of Saskatchewan. 



5692 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

And again it looks pretty good in the black and white. It looks 

pretty good in the explanations, but saying it don’t do it, Mr. 

Speaker. They’ve got to prove it. And they ain’t proving it, Mr. 

Speaker. So with P3s we see them going back to their Tory 

roots, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the film industry, and again it was interesting 

listening to the remarks from the member from Regina 

Coronation Park, the newly minted Culture minister. And again 

he was out in the parks all summer, Mr. Speaker, and I heard 

him on the radio asking whether or not Saskatchewan people 

should get a half a day advance crack at the Internet web 

registration for the sites. This was a big thing that the Premier 

had sent him out to accomplish and well, you know, all well 

and good, Mr. Speaker, but I wonder, if he was out in the parks 

this summer, whether or not he was handing out the refund to 

all the people who had their bookings screwed up by his 

predecessor. I wonder if that’s what he was up to when he was 

out and about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when it comes to the film industry, Mr. Speaker, my 

colleague from Nutana asked him a question the other day 

about what the heck the Premier meant when he said on July 9 

— and again, this is from Sun News, Mr. Speaker, so you know 

it’s got to be faithfully reported here by Sun News in terms of 

the wise words of the Premier — he stated, and I quote: 

 

I would be happy to agree if we could have other premiers 

in this country saying we ought not to have grants to any 

particular sectors. I’d agree with that, including the film 

sector, including any creative industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you hang out in politics long enough, you’re 

bound to get a little suspicious or paranoid even, Mr. Speaker. 

But given the way this government, you know, having 

campaigned on something very different, came out in the dead 

of night and killed the film tax credit and put the film industry 

into no end of turmoil . . . What did they have to say before the 

election, Mr. Speaker? Well I think they were singing loud the 

praises of the industry. I think it was in their platform. I think 

the Premier was quite happy to guest on Corner Gas. You 

know, there was no end to the sort of hugging and kissing that 

went on back then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But after the election, of course they killed the film tax credit, 

and the industry is in a significant amount of disarray since. 

And when it comes to the new value-added tax credit that’s 

being offered for manufacturing and processing generally, this 

government can’t even figure out whether or not the film 

industry fits into that. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I bring that to bear by way of the 

Premier’s quote because there are some over there who’d be 

like, oh we’re great supporters of the creative industry. And to 

that I would say, yes, just like you were for the film industry, 

just like the way you communicated this to the people during 

the election and then did something very different after the 

election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the Premier wants to have the hee-haw session about this 

with Sun News, Mr. Speaker. You know, just one right red meat 

right winger to another, I’m sure is how that went. I’ll be very 

interested to see what this means in terms of what this 

government means for the creative industry. Or perhaps they’ve 

blown their plan, so by raising it, Mr. Speaker, there’s some 

kind of insurance involved in that. But again we await the 

explanation of the Premier in terms of what that really means. 

 

[20:15] 

 

In terms of smart meters, again my colleagues have very 

capably handled this. But just to read one headline, “Smart 

meter mess fails smell test,” November 1st, 2014. And again 

you know, I don’t think we’re done figuring out what’s gone on 

with this government and public safety and the waste of 

ratepayer dollars, Mr. Speaker. But again the story changes 

almost on a daily if not minute-by-minute basis from this 

government, and that is yet to be fully understood. 

 

We see the government going off on different misadventures 

around MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging]. In 2008 the 

Premier stated, Mr. Speaker, that offering services such as an 

MRI for a fee seemed to be “. . . outside the Canada Health Act 

and an area where the government doesn’t want to tread.” You 

know, it almost sort of sounds like the now Minister of Finance 

on P3s back in 2008. 

 

These things, it’s interesting the evolution here, Mr. Speaker. In 

2010, while the Premier was defending his government’s 

growing use of private for-profit companies to provide health 

services, he said this: “. . . yes, we will use private clinics, 

within a public system — with one payer, no queue jumping, 

but we will use private clinics.” Again, Mr. Speaker, heating it 

up just another little increment. 

 

And then in 2012 while he was touting Saskatchewan’s health 

care plans to the rest of the country — including, I might add, 

lean, Mr. Speaker — he said this: “No one’s jumping the queue, 

no one’s slapping down a credit card to get ahead of the line.” 

And now, of course, we hear the Minister of Health offering up 

an adult conversation — at the instruction of his Premier of 

course — on the whole question of MRIs, on the whole 

question of, to use the Premier’s words, jumping the queue, 

slapping down a credit card to get ahead of the line. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s interesting that it didn’t make it into the Throne 

Speech, but it did make it into the spin gallery. So again we’ll 

see where this government winds up on that. 

 

One last thing that I’d like to touch on, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

the ugly, and then I’ll take my place, is just the way this 

government has acted on housing, Mr. Speaker. And again 

there’s a pretty damning editorial in the Prince Albert Daily 

Herald. And again, Mr. Speaker, we hear the hee-haw gallery 

chiming in over there and yukking it up and hee-haw and laugh, 

laugh, laugh. But again, Mr. Speaker, I know they don’t want to 

hear these things because, well it’s their own record. And it’s 

not cheerleading. It’s not cheerleading, Mr. Speaker. I guess if I 

was cheerleading a little bit more, they’d be like, you know, 

that McCall’s got a few things going. But because it’s not 

cheerleading, Mr. Speaker, because it’s referring to their record, 

of course they don’t like that. 

 

We’ve got the Prince Albert Daily Herald, September 10th, 

2014: 

 

Hey, Saskatchewan Minister of Social Services Donna 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5693 

Harpauer, there are a couple of questions that have come 

up about your job title and how in-touch you are with your 

community. 

 

It is interesting to hear that you don’t seem to think there 

are any “desperate homeless people” in this province. Can 

you clarify if that is just denial, or you really don’t believe 

there are [any] desperate homeless people? 

 

In case you missed it, people in Prince Albert have died in 

snowbanks — last winter and the winter before that. 

Would those people have been considered desperate 

homeless people? 

 

Mr. Speaker, you get the point. To close the quote from that 

story, there are other . . . Again this is a minister who, one of 

the first things they did when they came to power, you know, 

proclaim housing to be a big priority and then cut the Sask 

Housing budget, Mr. Speaker. So you’ll forgive our 

wait-and-see attitude when it comes to the action from the 

poverty reduction strategy or when it comes to real action from 

this minister on housing, other than offering up half-hearted 

apologies after the fact when she gets caught out, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of just how out of touch she is and this government is 

when it comes to housing and desperate people seeking housing 

in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to recap, there are some good things about this 

Throne Speech. There are some bad things about this Throne 

Speech, and there are some ugly things about this Throne 

Speech. And for that, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 

amendment, and I will not be voting for the Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to be able to rise today and join with my colleagues in 

addressing this Throne Speech. But before I do, I would like to 

also add my voice to condolences for the families of Warrant 

Officer Vincent and Corporal Cirillo, two of our soldiers who 

were so tragically and needlessly killed in their line of duty. 

 

I think my colleague from Prince Albert Carlton summed it up 

the best when he said that it’s human nature for all of us when 

confronted with danger to duck and run, but the trained police 

officers go to the danger. And I think we saw that in that clip 

from Ottawa last week where people were running out of the 

building, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and the 

service people were going to the danger. And we need to thank 

them each and every day for providing the protection that they 

do. 

 

But now to address the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, the Throne 

Speech entitled, “Keeping Saskatchewan Strong.” I think this 

Throne Speech provides a great overview of our existing 

initiatives and our plan for future initiatives to keep this 

province growing. And it’s a plan that’s going to make 

Saskatchewan the best place for us to live, for us to work, and 

for us to raise our families. 

 

And I’d like to just mention a few things that are going on in 

my constituency of The Battlefords, the thing that this 

government is doing to help make life better for the people of 

The Battlefords. Recently, Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity on 

behalf of the Minister Responsible for Sask Housing Corp and 

Social Services to speak at the opening of our new pocket 

housing complex there. That’s a complex that this government 

provided $425,000 towards the funding for this project. That 

brings the total of 200 affordable housing units that this 

government has helped fund in our seven years in government, 

and that’s a total of $9.7 million that we provided for that 

initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us sat riveted to our chairs here and listened 

to the great orator from the North, the member from Athabasca, 

here some time ago. He had quoted a bunch of figures and facts 

and stuff that he was going on about. One of them was, at one 

point he said, a third of our caucus was leaving. Then he said 

later on, it was the vast majority of our caucus was leaving. 

Then it was back down to one-third of our caucus was leaving, 

but another third were looking for an easy exit. Well I’m not 

sure exactly what the numbers were, but I’d just like to share 

with him and the other members of this Assembly some 

numbers that are important, that are factual. 

 

After the 2007 election, there was 20 members on that side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker. After the 2011 election, there was 9 

members. That’s a loss of 11 members. That’s 55 per cent of 

their members that the voters of this province saw fit to send 

home. They’re no longer here. Their chairs have vanished. Well 

no, they haven’t vanished. I know where they are. They’re all 

right here. In fact I think I’m in one of them. Mr. Taylor is no 

longer here. I have that chair now. And that’s what the people 

of Saskatchewan voted for. 

 

He talked about the mountain of money that he left us. And 

we’ve heard some of my colleagues speak about that tonight. It 

wasn’t a mountain of money. It was a mountain of 

infrastructure deficit. If we were getting a mountain of money at 

that time, why was this province still receiving equalization 

payments from the federal government? 

 

In 2005, we received $89 million in equalization payments from 

the federal government; 2006, $13 million; then in their last 

year of government, 2007, $226 million we received in 

equalization payments. Facts don’t jibe here somehow, folks. 

Why is that? 

 

Here’s another number: $81,816,889. That’s the increase in 

building permits in my constituency, The Battlefords, in the 

first five years of our government compared to the last five 

years of that NDP government. We listened some time ago to 

the member from Regina Rosemont making negative and 

disparaging comments about The Battlefords. He talked about 

the Vanguard building closing, it’s not even called the 

Vanguard building by the people that live there. It’s called the 

Grit Industries building, a thriving ongoing business, supplying 

a lot of supplies to the oil industry. He talked about Mifab 

building closing, occupied by a powder coating company now. 

Those are the kind of negative comments that I feel do no good 

for anything in our province. And somebody had asked me, 

why is it do you think they’re so negative? Because they’re in 

opposition, or are they in opposition because they’re so 

negative? It’s kind of the chicken and the egg, which is it? I’m 

not sure. 

 



5694 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

Another comment that was made some time ago by former 

Premier Calvert, and it was after the election in 2003. In fact I 

think it was on December 16th, 2003, on CFRA radio. He was 

commenting — I could be a little more specific — but 

commenting about part of their strategy to keep young people in 

this province was to lower the drinking age. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

at that time I had two sons that were embarking on new careers. 

And my kids weren’t angels, Mr. Speaker, but when they were 

choosing their careers it wasn’t based on the availability of 

alcohol. That’s not what motivated our kids to leave this 

province. That’s not what motivated the brain drain that we all 

faced for 16 years of their government. 

 

In contrast to that, Mr. Speaker, our plan — because we have a 

plan on this side — our plan was the grad retention program, a 

program that’s seen 50,000 students take advantage of $130 

million. That’s 50,000 more people that are living in the 

province, had an opportunity to get part of $130 million. My 

colleagues have talked about that, you know, off and on through 

their speeches. And I’d just like to take a second to think about 

what that meant to the young people of this province. 

 

My wife, Linda, and I proudly became grandparents last 

February . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you, and that 

was a great occasion for us. And it kind of drove home what I 

was thinking about. And unfortunately our kids graduated 

before this program come in, but young couples, probably when 

they just get out of university, they do have some student loans 

maybe. They’re buying a home. They’re buying a car. They’re 

raising a family. They’re getting married. That’s probably when 

their spending curve is the highest. That’s when they need help, 

and $130 million I think provided that help. And this was 

driven home when we were out, Linda and I with Dal and then 

Janelle and shopping for baby Kaylee. And they were buying a 

crib and buying a stroller and buying this kind of stuff. And 

they’re looking at strollers, and Janelle said, well there’s some 

for 500 and there’s some for 600 and there’s some for 800. And 

I said, whoa, I didn’t pay that for my first car — 800 bucks for a 

stroller. That just makes the point these are the kind of expenses 

that young people have. 

 

And I’m proud to say that my other children, Carla and Broc are 

expecting their first in January next year, and Calvin and Jess 

are expecting their first in December. So the Cox clan is doing 

their part towards the growth plan, I’m proud to say. And we’re 

very much looking forward to that. 

 

And when I’m talking about family, I’d like to just take the 

opportunity to thank my wife, Linda, for being my support and 

for being a sounding board for me and my inspiration in a lot of 

ways, and certainly providing me a lot of insight that helps me 

do my job here and keeps the home fires burning. And I thank 

her for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen over the last period of time, and we’ve 

heard our Premier talk about the problems of growth being 

better than the problems of decline. I think back to the years, 

several years ago, the city of North Battleford, and I commend 

them for their foresight. They developed the subdivision that we 

call Fairview Heights in The Battlefords, and they put in the 

curbs and the pavement and the sewer and the water. And they 

sat, I believe, for 17 years. Maybe four or five houses built out 

of, I don’t know, 120 lots that were serviced in that area, until 

finally in 2007 those lots started getting bought up. People 

started building houses because people were coming back 

home. 

 

The problem that we have now is we’re short of lots. People are 

trying to push the excavators out of the road so they can get in 

to build their house. They’re waiting for SaskPower to hook up, 

SaskEnergy to hook up. But those problems, let me assure you, 

are a lot better than the problems of decline, taxpayers’ money 

being spent on a subdivision that sits vacant for 17 years. I think 

those waiting times are a lot better than that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been my privilege, my pleasure to be one of 

the delegates for the Pacific NorthWest Economic Region on 

behalf of the province. And I’d just like to talk a little bit about 

the respect that this province, this government, and certainly our 

Premier has in other jurisdictions. And that’s a group made up 

of five US [United States] jurisdictions and five Canadian 

jurisdictions. And it’s in sharp contrast to a former premier, 

Calvert, when he talked about Saskatchewan being a wee little 

province, and we’d always be in and out of equalization. Well 

that to me is wee little thinking, and it would’ve not got us 

anywhere. 

 

Today we see giant strides being made in this province. We get 

asked at a lot of these functions when we’re gone to from the 

province about the carbon capture sequestration program, 

taking the equivalent of 250,000 cars off our highways by 

reducing our CO2 emissions. And that’s one of the reasons why 

our leader is so widely respected. Our government is respected. 

We’ve seen K+S Potash corporation come back to start digging 

their potash mine north of Moose Jaw. They left 40 years ago. It 

took them this long to come back. 

 

[20:30] 

 

We’ve seen the first uranium mine built in this province in 10 

years at Cigar Lake. And of course that’s a project that’s a little 

bit dear to my heart because my daughter Carla is the project 

accountant for that mine. And she’s very anxious, as I’m sure 

everybody is at Cameco, to get that up and running and start 

getting a return on their investment. 

 

This government and this Premier is also greatly appreciated 

locally. I think about the city of North Battleford when we talk 

about the revenue sharing. In 2007 it was $1.16 million. Today 

it’s $2.87 million. That’s a 148 per cent increase. The town of 

Battleford, the same sort of numbers: 407,000 back in ’07, and 

this last budget, 883,000. 

 

Our finances are not only respected locally in this province; 

they’re respected elsewhere. And we’ve seen that by both 

Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s giving us a AAA credit rating, 

allowing us the highest credit rating that is available to any 

jurisdiction, allowing us to borrow funds at a better rate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some time ago I had the occasion to speak at our 

local Boys & Girls Club, and they’d invited some government 

people there. I think one day they had the mayor there, and then 

it was my turn in the government’s governance day to speak on 

behalf of the MLA elected representative. And these were little 

kids, 6, 7, 8 years old, and they asked kind of the normal 

questions like, you know, what time do you go to work? And 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5695 

where do you work, and how much money do you make? And 

all these kind of things. Then one little guy down in the corner 

put up his hand and asked me, “What do you most enjoy about 

your job?” And I just forget exactly how I answered that. I just 

said, you know, I enjoy be able to work with the government. 

 

But since that time, I’ve had a little opportunity to think about 

it. And there’s several things that I enjoy about this job, and I’d 

just like to share a few of them with you right now, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve enjoyed the friends that I’ve made, first and 

foremost, the friends, the colleagues in this Assembly, the help 

that they’ve given me through my time here in this House. 

 

I’m very proud to be a member of this government, a member 

of the government, that I mentioned earlier, that has expanded 

drastically the revenue sharing with the municipalities, a 

government that has increased our adult basic education seats 

another 775 seats to bring the number to 9,355. They’ve 

increased the apprenticeship seats by 300 to now 7,000 in the 

province. Those are things that this government has done to 

help bring this province to a point where we now have 577,000 

people employed in this province. We have the lowest 

unemployment in the nation at 3.2 per cent. 

 

We have been able to spend $16 billion on capital projects. 

Again there’s that mountain that was talked about by our 

member from Athabasca opposite. That’s the deficit in 

infrastructure left to us. A government that’s expanded SIGI 

program, a program that was used by 82 communities, passed 

on some $200 million in low-interest loans. Those are the kinds 

of things that make us very proud to be a member of this 

government. $227,000 that we gave to the Atoskewin Success 

Centre. 

 

I was proud to stand shoulder to shoulder with our Health 

minister, with our Highways and Infrastructure minister, with 

our Minister of Corrections and Policing, and with my 

colleague from Cut Knife-Turtleford in the announcement of 

building the new Sask Hospital in North Battleford, a hospital 

that is greatly appreciated by the constituents there. Long 

overdue, but it’s going to be a reality. It’s now gone to request 

for proposal, so we’ve narrowed it down to three proponents 

and we’re going to be looking at that. And we’re happy to know 

that next year we’ll be progressing along with that project. 

 

And this is going to be a kind of a . . . We’re going to be leaders 

in this field. With the integrated corrections facility of 96 rooms 

on the side of our hospital of 188 beds, this is the leading edge 

of treatment for people with mental disabilities that are 

incarcerated. Those are some of the things that have been 

accomplished. 

 

I was proud to speak on behalf of the Economy minister at the 

Northland Power opening. I was proud also to attend the 

opening of our CUplex [Credit Union complex] where we 

provided some $7 million in funding from this government. 

 

Some years ago I had the occasion to be the president of a 

national equine association, and one of the jobs that I had as 

that position was to go and speak at the provincial association’s 

annual general meetings. And you know, we’d have the banquet 

ahead of time, and so you’re sitting at the round table and you’d 

be with six or seven or eight other people, and quite often in 

Calgary, Edmonton — they had two associations in Alberta — 

you’d be sitting with some oil people. And once they got by the 

no time change and the flat land and the terrible highway jokes, 

the question that they always asked me is, when is your 

government going to change in that province so we can come 

over there and do some business? Well I’m happy to say that 

they’re now here. They’re now doing business. Our government 

did change. 

 

We have reduced the time required for some oil permits from 

10 days down to one day. We’ve approved 13,700 more bridge 

permits than was previously approved. That’s double what was 

approved before. We’ve either built or started or planned to 

build 40 new schools in this province. I mentioned before our 

CO2 capture equivalent of taking 250,000 cars off the road. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to get back to the point here, the thing that I 

think makes me feel the best is when I’m at a function or I’m 

downtown or in the mall or whatever and somebody comes up 

to me and says, thank you very much for helping out my son or 

my daughter, my nephew or my next door neighbour with the 

situation that they had, a problem that they had through a lot of 

times no fault of their own, whether they had a problem paying 

their power bill and we needed to get some extension for them 

or they had a problem getting their social assistance cheque. 

And I said, you know what? I appreciate that. Thank you very 

much, and I’ll pass that on to the people who really do that 

work, and that’s my constituent assistants. Gail Heintz and 

Lillian Robinson are I think second to none in the work that 

they do. 

 

And I go home every Friday, and we spend a couple of hours in 

the morning going over what they’ve done for the week and if 

they’ve got any problems or they need something addressed. 

And they say mostly no, that they’ve had excellent, excellent 

response from the ministries involved that they’ve conveyed 

these messages to. And it’s them that do the work. And I’d like 

to just right now publicly thank them for all that they do, for the 

compassion that they show. And I know some days they get 

upwards to 10 or 12 situations arising, and they take care of 

them very professionally and very compassionately. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s so much other things that I could talk 

about. We’ve got some great crops up in our area. 

 

I had an occasion this past Sunday with the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford to attend our Territorial Youth Services, and 

that’s a CBO [community-based organization] and faith-based 

organization that does great work with young offenders, youth 

who have maybe just strayed a little bit from what they should 

be doing. They help with some guidance and some support to 

get them turned around the right way. And those are the kinds 

of things that help make our community great. 

 

But before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to take the 

opportunity to thank the constituents of The Battlefords for 

having shown the faith in me to allow me to come down and be 

their representative here in Regina. And I think back to my first 

campaign. When I campaigned, I campaigned on the policy that 

I was going to be their voice from The Battlefords to Regina, 

and that’s what I’ve tried to do every day. And I certainly thank 

them for showing that faith in me and continuing that on. 

 



5696 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

I would like to at this point say that I absolutely could not 

support that ridiculous amendment. I will be supporting the 

motion. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to join in with colleagues in replying to 

the Throne Speech delivered last week. It’s a great honour to do 

so on behalf of the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. 

Speaker, and I want to first and foremost thank them for 

allowing me to serve as their representative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I go too far into the Throne Speech, I do 

want to join with all of my colleagues to reflect on the terror 

that took place last week, on the day that the Throne Speech 

was going to be read, here in our capital, that took place in the 

nation’s capital in Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, it’s hard for me to add 

too much more than what members have already I think rightly 

expressed about that day. In fact, Mr. Speaker, one only I think 

has to listen to the words spoken by the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena and her heartfelt deliberations on the 

matter to really get a sense of what I think all of us feel. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, for me I think what remains from that day 

could be summed up in a few snapshots. The terror of that day, 

of watching MPs [Member of Parliament] that represent us in 

Ottawa, who not unlike all of us each day when we’re in session 

meet as a caucus, who gathered for their weekly caucus in the 

nation’s capital and to see the pictures that emerged of members 

using chairs to act as a barricade in the event that . . . not 

knowing if or when another attack was going to happen. 

 

The heroism. Seeing pictures of strangers coming together to 

try to save the life of a young corporal who was standing sentry 

over those who had fallen before him. The agony. The pictures 

of a young man who was cut down in the prime of his life while 

doing nothing more than serving his country and serving it 

nobly and honourably. 

 

The pictures of a young father and pictures of his young son, of 

his son wearing his regiment hat on the day of the funeral. Even 

the pictures of people leaving, perfect strangers leaving flowers 

at Corporal Cirillo’s fence at his home in Hamilton with the 

picture of the two dogs that were lying with half of their faces 

underneath the fence obediently awaiting a return that was not 

to be. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the resolve of the democracy that we have in 

this country, of the democracy that was exhibited in parliament 

to resume, and the democracy that was shown here that our day 

would proceed, not without some changes and not without some 

enhancements to the daily routines but that it would remain. 

 

And even earlier this evening in the nation’s capital at the 

National War Memorial to see Branden Stevenson, the sentry 

that was serving with Corporal Cirillo on that fateful day, take 

up his post once again as a sentry at the National War 

Memorial. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what a country that we are blessed to live in and 

certainly makes me exceedingly proud to be a Canadian. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the staff in the building that I have 

the pleasure of working with, as well as the Ministry of Health, 

as well as my constituency assistant. And I also want to thank 

my family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very fortunate to be just exceedingly blessed 

to be the spouse of Amanda Duncan. She has supported me 

every step of the way. I’ve been able to comment on that many 

times in this Chamber. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly believe in this province. We 

believe in the potential of this province. We believe in the 

growth that we’re seeing in this province. And we certainly 

believe in the Premier’s, the growth plan that was laid out by 

this government to the point where we literally wanted to be a 

part of that. 

 

And so on June 28th, we were very blessed to welcome our son 

Jack into our family. Mr. Speaker, it is hard to put into words 

what he has meant to the two of us. I can inform the House, 

based on baby pictures, that he has a good resemblance to his 

mother at this age. Mr. Speaker, not only does he have a close 

resemblance to his mother at this age, he has a fair bit of her 

temperament as well. And so I think, on both accounts, he’s 

doing quite well early in his young life. 

 

We are very fortunate to live on the original farm that when my 

great-grandparents came to this province . . . In fact though, Mr. 

Speaker, not the first farm they lived in because when they first 

came to Saskatchewan, they rented land quite late into life 

before they were able to move from rented land in the Forget 

district to Huntoon, where they were able to purchase a section 

of land. Amanda and I are very proud to call that home and are 

proud to say that Jack is the fifth generation of our family to 

reside on that piece of land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that members want to see the vote here 

shortly on the amendment, and so I’m going to move quite 

quickly through my remarks. I do want to talk a little bit about 

my constituency. Mr. Speaker, I have on a number of occasions 

to speak about what we’re experiencing in the Weyburn-Big 

Muddy constituency, not just in the city of Weyburn but in the 

communities that surround the community of Weyburn and also 

extending west all the way almost to the town of Assiniboia 

where we meet up with the Wood River constituency. Part of 

that we’re going to be losing after the next writ is dropped, but 

certainly it’s been an honour to represent the people of places 

like Willow Bunch and Coronach. 

 

[20:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the best way though for me to sum up what 

we’re seeing in Weyburn and the area and the constituency, I 

think probably would have been summed up, and I think it was 

the member from a number of years ago, Saskatoon Greystone, 

who, in either a budget debate or a Throne Speech, used a pretty 

simple metric, and that metric was, are more people moving in 

than are trying to leave? And, Mr. Speaker, certainly with my 

constituency, it is an area of growth and a place that people 

want to live and want to raise a family. Mr. Speaker, so we’re 

gaining a lot in our constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also do want to put on the record that this past 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5697 

week, we lost a lot. Mr. Speaker, I want to speak briefly about 

the passing of a constituent, Ken Cugnet. And some members in 

the House had the opportunity to meet and to know Ken. Ken 

was a lot of things. He was a husband and he was a father of 

four boys and he was a grandfather. He was a friend to a lot of 

people. He was a farmer and he was an oilman. But, Mr. 

Speaker, Ken was a builder. 

 

Ken was a builder of buildings. Certainly one only has to go 

through the city of Weyburn to see the Cugnet name, not only 

in the buildings that they have had a hand in developing, but 

most recently Amanda and I had the honour to attend a donor 

appreciation night for our new $4 million cultural centre that’s 

attached to our high school that the Triple C board of directors 

had raised over several years. And that building, thanks to a 

very large donation from the Cugnet family, from Ken and his 

wife, Joanne, will from now on be known as the Cugnet Centre. 

So he was a builder of buildings. 

 

He was a builder of businesses, certainly one of the more 

well-known oil companies in this province and in Western 

Canada, Crescent Point Energy. Certainly he had a large hand 

in creating that business, but you can trace the linkage from that 

one business back to its earlier beginnings with companies like 

Tappit and others that he was a major part of, being a part of. 

So he was a builder in that respect. 

 

But I think more importantly, Mr. Speaker, and we will see this 

on Thursday at his memorial, he was a builder of people. There 

will be scores of young women and men who got their start in, 

whether it be the oil industry or in the agricultural industry 

because of not only Ken’s wise, sage advice and his counsel, 

but in many cases his quiet capital that he helped individuals get 

their start. And so, Mr. Speaker, if I could, just on the record, 

and I’ll have more opportunity to do so on Thursday to the 

family, but to the family of Ken Cugnet, I just would offer my 

deepest sympathies and my greatest respect for all that Ken had 

achieved and all that he meant for our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I think of building and things that 

governments should do and, you know, what the obligations 

are, our obligations are on behalf of the people that we 

represent, knowing that this is a bit of a transactional 

relationship . . . We have the opportunity to serve for four years 

at a time and in exchange for that honour, it’s our obligation to 

ensure that the people’s money is being used properly and being 

used correctly. And so the things that this government has 

identified in the Throne Speech, the things that we want to be a 

part of building a better quality of life, better services for those 

things that government should be offering as well as those 

infrastructure assets that people need, schools and universities 

and hospitals and long-term care facilities and highways, I’m 

very pleased that this Throne Speech also identified the things 

that we believe on this side of the House that government ought 

not to be building, and namely, in government-owned liquor 

stores. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was a bit of irony. It wasn’t a couple of 

weeks before the Throne Speech was delivered when in one of 

my local newspapers, in the Coronach Triangle News, one of 

the public sector unions that have taken a position that they 

believe that government should be building Liquor Board stores 

. . . And we’re not quite sure, the members on the opposite side, 

where their views are on this but I think we’ll find out over the 

course of the number of months that lie ahead. But certainly in 

the Coronach newspaper, it was kind of interesting to see a 

news story that was submitted by one of the unions that was 

urging the people of Coronach and the people that read that 

newspaper to phone their MLA and ensure that I know that their 

views are to keep the liquor stores public and that it should be 

government employees that are working in the liquor stores and 

that this is something that should be not in the private sector. 

This should be in the public sector. 

 

The irony, Mr. Speaker, is that in Coronach, liquor is sold at the 

local Co-op. In fact, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately I don’t think 

anybody mentioned that to the union. In fact in my 

constituency, of all the locations that you can buy liquor in the 

Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency, knowing that we have cities 

and towns and villages in quite a large constituency, there is 

one government-owned liquor store that employs government 

employees, that sells liquor. All of the rest of it is handled by 

private entities, by entrepreneurs, the co-operative sector. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, I think that certainly this Throne Speech 

speaks well to the way that this type of business is currently 

delivered in my constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to speak in the time that I have 

remaining on initiatives related to the ministry that I have the 

great honour to be minister responsible for. Mr. Speaker, the 

Throne Speech speaks to I think the success that we’ve had in a 

number of areas, and areas that we need to move further to 

improve services. But I think it lays out the way that this 

government, the way we function and the way that we think and 

the way that we’re not necessarily wanting to stay with the 

status quo when it comes to how we deliver services. 

 

In fact, under the former minister of Health, the member from 

Indian Head-Milestone, we set a goal that we wanted to see 

wait times in this province no greater than three months for the 

offer of surgery, for any surgery, knowing that Saskatchewan 

had among the highest wait times in all of the country for 

surgery. So a goal was set. A team was put together to look at 

how services were currently delivered, also to ensure that all of 

our health regions and our Cancer Agency were thinking and 

acting as one. And so they came up with a plan that was 

implemented over a number of years that was quite innovative. 

 

So the people of this province, when it comes to surgery, should 

and can be assured of a number of things when it comes to 

surgery. We want to see surgeries not just done sooner but safer 

and smarter. For instance, today we’re close to 100 per cent — 

not quite there; we need to get there — but a safety checklist. 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province can be assured that 

when they get on to an airplane that the pilot and the co-pilot 

are going through a safety checklist before the flight takes off. 

Why shouldn’t it be the same for when you go into surgery? We 

know that there’s lots of examples, not just in the past in this 

province but in other jurisdictions, where we have issues where 

there’s not a proper accounting of medication. Perhaps the 

wrong part of the body is operated on. Those things are errors 

that we need to eliminate in the health care system. So a safety 

checklist. 

 

We also allowed for pooled referrals just so that the patients had 

more choice to say, I want to stick with my surgeon or perhaps, 



5698 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

I want to move to a different surgeon if they have a shorter wait 

time. We also put together a surgical checklist — sorry, a 

surgical registry — so that people could see which surgeons had 

a shorter wait time so that they had more choice. They had the 

ability to move to where they wanted the surgery to be done. 

We also used third party providers. Not sure the opposition 

have yet indicated whether or not they support this although it’s 

been in place for a couple of years, but we are buying surgeries 

at a lower cost through third party delivery than it costs us to 

provide that in a hospital. And it also means that we have 

people that are not going, that don’t need to stay overnight in 

the hospital, or not going to the hospital as much as they used 

to. And there’s more that we could be doing on that front. 

 

And we’re using things like pathways. So I had the opportunity 

to go to the reopening of the Hip and Knee Treatment and 

Research Centre here in Regina, which is seeing surgeons and 

physiotherapists working together on both pre- and 

post-operative to determine whether or not the person is a 

candidate for surgery, but also to streamline the system. So to 

the point where, after a provider does a referral, somebody can 

be into that centre within four weeks to see the physiotherapist, 

to see the surgeon, and then physio can start in a timely fashion 

in the event that surgery is complete. 

 

We also have to have course correction in the event that we 

have some problems with the plan rolling out. We have an 

opportunity to look back to see what can be changed going 

forward. And the results are quite evident. In 2010 before the 

initiative started, those people waiting longer than three months 

for surgery . . . And today we still do have those. We’re not 

quite there yet. We still, as of July, we still have about 2,500 

people waiting longer than three months, but four years ago 

when this initiative started, nearly 16,000 people were waiting 

longer than three months for surgery in this province. So a 

remarkable, great deal of work has been done, but I think it 

serves as a foundation for moving forward in some other areas 

that we should set some targets and see some results. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased that the Throne Speech has 

identified that mental health and addictions is a priority for this 

government, that we have announced that a commissioner is 

doing work. She is completing her work, and I look forward to 

seeing her recommendations. My hope is that before this year is 

out that those recommendations will be complete. It’s a 10-year 

plan that will chart a course for this province to work more 

collaboratively with other sectors and NGOs 

[non-governmental organizations], not just the Ministry of 

Health. 

 

But we’re not waiting. So Saskatchewan Hospital North 

Battleford was mentioned by the previous speaker, the member 

for The Battlefords. This is something that this government is 

moving forward and frankly, Mr. Speaker, this is something 

that we need to move forward on. I’m not sure of another 

hospital in this province that would have waited 100 years to be 

replaced had it not been for a mental health hospital. And I 

think that that is something that we all should be mindful of, 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the issues related to mental 

health and addictions in this province. But we are moving 

forward on that important project. 

 

We’re also moving forward on some innovative ideas around 

mental health crisis teams, where we team up police services 

with mental health workers to hopefully defer what normally 

happens to a lot of these cases, where they end up in the 

emergency room or, more concerning, they end up in police 

holding cells. We think that we can provide services better. 

 

And we’re also changing the way that we currently do business. 

So as I’ve mentioned before, Regina Qu’Appelle mental health 

and addictions went from a wait-list of 400 to 9. They went 

from cancelled appointments from 42 per cent down to 4 per 

cent, using something that I think people have heard about, 

using lean methodology. And I’ll speak a little bit about that a 

little bit later. And frankly, that’s not the only region that’s 

using it. The Minister of Rural and Remote Health and I were in 

La Ronge about three weeks ago and they’re actually using, 

deploying lean to decrease their wait times when it comes to 

their own mental health services that they currently offer at that 

hospital. 

 

We are also making a priority, as I spoke about, the 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford on capital 

replacement, and maintaining what we do already have. So for 

example, Mr. Speaker, we’re moving forward with a 13 

long-term care facility renewal. I had the opportunity, as did the 

Minister of Rural and Remote Health, to be in Kelvington with 

the member from Kelvington-Wadena to see the ground turning 

of that new facility. That will be the 12th of the 13 that we’ve 

already said, that we did already announce, and so we’re 

pleased that that project is moving forward. 

 

We also have planning dollars in place for renewal of long-term 

care beds in Regina, work around the Prince Albert Victoria 

Hospital, as well as La Ronge. And I hope to be able to say 

more about that, future date. 

 

We are also, Mr. Speaker, as members will know, we’re also 

moving forward on the building construction that’s started on 

the children’s hospital. This is not only key for having a 

dedicated children’s hospital in this province, I think something 

that is very much timely for a growing province, but it also 

means, once services that are in the existing RUH [Royal 

University Hospital] will be able to move over to the children’s 

hospital, and that’ll allow for some work to be done in RUH. 

 

In fact we’re already seeing great work. There is a new 

pharmacy, hospital-based pharmacy, at RUH. And it is pretty 

stunning what you can see that can be done in an old structure 

when you have the room to create some new space. 

 

We’re also investing in terms of the maintenance of our 

buildings. So this year, once again in this budget, did allow for 

maintenance dollars, and so that shows commitment not only to 

the new facilities but also maintaining what we do have 

although there is more work to be done on that. 

 

[21:00] 

 

I do want to speak briefly on issues of older adults and seniors 

in Saskatchewan. So members will know, the public will know 

that this government has conducted, I would say, the first 

in-depth review of the conditions within long-term care, 

knowing that that’s for about 7 or 8 per cent of seniors at any 

given time. So there’s this large group of older adults that aren’t 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5699 

in long-term care, but we did put a focus on that. Ten million 

dollars went towards a significant capital equipment upgrade 

into long-term care, I think one of the largest dedicated to 

long-term care, certainly in a generation, where 700 pieces of 

equipment are being delivered, training is being developed for 

staff, and additional staff are being hired. 

 

That was the approach that we took on this side of the House 

whereas members opposite obviously have been raising this as a 

concern, pretty critical of the government’s response to this. But 

what we haven’t heard from the members opposite is how we 

really came to be in the position that we are in today. And I 

would refer members and the public to an August . . . sorry, 

October 31st, 2013, so about a year ago, op-ed that was 

co-written by the Saskatchewan council of aging and 

Age-Friendly Saskatoon initiative where it says, and I quote: 

 

The reason for the LTC bed capacity problem isn’t 

complex. Saskatchewan stopped investing in new 

subsidized LTCs starting in the mid-1990s. Thus the 

number of beds and the dollars for staff began to fall just 

about the time that the population for older adults . . . 

began increasing. 

 

So that was the approach at that time. It was to cut the number 

of facilities by, I believe, 19. It was to cut the number of beds 

by nearly 1,500 in this province at the time that the population 

was aging in this province. And at the same time, don’t forget, 

Mr. Speaker, at the same time when the services were being 

decreased, the number of beds and facilities were being 

decreased, part of the other solution from the members opposite 

when they were in government was to propose to substantially 

increase the rates that residents were paying to the point where 

some had a choice between paying what they currently were 

going to be paying and looking at welfare as an option. 

 

So that was the response that we had back from the members 

opposite when they were in government. And now what we 

have from the, particularly the Leader of the Opposition in 

criticizing the $10 million which again is a significant cash 

injection mid-year in this last year, and I would quote from The 

StarPhoenix editorial March 6th, 2014, and I quote: 

 

For Mr. Broten to say that the government should have 

forked over $18.5 million in order to meet every request 

made by the regions suggests that he’s simply trying to 

pander to public sentiment in a sensitive area. Either that, 

or he demonstrates a reckless approach to spending public 

money that raises questions about how the NDP would run 

the province if they were given the reins, [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

So we have taken a different approach. Mr. Speaker, we have 

invested directly into the front lines and directly into where 

residents will see those improvements, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly there will be more work to do in improving conditions 

not only for seniors in long-term care, but the 93 per cent of 

older adults, of seniors in this province that don’t live in 

long-term care, may never live in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 

And so that remains a priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just in closing, I want to thank the member from 

Elphinstone who did mention the legislation that is in the 

Throne Speech, the health legislation. Certainly, and I apologize 

for the members if I didn’t hear their speeches that did talk 

about the legislation. But I think in terms of scope, this is an 

area that we need to move on, where pharmacists have the 

ability, they’ll have the training, they’ll ensure . . . The college 

will ensure that there are bylaws in place to ensure that this is 

done in a safe and appropriate manner. But we believe that 

pharmacists should have the ability to carry out with 

immunizations and things like the flu shot and ordering tests for 

the sake of their patients. 

 

And I also am looking forward to introducing changes to The 

Health Information Protection Act, the HIPA legislation. 

Patients in this province should and can, Mr. Speaker, but they 

should feel that their privacy is important, that it is a priority, 

and that it is something that will be safeguarded by trustees or 

people employed by trustees, and that in the event that it isn’t 

safeguarded, that the appropriate actions will be taken so that 

repercussions will be put in place. So I am looking forward to 

tightening that Act up. I think it is something that hopefully all 

members will be able to support. 

 

And in closing, Mr. Speaker, I do want to just say, in . . . The 

U.S. News is a magazine that annually publishes various lists: 

top colleges, top universities, top American hospitals, and so 

forth. And just recently, they came out with their top 10 

hospitals. This is according to U.S. News, U.S. News magazine, 

and so those top hospitals, I’ll read them into the record: the 

Mayo Clinic, Massachusetts General, Johns Hopkins, Cleveland 

Clinic, UCLA [University of California, Los Angles] Medical 

Center, New York - Presbyterian, University of Pennsylvania, 

University of California, San Francisco; Brigham and Women’s 

Hospital; and Northwestern Memorial Hospital. Mr. Speaker, 

why do I bring all of these hospitals into the public debate? Mr. 

Speaker, all 10 of these hospitals to some degree, to some 

fashion, deploy lean within their health care system. Mr. 

Speaker, some have used John Black; others have not used John 

Black. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that when at a time over the last seven 

years, when the health budget has increased by 52 per cent, 

where health regions are seeing over $1 billion in additional 

funding compared to what they would have seen seven years 

ago, Mr. Speaker, we have a choice. We can try to continue to 

operate the way that we used to operate in terms of the health 

care system. And this is not I think a . . . I don’t think it’s down 

party lines. Certainly these are the conversations that I have 

with Health ministers, whether they be from NDP Manitoba, 

whether they be from Liberal in BC [British Columbia] or 

Progressive Conservative in Alberta or Liberals in Prince 

Edward Island. These are things that we’re all struggling with. 

 

But the fact remains that as an example, and this is just a 

one-year example, but 10 years ago when the health budget of 

this province increased by 6.3 per cent — so well two to three 

times the rate that inflation was growing and that GDP [gross 

domestic product] would’ve been growing — at 6.3 per cent, 

the government of the day still had to make difficult decisions 

about closing facilities, about laying off staff. 

 

We’ve had a budget increase last year of 3.5 per cent. This year 

it’s 3 per cent. Mr. Speaker, it has meant that we need to do 

business differently, but it also has allowed us an opportunity to 

put a better focus on the patient, on quality improvement, and 



5700 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

ensuring that we put the patient first. Mr. Speaker, we will 

certainly look to make improvements, continuous 

improvements all along the way, not only in the way it is rolled 

out but the way that it is operated going forward into the future. 

 

But for these reasons, for the reasons I’ve outlined, Mr. 

Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, and I will be 

supporting the motion on the Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the House is the 

amendment to the humble address moved by the member for 

Regina Rosemont, seconded by the member for Athabasca: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 

 

And that this Assembly condemns this government for 

primarily working to benefit a select few while dismissing 

the most important things Saskatchewan families want and 

need, especially in the areas of health care, education, and 

rising cost of living. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The nays have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 21:09 until 21:10.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 9] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 34] 

 

Morgan Duncan Krawetz 

Eagles McMorris Harpauer 

Doherty Moe Docherty 

Campeau Heppner Cheveldayoff 

Harrison Tell Ottenbreit 

Norris Hart Kirsch 

Bjornerud Brkich Makowsky 

Weekes Cox Wilson 

Marchuk Bradshaw Michelson 

Hutchinson Steinley Hickie 

Tochor Parent Phillips 

Doke   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 9; those 

opposed, 34. 

 

The Speaker: — The nays have it. The motion fails. The 

debate will continue on the main address, the humble address to 

Her Honour. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 

Lawrence.] 

 

[Applause]  

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure this evening to address the 

Speech from the Throne. I know the hour is late, so I will keep 

my remarks brief. That’s probably the biggest applause that I’ll 

get this evening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like so many who have addressed this speech 

before me, Mr. Speaker, I do so with mixed emotions. Although 

I’m saddened by the havoc wreaked on our military and upon 

our parliament on October 22nd, I am buoyed by the resiliency 

and the refusal of members of this House to be deterred from 

their duty. 

 

Despite a shaken nation, whose tremors were felt across our 

province, the Throne Speech was delivered that same day. 

People that I have spoken to, Saskatchewanians across our 

province wanted it that way. And indeed that’s what happened. 

For this I salute all members of the legislature and all those 

involved in making the Speech from the Throne happen, from 

the Sergeant-at-Arms to all legislative staff. Mr. Speaker, 

indeed they should be congratulated. 

 

Democracy is not a whim, not a wish to be trifled with, but a 

sacred concept and a bedrock of all free nations. Mr. Speaker, 

we live in challenging times. Violence surrounds us in the 

world, a world that is fraught not only with the threat of 

escalating terrorism but also with a multitude of natural 

disasters and epidemics such as Ebola. 

 

It was not long ago that our neighbours to the west were 

besieged with floods. To the east, Quebec was ravaged by a 

railway disaster that extinguished many lives. We ourselves in 

Saskatchewan had our mettle tested by a series of floods that 

rocked the security and safety of our citizens. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Today no one is completely immune from challenge or disaster. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is why we welcome a Speech from the 

Throne titled “Keeping Saskatchewan Strong.” Each one of us 

in this Chamber has a duty to join our hands, our heads, and our 

hearts to make our province as strong as it can be. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m so privileged to sit in this Chamber with all of you, 

knowing that our collective negotiations and our will will serve 

to benefit every man, woman, and child in this great province. 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5701 

I’m so privileged, Mr. Speaker, to have the support of my 

family and friends that enable me to do this job. So I want to 

take a moment to thank them for the support that I have been 

given over the last 11 years. And I learned something earlier 

today from the member from Batoche that indeed it is an 

anniversary today. Eleven years ago today, the member from 

Batoche, the member from Saskatoon Southeast, and myself 

had the pleasure and honour of being elected to the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. And for that I’m very, 

very thankful. 

 

So much has happened in the 11 years. In my family, our 

children, and they were three and five years old, in the 

Legislative Assembly here for the swearing-in and enjoying it 

as young children. Now they’re 16 and 14 years old, Mr. 

Speaker. Paige, our daughter, is in grade nine; Carter, our son, 

in grade 12. Both are at St. Joseph High School. Both are very 

involved in their school and in their community. For Carter it’s 

football and track and field. For Paige it’s the Goldfins 

swimming. And certainly they’re learning to . . . As they grow 

up, I appreciate that they are learning more about what their dad 

does. They’re learning more about the Legislative Assembly. 

They both have had the opportunity to come here with their 

school groups and to see what we do first-hand. 

 

But I very much appreciate the questions that they are asking 

me about my job and what we do. A little while ago I just had a 

conversation with them about the graduate retention program, 

as Carter is in grade 12. I explained to him about the many 

options available to him. And that’s what we want to be able to 

do, is to lay out the options for our children, but also tell them 

the advantages of staying here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t thank my spouse. My 

wife, Trish, has embarked on a new career as an entrepreneur. 

While it can be very challenging, it can be very rewarding as 

well. She is certainly finding that out as she is growing her 

business in Saskatchewan and taking advantage of the growing 

economy that we have here in Saskatchewan. So I thank her for 

her support as I undertake my duties here in the legislature. 

 

Thanks must be given to our staff and the dozens of volunteers 

that help us do our job every day. I am blessed to be surrounded 

by volunteers who give so freely of their time and ask so little 

in return. However I do feel that I owe them something. We 

owe our family, our staff, our volunteers our commitment to 

make a difference while we are here. Together we can make a 

difference. Together we must make a difference. And to me, 

making a difference, the barometer for that is what we are doing 

in this legislature for our constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that I believe that the 

constituents of Saskatoon Silver Springs can be assured that we 

are making a difference. When you talk about that community, 

that part of the city of Saskatoon, I know we are making a 

difference when it comes to the new South Circle Drive bridge 

that was opened last year. And it’s just made accessibility to our 

city something very substantial. 

 

We also have the opportunity to welcome 12 more police 

officers in our city because of funding that has come from the 

provincial government, an additional $2.7 million. Twelve more 

police officers, a total of 42 provincially-funded police officers 

now serving the people of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are making a difference with the north 

commuter parkway bridge that was announced earlier this year. 

This is a commitment of $50 million from the provincial 

government, but it’s more than that. It’s a partnership with the 

federal government. It’s a partnership with the municipality, 

with the city of Saskatoon, and indeed it is talking about the 

very vibrant and positive future of the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity not too long ago to announce 

Headstart on a Home and the project that is in the constituency 

of Saskatoon Silver Springs. This was an investment of $12 

million in a program for 66 entry-level condominiums for lower 

income families in Saskatoon. It was a positive day and again, it 

was a partnership that came together. The private sector was 

involved.  

 

I’ve heard members in this House say that the private sector 

shouldn’t be involved, but I am very proud of people like Wally 

and Colleen Mah in Saskatoon who’ve given of their private 

funds to ensure that this project get under way. They’ve 

partnered with companies like Westcap Management and others 

who are very successful in the private sector. They’re 

leveraging that, using public funds as well, to create homes for 

individuals. Mr. Speaker, some 3,603 new housing units have 

been funded by this government since 2007 in the city of 

Saskatoon. I would submit to you that indeed we are making a 

difference, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One other area, a very important area where we’re making a 

difference, is the new children’s hospital in Saskatoon, the new 

Saskatchewan children’s hospital, one that is long overdue, I 

would submit. And when I think back in my 11 years in this 

Assembly, some of the very first speeches that I gave, and the 

very first speeches that I’ve heard from members certainly on 

this side of the House, was calling for a children’s hospital. We 

were ashamed that Saskatchewan and PEI [Prince Edward 

Island] were the only provinces in the country that didn’t have a 

dedicated children’s hospital. Well, Mr. Speaker, we are 

making a difference and that is going to change: $235 million 

from this government towards a 176-bed, new children’s 

hospital in Saskatchewan, now under construction and soon to 

be opened, Mr. Speaker. Again we are making a difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have learned a great deal during my time here. I 

have certainly learned that our province and our legislature need 

not take a back seat to any legislature in existence. Our Throne 

Speech is an example of this thrust. Where we once watched 

other regions in awe, that is no longer the case. Now other 

regions marvel at our economy, our job creation, our education, 

and our will to test the waters of creativity and innovation. 

These, Mr. Speaker, are now the envy of much of the world. 

 

Our Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, is a plan, a plan to achieve 

the unlikely or maybe even, some deem, the impossible. It 

wouldn’t be the first time though. Not so many years ago 

people said our population couldn’t grow. They said it was 

statistically impossible for Saskatchewan to grow with the 

national average. But grow it did, and now we are some 

123,000 more residents today than were here when we took 

government as a Sask Party government. 

 



5702 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2014 

Now some of those same naysayers say things like the economy 

and the environment cannot flourish together. Mr. Speaker, this 

Throne Speech shows that they can. Our economy and 

environment can flourish side by side rather than in 

contradictory silos. Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech shows that 

we can devise a plan whereby diverse ethnic and ideological 

interests of our citizenry can mesh and meld together and 

become new residents from around the world. This is what 

democracy demands of us, Mr. Speaker. That is what our 

Throne Speech delivers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to share an interesting Chinese proverb that 

I came across, and it goes like this. If your vision is for one 

year, plant wheat. If your vision is for 10 years, plant trees. If 

your vision is for a lifetime, plant people. 

 

In Saskatchewan we have planted and improved wheat to the 

extent that we became the breadbasket to the world. That was 

the vision of our parents and our grandparents, not a bad vision 

at all, Mr. Speaker. It is also true that we had a 10-year vision 

and planted trees, shelterbelts throughout the length and breadth 

of this province, protected against soil erosion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is time for us to create out of this Throne 

Speech and from our deliberations of this legislature our future, 

our vision for indeed a lifetime. It is true as a Chinese proverb 

decrees that we must plant people. Yet what, Mr. Speaker, can 

this exactly mean? 

 

When I was a young man, my father and grandfather and uncles 

would come from the farm in Blaine Lake so covered in dirt 

and dust that you could almost have planted them. But that is 

not what the Chinese sages had in mind. They thought quite 

differently about planting people. It was based upon three 

principles: cultivate people, care for people, and create 

opportunities for people. Those are three axioms that — 

cultivate, care for, and create opportunities for people — could 

well become the cornerstone of our lifetime vision. 

 

This Throne Speech gives us the scope and pathway to do all 

three. With these initiatives we can expand the way we reach 

out to people across our nation and around the world. Yet we 

can do more. We can keep our children here in productive 

enterprises, and we can provide our citizens of every stripe with 

equal opportunity to thrive, not simply survive. 

 

Secondly, we have an aging population in our province. Even 

some of us in this House, Mr. Speaker, are aging, and our level 

of care for our seniors and all age groups must continue. 

Despite our efforts so far, that care must now rise to an 

unprecedented level. We must do this in concert together. 

Thirdly, we must create equal opportunities for all people 

regardless of gender, age, culture, or creed. That too is a 

cornerstone of a fair democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is the beginning of great 

things in Saskatchewan. As we all know, lifelong visions 

require more than a will. To stay vibrant, as Saskatchewan 

presently is, requires the strength to make vital changes in 

time-honoured thinking and to visualize what our future should 

be. This Throne Speech maps out in great detail how this 

government will keep Saskatchewan strong — strong in poverty 

reduction, strong in justice and security, strong in the reduction 

of interprovincial trade barriers and the expansion in our 

international markets, strong in updating our 

telecommunications, in upgrading our health care, strong in the 

protection of personal privacy, and expanding First Nations 

opportunities, in curbing violence and crime, in protecting our 

children, in recruiting and nurturing new citizenry, and 

augmenting our educational opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that there is an untapped potent force for 

good in each of us. Sometimes it is not exposed unless we face 

a so-called defining moment in our lives. Dr. Morris Massey 

described that defining force as a significant emotional event 

which transforms our lives and transports us to a higher 

dimension. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that on October 22nd, in this year 

2014, this will be a defining moment for our Canadian 

citizenry. It was indeed a significant emotional event, and I 

believe it will be a defining force for our democracy in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we want this House to provide a lifetime vision, 

we must, as the Chinese sage says, plant people. May I suggest 

that destiny has placed us all here for the purpose of 

transforming the future of the people of our great province. 

William Jennings Bryan once affirmed that destiny is not a 

matter of chance; it’s a matter of choice. Whether our destiny 

here in Saskatchewan is to flirt with utopia or to become mired 

in myopia is our collective choice. 

 

Albert Einstein tells us we cannot solve our problems with the 

same thinking we used when we created them. He also told us 

that every move we make affects our future. The people we 

associate with, the jobs we take, the area in which we live, the 

causes we support — all these affect our future. This was 

equally true for institutions such as this Legislative Chamber. 

This Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, is full of choices, and each 

choice we make will affect the future of this province and its 

people for years to come. 

 

Buddha indicated that a generous heart, kind speech, and a life 

of service and compassion are the things that will renew 

humanity. Let those words be part of the credo of this 

legislature. Joe Darion and Mitch Leigh wrote that wondrous 

song, “The Impossible Dream.” There is one touching portion 

that I would like to share with you, Mr. Speaker, and it goes: 

 

This is my quest, to follow that star 

No matter how hopeless, no matter how far 

To be willing to give when there’s no more to give 

To be willing to die so that honour and justice may live 

 

Friends, a few October days ago, two of our countrymen died so 

that honour and justice may live. Mr. Speaker, honour and 

justice do live here in the Saskatchewan Legislative Chamber. 

May these be the watchwords for our future. May we make this 

Throne Speech come alive in our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. I move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



November 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5703 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move to 

adjourn the House. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:31.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5681 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5684 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5687 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5693 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5696 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5700 

 Recorded division (amendment)................................................................................................................................................ 5700 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


