
























































Hansard: April 30, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 56A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 30, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5253 
 April 30, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce my intern for the rest of this session and 
through the summer, Mr. Dustan Hlady. He’s up there in your 
gallery. And he’s living in Moose Jaw or, as I call it, Moose 
Gaw, and his wife and two little ones. And we will be delving 
deep into the history of Saskatchewan, so I would ask all 
members to welcome him to this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all the members of the Assembly, I am very 
excited to introduce 22 grade 8 students from the Regina 
Christian School here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, just down the 
block from the legislature actually. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Geoff Glasspell. 
And he is one of the coaches of the Regina Christian School 
Grizzlies, Mr. Speaker, quite an athletic program. Mr. Glasspell 
in his own right is quite an athlete, having played basketball for 
the Regina Cougars. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming this group to their 
Legislative Assembly, and we’ll have an opportunity to meet 
them afterwards. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, I’d like to introduce guests who are 
seated in your gallery from the Multiple Sclerosis Society of 
Canada, Saskatchewan Division. Members will know that they 
will be hosting MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
this afternoon, after the House adjourns, at a reception. 
 
Joining us this afternoon is the board Chair, Brian Duck; 
Vice-Chair, Bonnie Gleim; government relations committee 
Chair, Eugene Paquin. Also accompanying them are division 
president, Erin Kuan; and government relations and research 
support director, Jessica MacPherson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to acknowledge this organization, 
their employees and their volunteers, who work tirelessly 
advocating on behalf of people with MS [multiple sclerosis]. I 
look forward to meeting them later this afternoon, and I would 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 
behalf of the official opposition to join with the minister in 
welcoming the guests from the MS Society of Saskatchewan, or 
Canada-Saskatchewan Division. Excuse me, my lips are not 
working incredibly well today. Welcome to Brian Duck, Bonnie 
Gleim, Erin Kuan, Jessica MacPherson, and Eugene Paquin. I 
blame it on dental surgery, actually. 
 
But to the guests, welcome and thank you for all the work that 
you do in providing services, and in terms of the research that 
you do and ensuring that people in Saskatchewan can live better 
with MS and hopefully will not have to live with MS down the 
road. So thank you for all the work that you do and with that, 
welcome these folks to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased that you 
remembered my riding. Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce guests seated in your gallery. We have a 
former Speaker and a former member of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. Mr. Arnold Tusa is seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. He’s taken time to bring us a guest to the 
legislature who has travelled some distance to be here. He’s 
accompanied by David Bekesi, and I knew I was going to have 
problems with that name. Mr. Bekesi is here on a cultural 
exchange program sponsored by the Hungarian national 
government. He arrived about 10 days ago, and he’ll be with us 
here in Saskatchewan for about six months.  
 
The purpose of his visit to Saskatchewan is to connect with 
Saskatchewan residents who originally came from Hungary, or 
else their ancestors came. And he’s going to help them to 
reconnect with their Hungarian culture, Mr. Speaker. He’s 
already mentioned that he’s also a folk dancer and has already 
connected with a group here in Regina. And I know he’ll be 
quite successful in his . . . and he will certainly be warmly 
welcomed. His first visit to a community happened to be to Mr. 
Tusa in my home community of Cupar. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like members to welcome them. 
 
But before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, I see someone else 
who has a bit of a connection to Last Mountain-Touchwood: the 
former member of Melville, which Last Mountain-Touchwood 
does take part of that constituency, Mr. Ron Osika, the current 
mayor of Fort Qu’Appelle. I would certainly like to welcome 
Ron here to the Assembly and thank him for his time that he 
spent with myself and Graham Jacobs, a member of the 
Western Australian Assembly. 
 
We spent two and a half great hours touring the All Nations’ 
Hospital in Fort Qu’Appelle. And Ron’s a member of the board, 
and I certainly thank him for all the time and effort that he spent 
with us that day. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask members to 
welcome these guests to our Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to join with the member opposite and, on behalf of the official 
opposition, welcome Mr. Tusa back to his Assembly here 



5254 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2014 

today. Certainly I know he served with great integrity in this 
Assembly. I’d also like to welcome our guest from Hungary 
here today. Mr. Bekesi, welcome to our province. Thank you 
for your time here. We hope it’s productive.  
 
It’s also a pleasure to welcome former Speaker and current 
mayor of Fort Qu’Appelle, Mr. Osika. Your Worship, pleasure 
to have you here today. Thank you for all you do. I know a 
tireless champion in Fort Qu’Appelle to this day. It’s also a 
pleasure to see the mayor, His Worship of Torquay, here today. 
Pleasure to have you join us in this Assembly. I ask all 
members to welcome these fine members to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I do want to join with the member from Rosemont to 
welcome the mayor of Torquay, Michael Strachan, to his 
Legislative Assembly. Michael does a great job as the mayor of 
the community of Torquay. He also serves on the board of 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and 
is doing a great job in his first, I believe, his first term on the 
board of SUMA as a member of the executive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, His Worship Mayor Strachan and I go back a few 
years, playing a lot of baseball and hockey when we were 
growing up. And I got to know him especially playing baseball 
in high school for a year with him. I just also want to 
acknowledge that Michael is seeking candidacy at a federal 
level for this upcoming federal election, seeking a nomination 
for a federal party, and I want to wish him all the best in that 
upcoming nomination run. And I want to ask all members to 
join me in welcoming Michael Strachan to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
welcome a school group from my constituency, right from the 
heart of Saskatoon Massey Place. And that’s a group of grade 6 
and 7 students, 28 of them, from Vincent Massey Community 
School. Along with them, Mr. Speaker, are their teachers: Ms. 
Allison Howdle, as well as Ms. Cindy Joyal, and along with 
chaperone, Jolene Agent. 
 
It’s great to have this group. The teachers have been very 
diligent in bringing school groups in previous years, and I look 
forward to the conversation with them later on this afternoon, 
Mr. Speaker. And it wasn’t too long ago that I saw a good 
number of them during Literacy Week at the school for a time 
of reading in the library. So it’s great to see the commitment of 
the students to learning, and the commitment of the students to 
learning about democracy and about our legislative system. 
 
I would also like to highlight, Mr. Speaker, the important work 
that the staff and the students are doing at Vincent Massey 
Community School as it relates to building a strong community 
in Saskatoon. And they were recognized by the city of 
Saskatoon with receiving one of the Living in Harmony Awards 
for the work that they have done in hosting events like 
powwows as well as other cultural activities, showing off 
educational activities around new Canadians as well. So I really 
want to compliment the staff and the students on that. I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming this group from Vincent 
Massey School, please. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to you and 
through you to the rest of the House, Dr. June Zimmer, seated 
in your gallery. June is nationally recognized as a health 
researcher with a passion for sport and physical activities and 
the promotion of women and girls. June is also the founder of 
Girls in the Game here in Regina. June was awarded the 
Alumni of Distinction Award for Campion College. 
 
We’re pretty excited to have June facilitate the Dove workshop 
that the member from Regina Wascana Plains and myself will 
be hosting this Sunday because June is well recognized and 
very well respected within her field. And she’s been named one 
of the women to watch on the Most Influential Women in Sport 
and Physical Activity list by the Canadian Association for 
Advancement of Women in Sport. So we’re pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, to have June join us in the House today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley in 
welcoming Dr. June Zimmer to her Legislative Assembly, one 
Campion grad to another, and to thank her for all the great work 
that she does making Saskatchewan a better place for all. 
 
I’d also like to welcome in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, two 
individuals seated there. One is Ms. Taylor Apperley, and her 
friend, Ms. Deidre Brandt. And I’ve known Taylor since she 
was, even before she was born. And I think I’ve gone on about 
this before in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, so I won’t belabour 
the point. But certainly two young women with a great interest 
in the public affairs and life in this province, and it’s really 
good to see them here today in their Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce again one of the members of 
the MS delegation that’s with us in the gallery, in your gallery 
today. I want to single out specifically Ms. Bonnie Gleim. 
Bonnie is a businesswoman in the town of Eastend. Her office 
is located right next to my constituency office, so we see each 
other frequently. 
 
But what I want to make clear today, Mr. Speaker, is that 
Bonnie is the driving force and the prime organizer behind the 
MS Walk in southwest Saskatchewan, which over the last 
decade and a half has literally raised hundreds of thousands of 
dollars for MS research. And I want to salute her for her 
continuing effort in that regard, for her patience, and for her 
commitment to the cause. 
 
Ms. Gleim is no stranger to this facility. As you know, Mr. 
Speaker, she’s the daughter-in-law of a former MLA, Mr. Ted 
Gleim, who represented the constituency of Shaunavon a 
number of years ago. I’d like to ask all of our colleagues to 



April 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5255 

welcome Ms. Gleim to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to point out that it’s not often that I get family here to visit 
us in this Assembly, especially myself being from the far 
northern community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. But I want to welcome 
my twin brother here, Ron Osika. A lot of folks may not notice, 
Ron and I are twins. We’re very close friends, and we’ve 
become family over the years. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that Mr. Osika, being the mayor, has been a great, great 
confidant over the years. And he was also a great, but fair, 
Speaker like yourself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to point out that he’s been a source of friendship, a 
source of courage, and certainly a source of inspiration. And I 
want to thank Mr. Osika for the many, many years that he’s 
helped me along, and to point out that he’ll always be a friend 
to me and my family. And I’d ask all the Assembly to welcome 
one of the fair and great Speakers, Mr. Ron Osika. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can’t sit in 
my seat when a mayor of one of the largest communities from 
my constituency is in the gallery, so I too would like to join 
with the members opposite and on this side and welcome 
Mayor Osika to his Legislative Assembly. Of course he, as was 
mentioned, sat on the floor here for many years. 
 
Ron represents, as the mayor, one of the nicest communities, 
one of the most beautiful communities in the province, with the 
lakes and of course the ski hill, Mr. Speaker, that we frequented 
quite a bit, Mr. Speaker, as we had some boys growing up. But 
he does . . . I’ve noticed that he’s visiting the city a little bit 
more than he did in the past. I think he’s really enjoying those 
passing lanes on No. 10 Highway, Mr. Speaker. So welcome 
again to the city of Regina and your Legislative Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join my colleagues in welcoming Mike Strachan to the 
Assembly. Mike is the mayor of Torquay, which is in my 
constituency. So welcome, Mike. I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today appears 
to be the day of reintroduction, introducing a lot of the people 
who are in the gallery. So I’d like follow suit and reintroduce 
Eugene Paquin who is here today with the MS Society, but also 
significantly for me, he lives in my constituency and happens to 
be the president of my constituency association. So I’d like to 
commend him on his good work, both in the constituency 
association and with the MS Society. And I welcome him down 
here and urge him to continue keeping up the very good work 
he does on both of those very important fronts. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Well I would like to join with members in 
welcoming two former Speakers to the Assembly: Mr. Arnold 
Tusa and Mr. Ron Osika, as well as their guests. And before we 
move on, I just wonder, is there anybody in the gallery who 
didn’t get introduced? 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition against Saskatchewan health care 
laundry privatization. And we know that in May 2013 the 
Government of Saskatchewan announced its plan to privatize 
health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over for a 
for-profit, Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen. And we 
know that as a result of that decision to privatize health care 
laundry, six non-profit health care laundry facilities will be 
closed within two years in the communities of Prince Albert, 
Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon. I’d like 
to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in the 
devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 
an Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 
privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 
risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 
over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 
ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
the lack of safety on Dewdney Avenue, and the unacceptable 
inundation of heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue. 
They note that this issue was caused by actions of that 
government, and that any further delays by that government to 
resolve this unsafe circumstance is entirely unacceptable. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 



5256 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2014 

well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 
are very proud homeowners in their communities. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 
ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 
the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 
destroyed for many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 
government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
It is signed by many good people of the North. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today again and present a petition to build a second bridge for 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government to guarantee that a second bridge that serves 
central and northern Saskatchewan, and as well the city of 
Prince Albert, will receive a commitment from senior 
governments. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from Humboldt, they’re from Regina, and they’re from all 
throughout the land, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to present this 
petition today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition for real 
action on climate change. And the residents who signed this 
petition wish to bring to your attention the following: that 
Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions 
per capita in all of Canada; that Saskatchewan’s emissions have 
continued to grow to 74 million megatonnes, as reported by 
Environment Canada in October 2013, and show no signs of 

decreasing; that the Saskatchewan government has failed to 
tackle climate change, reduce emissions to the province’s own 
targets, or put in a real plan to protect the natural environment; 
and that slashing programs such as the Go Green Fund and the 
EnerGuide for Houses energy efficiency program set the 
province on a backwards course. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a real 
plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Volunteer Wins Professional of the Year Award 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to recognize a personal friend of mine, Ms. Pearl 
Hawkins, who is from the village of Meota in my constituency. 
Earlier this month Pearl was honoured at the Rivers West 
District for Sport, Culture and Recreation Awards Night in 
Radisson. 
 
After being nominated by the village of Meota, Pearl received 
the Professional of the Year in appreciation of the many 
activities she heads or works in within the community. Pearl sat 
on village council for six years and belongs to the Meota 
Lakeshore Lions, Meota ADRA [Adventist Development and 
Relief Agency], and the Meota Community Complex 
management board. 
 
She has been tireless in the fundraising to keep the Meota 
Community Complex a viable facility, organizing multiple 
events throughout the year. Meota is lucky to have such a 
fantastic volunteer as a member of their community, and they 
appreciate everything that she has done for them. Mr. Speaker, 
it is role-model citizens such as Pearl, who just turned 75 years 
old, who strengthen our communities and help make our 
province such a great place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly to 
recognize and thank Pearl Hawkins for the outstanding work 
she has done for her community over the years, and 
congratulate her on her Professional of the Year Award. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 

2014 Saskatchewan First Nations Winter Games 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
congratulate the many young people who were a part of the 
2014 Saskatchewan First Nations Winter Games in Prince 
Albert from April 20th to the 25th. 



April 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5257 

The Prince Albert Grand Council was a great host for the 40th 
anniversary of the games. The proud tradition of these games 
originated in 1974 by Chief Tony Cote, whose dream was to see 
more First Nations youth involved in mainstream sports. The 
2014 games had 4,000 athletes from 74 First Nations 
participating in badminton, curling, basketball, broomball, 
volleyball, and hockey. 
 
I enjoyed attending the games and watching some very exciting 
medal matches. Sports plays a vital role in the development of 
our youth in our communities, and the research proves that it 
helps build healthier lives. I commend the games manager, Mel 
Mercredi, and the Prince Albert Grand Council executive and 
staff, including Grand Chief Ron Michel, Vice-chief Joseph 
Tsannie, and Vice-chief Brian Hardlotte. 
 
The First Nations communities should be proud of all they are 
doing to change the lives of our youth for the better. I 
congratulate the athletes, and I want to give special thanks to 
the many coaches, volunteers, organizers, and officials who 
made the 2014 games a reality. Without their support and 
commitment, the games would not have been so successful. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Knights of Columbus State Convention 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last Saturday I 
had the pleasure of bringing greetings on behalf of the Premier 
and the Government of Saskatchewan to the Knights of 
Columbus 92nd State Convention banquet held in Moose Jaw. 
The convention held over the weekend was a great event that 
brought many people together to recognize and celebrate this 
fraternal organization. 
 
This year 170 delegates attended with their families, along with 
district deputies and state program directors, making it close to 
400 in attendance at the state banquet. Also in attendance at 
Saturday’s banquet were the four serving Catholic bishops: His 
Grace Archbishop Daniel Bohan of Regina; their excellencies 
Bishop Don Bolen of Saskatoon, Bishop Albert Thévenot of 
Prince Albert, and Bishop Bryan Bayda of the Eparchy of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Knights of Columbus continue to work and 
contribute in many ways to their communities for a better living 
for us in the province. As effective advocators and defenders of 
civil rights, of religious rights, they contribute billions of dollars 
and millions of hours in volunteer service and charity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
Knights of Columbus for all they do for our communities and 
congratulate them on the success of their annual convention. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Saskatchewan Paddling Symposium 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to both 
recognize a fantastic event celebrating paddling in 
Saskatchewan and to recognize Ric Driediger, a man who 

helped shape it. 
 
The Saskatchewan Paddling Symposium was held on April 25th 
in conjunction with the 50th anniversary of Churchill River 
Canoe Outfitters, one of Canada’s oldest and foremost canoe 
outfitters and instruction companies. The event gathered people 
from far and wide. There was an opportunity to learn about and 
celebrate the history and future of paddling in Saskatchewan. 
Ric Driediger owns Churchill River Canoe Outfitters, and the 
symposium was also an opportunity to recognize his important 
contributions to the paddling scene here in Saskatchewan, to 
celebrate the anniversary of his business. 
 
I know Ric, and I’ve had the opportunity to gain from his 
insights and passion as I’ve ventured on so many of my own 
canoeing adventures throughout our incredible North on the 
historic Churchill River. Quite simply, there is not much better 
than a fresh fish fry or shooting the rapids in this vast, remote 
wilderness. I could not be more pleased that Ric was honoured 
with the Saskatchewan Tourism’s Lifetime Achievement 
Award, an award that is so well deserved. 
 
Ric is a northern Saskatchewan paddling expert involved in 
wilderness leadership and guiding since 1973. He’s well known 
for his stories from his many years of adventures. 
 
I call on all members to recognize the success of 
Saskatchewan’s first Paddling Symposium as well as the 
incredible leadership and contributions of Ric Driediger and the 
Churchill River Canoe Outfitters for helping shine a light on 
our beautiful North. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, Multiple Sclerosis Awareness 
Month begins tomorrow. It is estimated that about 3,700 people 
in this province live with MS, the highest per capita rate in all 
of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following requests from MS patients and 
specialists, Tecfidera, an important new oral medication for 
MS, will soon be more available in Saskatchewan. Our province 
will be the first of the Pan-Canadian drug pricing alliance 
partners to cover this treatment. Saskatchewan led the 
negotiations that recently resulted in a pricing agreement 
between the manufacturer and the provinces and territories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government understands how important MS 
research is in the search for answers about MS itself and how 
best to treat it. Our government funded participation by 
Saskatchewan people living with MS in a clinical trial in 
Albany, New York, but unfortunately the lead researcher closed 
the trial last September. Since then we have met with 
stakeholders and other partners to identify opportunities to 
support MS research for the benefit of Saskatchewan people 
living with MS. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the MS Society is hosting an MLA reception later 
today, just one small part of its important work on behalf of the 
residents with MS and their families. We want to thank the MS 



5258 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2014 

Society and all of its members for the good work they do to 
raise awareness of MS in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

MelBex Awards 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of 
the building blocks for any thriving community is its business 
sector. Last Wednesday evening, I was very pleased to attend 
the Melfort & District Chamber of Commerce 18th annual 
MelBex Awards. This is an opportunity for the community to 
shine the spotlight on the excellence of many of the businesses 
in our community. 
 
I would like to offer my congratulations to Catz ’n Jammers, 
who received two awards that evening. Other winners were 
Scotiabank, Melody Motors, and Northland Building Supply. 
The Community Involvement Award was won by Communities 
in Bloom, whose effort guided the city to a four-bloom award in 
the national competition. 
 
The Melfort Journal won the Heritage Award for its strong 
involvement in the community for the past 107 years. 
Throughout those many years, the Journal only had four 
owners, of which my family was one for 28 years. 
 
I was very proud to see a good friend and a very strong 
community leader, Peggy George, named Melfort Citizen of the 
Year. Peggy has worked for the good of the city throughout her 
life, and an interesting fact is that Peggy George was actually 
the chamber president 18 years ago when the Citizen of the 
Year was introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
these award winners and all of the nominees whose efforts are 
so valued by Melfort and surrounding area. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Presenting Policy Alternatives 
 
Mr. Hickie: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre claimed the Ministry 
of Highways is throwing tools and equipment out on the 
highway workers who need them, all because of lean. He knows 
it’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. And all he can tell us is that 
someone came to him and told him this. He’s just following his 
leader, making erroneous statements, and we have to correct the 
record. And the NDP [New Democratic Party] leader refuses 
them. All he can say is, quote, it was reported, or claims his 
inbox is full. 
 
Here are some of the real facts reported that he can read today 
in today’s Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. From the Five Hills 
Health Region, savings of $269,000 in acute and emergency 
care costs with new assessment tools and, more importantly, 
improved patient care; $184,000 in savings for primary care and 

mental health, reducing appointment times from weeks to days 
and lab services from hours to minutes. And the new Moose 
Jaw hospital costing $30 million less than originally forecasted, 
thanks in part to lean. 
 
If the Leader of the Opposition has given up on presenting 
policy alternatives, that’s fine. If he wants to change his name 
to the new democratic protest party instead of saying where he 
stands on issues, that’s fine as well. If he wants to ignore the 
civil servants who come to committee meetings and answer 
questions about lean, fine. 
 
But in all the rhetoric and spin, Mr. Speaker, we ask the 
opposition to remember why we are in this Chamber. Principled 
and informed debate in this Assembly serves the people of our 
province better than fearmongering or torqued information ever 
will. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Costs, Benefits, and Contract Terms for the Lean Initiative 

 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Minister of Lean, Mr. Speaker, boasted, she actually boasted 
about government throwing away 60 fully decorated Christmas 
trees in the Moose Jaw Hospital storage area. Can the Premier 
confirm that those Christmas trees were part of the Moose Jaw 
Hospital Foundation’s annual fundraiser, the highly successful 
Festival of Trees? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Wow, Mr. Speaker, leader’s . . . 
[inaudible] . . . on Christmas trees. That’s pretty spectacular. 
Mr. Speaker, the trees that were in the hospital were donated. 
They were taking up valuable storage space at the same time 
while the hospital was requesting additional storage space be 
built. Mr. Speaker, those trees were removed. Some of them 
were thrown away because they were so old. Other ones were 
donated to charitable organizations. And that space that held the 
trees was converted to an area for storage of maintenance 
equipment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the Minister of Lean 
said yesterday: 
 

. . . one of the examples of things that got thrown away 
were I believe at the Moose Jaw Hospital. Using up 
valuable storage space were 60 decorated Christmas trees. 
I don’t know what any hospital needs with 60 decorated 
Christmas trees. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those trees for that annual fundraiser had 
raised $2.7 million for the hospital foundation. But according to 
the minister, Mr. Speaker, those trees were thrown out to use 
for the fundraiser. It sounds bizarre. But what’s more bizarre, 
Mr. Speaker, is that this government’s go-to line now for the 
so-called success of lean is about throwing away Christmas 
trees for a fundraiser. 



April 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5259 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: is throwing away 
fundraiser Christmas trees really the best example of why we 
need to spend $40 million on a US [United States] consultant 
and $3,500 a day for each Japanese sensei? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, at a time when 
the hospital was asking for money for a new storage space, Mr. 
Speaker, there was an effort undertaken to look through their 
current storage facility to make sure that it was being used to its 
best capacity, Mr. Speaker, and there were trees in there. And as 
I said, some of the trees were thrown away because they were 
so old that they weren’t in a good enough shape to be donated. 
And those that were in good condition were donated to 
charitable organizations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These were not the trees that were part of the Festival of Trees 
that were then auctioned off. I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people of this province have far more pressing issues that they 
would like to discuss than the NDP’s Christmas tree scandal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government spends $40 
million on a US consultant; Japanese senseis, $3,500 a day. And 
their best go-to line for the defence of lean, the need to spend 
that amount of money, Mr. Speaker, is because they had to clear 
out Christmas trees from the basement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now John Black and Associates has a list of basic criteria for 
contracting. It says, “The following criteria must be met for all 
consulting contracts.” Now, Mr. Speaker, on the list of 
requirements from John Black, I don’t see Christmas tree 
disposal on the items. So perhaps that was an add-on from the 
$40 million contract. Perhaps that was one that the senseis came 
up with. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, but the list of basic 
mandatory criteria does say this: “Add no people, no space, no 
new equipment, and spend no money.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: does the government 
actually have John Black giving approval for new staff and new 
equipment, and is that why it’s been so difficult for this 
government to actually fix the basics in health care and in 
seniors’ care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition only needs to look to the Regina Leader-Post today 
to see some of the efficiencies and the savings through lean. 
Five Hills finds $750,000 in savings through lean, is the title of 
the headline, the headline in the article. 
 
Here’s an example, and I think this is an important one. 
Obviously removing the trees that were not necessary in the 
hospital, especially the old ones that needed to be thrown away, 
is a good thing to do. You need to free that space up. 
 
But here’s a good one as well. Five Hills saved $184,000 — 
this is just on the dollar side — by reorganizing appointment 
schedules. But here’s why that’s important. Patients who called 
for non-urgent mental health services could wait up to 30 days 

for a callback and wait another 30 days for their first 
appointment. Sixty days is what we used to do, the norm, at 
Five Hills. Now after lean, patients have their first appointment 
in five days. Sixty days versus five days — I’ll take that record 
any day of the week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, John Black’s stated criteria to 
have him engaged as a consultant says that . . . But the list of 
basic mandatory criteria does say this: “Add no people, no 
space, no new equipment, and spend no money.” 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, was to the Premier: does 
government actually have to get John Black’s approval for new 
staff, new equipment, and is that why it’s been so difficult to 
get this government to act when it comes to health care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would just refer the member to the 
Leader-Post of today. I’d refer the member, the Leader of the 
Opposition, to the Leader-Post of the 24th of this month, just a 
couple of days ago, where it says that the number of registered 
nurses and nurse practitioners in Saskatchewan has hit an 
all-time high, 11,042. Karen Eisler, the executive director for 
the SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association] 
says, “We haven’t been over 10,000 ever. It’s amazing.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that we were able to invest 
those dollars to ensure that we have front-line staff, in this case 
RNs [registered nurse]. And no, we didn’t need John Black’s 
permission to do something. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also on John Black’s 
mandatory list of criteria, it says that for consulting contracts 
that this must exist: “Establish a kaizen promotion office staffed 
with personnel approved by John Black and Associates.” Mr. 
Speaker, my question to the Premier: does government have 
John Black approving personnel? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, no. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the mandatory list of criteria that 
must be met for all consulting contracts for John Black, that’s 
the $40 million US consultant, it’s a lengthy list. The 
mandatory criteria list also includes this: “Develop and 
implement a lean training matrix. Will include top leadership 
participation in Japan training led by master senseis who are 
students of Taiichi Ohno.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: how many top lean 
leaders will be travelling to Japan to take training from the 
master senseis who studied under Taiichi Ohno? Or are these 
the $3,500 per day Japanese senseis that this government is 
repeatedly flying from Japan to Saskatchewan instead? 



5260 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Leader 
of the Opposition’s question in terms of Health officials going 
to Japan, the answer is zero. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard a lot 
about the expenses related to this government’s lean pet project. 
In Health there’s $40 million to John Black and Associates, 
$3,500 per day for Japanese senseis, $17 million per year for 
kaizen promotion offices, $980,000 in hotel and travel for lean 
leader training, and $17.6 million for wages covered for those 
taking the training. And we’ve heard about at least $13.7 
million for lean initiatives in other areas of government, 
including $4.1 million for consultants alone. 
 
So we’ve heard a lot about the expenses, Mr. Speaker, but this 
government has not been forthcoming with how much in total 
its lean pet project is costing Saskatchewan. Surely that is 
something Saskatchewan people deserve to know. So to the 
Minister of Lean: what’s the answer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have repeatedly said in this House that the money that this 
government has spent on lean has paid for itself and then some. 
We’ve had millions and millions of dollars in cost savings. 
We’ve had about $20 million in cost avoidance. We’ve had 
improved customer service, Mr. Speaker. In the case of Energy 
and Resources, the reduction in approval times for horizontal 
well drilling, every time one of those drills goes into the 
ground, Mr. Speaker, it’s $3 million to the economy of this 
province. Some of these things actually can’t be measured in 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, because they’re just so important to our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have example after example. I’ll just give one 
right now. Saskatchewan residents were waiting over two 
months to be reimbursed for their out-of-country health 
expenses. There was a backlog of over 2,200 claims. That 
backlog has been eliminated and the processing time has been 
reduced by 81 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That is a direct benefit to 
the people of this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, again: how much in total? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister of 
Health has been very clear on the contract totals. But, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee, 
which protects the interests of Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable 
residents, Mr. Speaker, the time for payment was reduced from 
five days to just 1.4 days, a 70 per cent reduction. Their error 
rate was reduced from 15 per cent to 2.7 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 
these are for some of the most vulnerable people in our 
province. This is a direct benefit to the people of this province 
because of the lean initiative in this government. 

Mr. Speaker, we will not apologize for doing things better, for 
serving the people of this province better. We didn’t see that 
kind of improvement under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, and we see 
the results of that today in the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard the spin. But what is 
the sum total? Can the minister answer that for the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the Health 
minister has indicated that to date the Health contract is about 
$26 million. In estimates the other night, I believe that we gave 
the total of, I think it’s 1.4 within the corporate projects group 
which is now housed in the Ministry of Education, Mr. Speaker. 
The critic had the opportunity to sit through an hour and a half 
of estimates that covered lean. Mr. Speaker, he chose not to ask 
any questions, so there was a lot of time for information to be 
offered up there as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as I said, I have list after list of things that have been saved 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. I have quote after quote of 
government employees who are thrilled with the actions that we 
have taken, people who’ve said they’ve been in the public 
service for 28 years and nobody has ever asked them for their 
opinion on how to do things better, Mr. Speaker. We are 
engaging the front line of the public service and our third 
parties, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we can do things better 
in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, even taking a conservative 
approach to calculating the total cost for lean so far, based on 
the limited information this government has actually revealed, 
that very conservative estimate reveals at least $92 million has 
been spent on lean to date. And we know even that number is 
far from complete because this government has refused to 
release information and they’ve refused to answer a number of 
our written questions. 
 
Saskatchewan people deserve to know how much this 
government’s lean pet project will cost them. So again to the 
Minister of Lean: what’s the answer? How much will lean cost 
Saskatchewan taxpayers in total? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, pretty much every day 
that we come into this House, we listen to the NDP ask 
questions based on very erroneous information, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m not sure where they get their information from, but 90-some 
million dollars is an absolute ridiculous assertion to be made in 
this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health has been on his feet day 
after day after day after day giving the numbers of the value of 
the contracts. Mr. Speaker, there is money being spent in other 



April 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5261 

areas across government. It’s a few million dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. But as I said, the critic had an hour and a half in 
estimates the other day. He could have asked a lot of these 
questions instead of a couple of minutes in question period. 
Apparently it wasn’t that important to him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the public service in this province are very excited about 
the things that we are doing. Mr. Speaker, as I said, we’ve had 
public service employees who’ve been here for decades who are 
finally being asked their opinion on things. Another one said, 
“There’s so many things that we do just because we’ve always 
done them.” And, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we are 
trying to change in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I know this government’s lean 
pet project seems to have taken on a life of its own and the costs 
are ballooning. So perhaps that’s why this government doesn’t 
want to put an estimate on how much, in total, the lean pet 
project will cost Saskatchewan taxpayers. It might be because 
they just don’t know the answer, Mr. Speaker, or perhaps John 
Black and Associates haven’t given approval for this 
government to release the information on how much the lean 
pet project will cost Saskatchewan taxpayers. But surely this 
government should at least be able to answer how much it has 
spent so far. 
 
To the minister: why won’t this government just release all of 
that information? What do they not want the people of 
Saskatchewan to know? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
opposite has indicated that lean has taken on a life of its own. It 
absolutely has. It has changed the culture of the way this 
government does business, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what 
it’s supposed to be doing. And it’s ongoing, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t think we should ever cease to look for improvements in 
the way government does things, Mr. Speaker. We saw under 
the NDP that they didn’t make any effort to make 
improvements and we see today what the result of that was. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, another public service employee said: 
 

When I first heard I was going to be involved in a lean 
project, I was hesitant because I thought lean meant finding 
ways to cut jobs. Once I learned more about lean I saw 
first-hand that it is not, but it’s about finding ways to work 
more effectively to serve our clients. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is exactly the point of this: to serve our 
clients, the taxpayers of this province, better. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Support for Seniors 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
know that many seniors in our province are struggling with the 
cost of living and we hear heartbreaking stories about this all 
the time. And yesterday we learned that the number of seniors 

having to use the food bank here in Regina has increased by 24 
per cent just over last year. To the Minister of Social Services: 
how can she explain why the number of seniors accessing the 
food bank here in our capital city has jumped by 24 per cent in 
just the last year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I also 
heard the report this morning about the seniors and the 
individual that was looking for housing, and that there was an 
increase in food bank usage. I think the question that the 
member opposite should be asking themselves is why, when 
they were in government for 16 years, they didn’t look at things 
like the seniors’ income plan. Never once in 16 years did they 
look at it. We’ve increased it 189 per cent since we became 
government, and for 16 years it was frozen under them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also looked at the housing issues for seniors 
and the social housing in Regina. The wait-list has decreased 
from 192 in June of 2012 to 92 in April of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know there’s always more work to do when it 
comes to helping those who are very vulnerable. But I know 
that we’ve also looked at things like the seniors’ income plan, 
the personal care home benefit, the caregiver tax credit, and 
issues that we know impacts every one of them on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s never . . . Not one of us on this side of this 
House doesn’t realize there’s more to do, and we will continue 
to do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — And, Mr. Speaker, under this government’s 
watch, 3,000 seniors have been thrown off the seniors’ income 
plan, and she knows that. It’s cold comfort to seniors who have 
to go to a food bank — 24 per cent increase in the number of 
seniors in the last year, in the last year. 
 
But we also know that there’s an alarming increase in the 
number of homeless seniors seeking emergency shelter in 
Regina. And the director of the Salvation Army Waterston 
centre says, “This alarming increase is linked to rising rental 
and utility rates.” 
 
My question to the minister: is the government paying attention 
to this? Is it concerned? And when will it actually do something 
to help seniors who are living in poverty? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is each and 
every day and each and every budget we think about people that 
need our support. Mr. Speaker, there are 1,150 social housing 
units for seniors in Regina. Mr. Speaker, the wait-lists for those 
housing units have decreased from 192 in 2012 to 92 in April of 
this year. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about the seniors’ income 
plan going up. We’ve talked about the personal care home 
benefit and caregivers’ tax credit. And I think the member 
opposite should know that the seniors’ income plan is based on 



5262 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2014 

income. That’s why people are not on . . . They’re going off it 
because their income has increased. Isn’t that what we’re 
supposed to be doing? Isn’t that what we’re pleased to do in this 
province, is having seniors with more income? That’s why we 
have the third-lowest percentage of low-income people in 
Canada. 
 
We care about every one of those seniors that need support. 
And, Mr. Speaker, because of the changes we made in income 
tax, right now a single senior with $25,000 in income tax, in 
income this year, pays $59. You know what they paid in 2007? 
Nine hundred and thirty-three. Mr. Speaker, we are looking at 
things like the personal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
can cheer while the minister recites stats, but what are the 
people on the front lines who are helping seniors every day 
saying? What are those people saying? They’re seeing a 24 per 
cent increase. 
 
And this is what the Regina Food Bank CEO [chief executive 
officer] has to say, and I quote. And he’s a front-line worker. 
He’s not regurgitating the stats. He’s saying, “What we’re 
starting to see now is people that would never have thought they 
would have to entertain the idea of reaching out for some 
support through the food bank.” 
 
And they laugh over there. The director of the emergency 
shelter says this: 
 

The seniors that we’ve seen come to the shelter have been 
folks that have lived comfortable lives and because of their 
financial instability that they face, they’ve not been able to 
maintain that standard of living. 

 
It’s incredibly disturbing to hear about seniors’ poverty. To the 
minister: will she just admit that Saskatchewan needs a 
comprehensive anti-poverty strategy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I will tell 
the member opposite is what we need is continued action. The 
members opposite want to talk about another paper, another 
strategy, and we want to talk about action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a senior couple with a combined income of 
$50,000 now pays $494 in provincial income tax. That’s a 
savings of $1,699 compared to 2007. 
 
All of a sudden there’s a new-found caring about seniors from 
the members opposite. They had an opportunity for 16 years to 
look at our seniors’ issues, and they didn’t do anything. We’ve 
talked about the seniors’ income plan. We’ve talked about 
ensuring that people that need our support are getting it, through 
access to housing, through personal care home benefits, the 
caregiver tax credit, to the Alzheimer Society, for the seniors’ 
house call pilot program. The ministries together are 
recognizing the needs of our seniors, and I assure you, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s something that we’ll continue to do. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Yesterday I called on the Minister of 
Education to do two things: first, to scrap the lean clawback 
initiative that was sprung upon school boards and students in 
this year’s budget; and second, to take the $5 million that were 
earmarked for standardized testing and immediately redeploy 
them to the front lines of education where they make a 
difference in the life of students. 
 
The Education minister had a lot of bluster but he didn’t have 
any answers to a very straightforward question. So to the 
Premier: will he reverse the lean initiative clawback, and will he 
immediately redeploy the standardized testing money to places 
where it matters in the lives of students here today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I answered the question 
yesterday. I indicated that we have a budget of just under $2 
billion a year. We’ll never apologize for looking for 
efficiencies, especially efficiencies that will allow us to 
continue to redirect money to the front lines where our students 
are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the efficiencies that we’ve worked at and 
developed through lean in the Ministry of Education is: one, 
we’ve reduced the amount of time it took to get a contract 
approved for grant payments. The wait time for contract 
completion has now been reduced from rather than 20 to 40 
days, to eight days, saving the province $200,000 which is 
money that can go straight into a classroom. 
 
Teacher certification process so we can hire teachers: we have 
reviewed the teacher certification process to streamline the 
process; cost savings, $100,000. The turnaround time for 
Saskatchewan graduates has now reduced to three days where it 
was originally four weeks. The turnaround time for 
non-Saskatchewan graduates has reduced to two weeks from six 
weeks. Mr. Speaker, we’ll not apologize for saving money and 
putting it in where the students are. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, what that minister has 
done is surprise school boards with millions of dollars of 
clawbacks across school divisions across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact the approach of that government when it comes 
to education is increasingly embarrassing, and it’s hurting 
students. We’ve seen how this government has been dismissive 
with teachers, with students, with educational assistants. But for 
this government to now be dismissing the very real concern of 
elected school board trustees is absolutely appalling. Elected 
school board trustees deserve better than that. Teachers deserve 
better than that. And certainly Saskatchewan’s students deserve 
better from that government. 
 
To the Premier: why can’t he simply do the right thing here 
today, to scrap the lean initiative clawback and redeploy those 
dollars for standardized testing to where they matter in the lives 
of the students? 



April 30, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5263 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve had an increase in each and every year in the overall 
operating grant for school divisions — 26 per cent since 
November 2007. The members opposite are dismissive, 
stubbornly dismissive, but they just don’t get it. They need to 
look back at what their own record was: ’93-94 they reduced 
operating grants; 1995 they gave the school divisions zero per 
cent. That was how they treated the school divisions. The 
reason they were willing to do it, because they were willing to 
let students leave the province in droves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re continuing to build schools. We’ve got 40 of them under 
way, are built now. Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward to 
growth and doing the best we possibly can for our students. 
And we’ll take no lessons from that group over there. 
 
[14:30] 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy. 
 

Oilseed Trade Challenge 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
morning the Agreement on Internal Trade dispute resolution 
panel made a very important ruling, and the panel ruled in 
favour of Saskatchewan. It determined that Quebec’s 
government’s protection restrictions against production, sale, 
marketing of vegetable oil, dairy products contravened trade 
obligations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has taken a direction within 
Canada to be a leader in promoting and defending free trade. 
We took the lead in challenging the Quebec government’s 
restrictions that directly hindered and limited our oilseed 
producers’, our farmers’ and processors’ access to the Quebec 
market — one quarter of Canada’s food market. 
 
This is especially important for Saskatchewan when we 
consider that we had a record 8.9 million tonne canola crop last 
year. Saskatchewan’s challenge was supported by the 
governments of Alberta, British Columbia, and Manitoba. 
 
We are pleased with the panel’s decision, as it will mean major 
new access to the Quebec market for our farmers and producers. 
This decision also highlights that free trade can and is working 
within Canada. To quote the Vegetable Oil Industry of Canada 
president, Sean McPhee: 
 

We acknowledge the leadership shown by Saskatchewan, 
along with other western provinces, in pursuing open 
markets in Canada. It seems like a small thing, but 
businesses in Canada should not be discriminated against 
by unfair trade rules. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is not just a win for Saskatchewan farmers 
and producers, but it is also a win for Quebec consumers who 
will now have full access to the Canadian market for 
margarines, coffee creamers, and dessert toppings. We will 
continue to take strong action, promoting and defending free 

trade both within Canada and internationally. This is why we 
have supported the Canada-EU [European Union] trade deal, 
the Canada-Korea free trade agreement. This is why we signed 
on to the New West Partnership and this is why we have stood 
up and defended free trade at every opportunity.  
 
The evidence is in the numbers. Our province is the largest 
exporter per capita in Canada. Last year we exported $32.9 
billion worth of goods. That is up 70 per cent from 2007, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We understand that the Quebec government is choosing to 
appeal the ruling from the panel. While it is within Quebec’s 
rights to appeal, we will once again take a strong and just case 
for free trade. We will continue to defend our farmers, our 
producers, and our processors. We will continue to take action. 
We will also continue to defend Quebec consumers and, Mr. 
Speaker, I am confident that we will win and that free trade will 
win. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to join with the minister opposite to welcome this good news 
and this good decision, a decision that’s important certainly to 
the producers of this province, important to the economy of this 
province. And certainly we’re pleased that Saskatchewan along 
with Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia came together to 
make the case that made sense certainly for our province and 
one that certainly is a matter of fairness. 
 
This is important to Saskatchewan when you look at the oilseed 
producers and the role they play within Saskatchewan’s 
economy. It’s important when you look at the nearly 9 million 
tonnes of canola that was produced last year. And it’s important 
for governments to be ensuring that there’s broader markets for 
our products to get to, to be sold to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s important of course as well for us to continue to work and 
to demonstrate leadership to make sure that those very 
commodities, those very goods, those very products can 
actually get to market, and that’s where we’re going to continue 
to look for and press for solutions on the transportation side of 
the equation as an export-driven province. But certainly we 
welcome this good news. We’re pleased that Saskatchewan was 
a part of this effort. 
 
And certainly this, you know, as it relates to trade irritants for 
Saskatchewan, there’s other matters as well that need to be 
considered and be addressed. And we’ll be tracking the 
progress of those in the days and weeks to come. Thank you so 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 
Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to report 



5264 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2014 

Bill No. 136, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 
2014 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Energy 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on this bill and this 
bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 136, The 
Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2014 and that the 
bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 136 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read the third time and be passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 136, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2014 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — With requesting leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you, it’s my pleasure to introduce, seated in the west 
gallery here today, two young leaders within their province, 

Ben Bushell and Eric Holloway. 
 
These young, bright leaders are leaders within the student 
movement. They’re also leaders within Youth Parliament. And 
it’s a pleasure to have them here in their Assembly here today. I 
know that they have a lot to offer. They offer a lot to our 
province here today, and I know their contributions will be 
many, moving forward in the years ahead. So I ask all members 
to welcome Eric Holloway and Ben Bushell to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committee this afternoon and this evening, 
I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. 
tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:37.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5253 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5253 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5253 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5253 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5253 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 5253, 5264 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5254 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5254 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5254 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5254 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5255 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5255 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5255 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5255 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5255 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5255 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5255 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5256 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5256 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5256 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Volunteer Wins Professional of the Year Award 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5256 
 2014 Saskatchewan First Nations Winter Games 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5256 
 Knights of Columbus State Convention 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5257 
 Saskatchewan Paddling Symposium 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5257 
 Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5257 
 MelBex Awards 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5258 
 Presenting Policy Alternatives 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5258 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Costs, Benefits, and Contract Terms for the Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5258 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5258 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5259 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5260 
 Support for Seniors 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5261 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5261 
 Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5262 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5262 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Oilseed Trade Challenge 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5263 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5263 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5263 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 136 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2014 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5264 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


