




















































Hansard: December 02, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 22A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6171 

 December 2, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce to 

the House, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, the Hon. Ron 

Barclay and Mrs. Barclay, who are here today to observe the 

reappointment, his reappointment as the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner. I would ask all members to welcome them. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

seated in your gallery today I’m pleased to introduce three 

guests: Betty Ann Pottruff, head of counsel for children 

program; Kim Newsham, senior Crown counsel with strategic 

initiatives and innovation division in the Ministry of Justice; 

and Lisa Broda who is here on behalf of the Saskatchewan 

Advocate for Children and Youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you’ll soon hear the new counsel for children 

program is taking a very important step forward today. This 

program represents years of hard work on behalf on the 

Ministry of Justice and the Advocate for Children and Youth, so 

we are pleased to have these three individuals join us today to 

mark that occasion. 

 

Our thanks to Ms. Pottruff, Ms. Newsham, and Ms. Broda for 

their great work in creating this program and promoting the 

legal rights of children in Saskatchewan. So I’d ask all members 

to join me in welcoming them to their legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly 35 great students. They’re grade 12 

students from Humboldt Collegiate in Humboldt. And with 

them is their teacher, Mr. David Millette, who has brought a 

class to this Assembly every year for I don’t know how many 

years now, but he’s very dedicated in bringing his students to 

see how this Chamber works. Also with him is an intern, Erika 

Knorr, and two parents, Judy Wiest and Ruth McKeown. If 

everyone could please join me in welcoming them to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and on behalf of the 

official opposition I would like to take this opportunity to 

welcome two very important people in the arts community here 

today. First of all we have Mr. David Kyle from the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board. So I wanted to welcome him and 

thank him for all the work he does for the Arts Board. And also 

the former president of the board, Ms. Byrna Barclay, who also 

did some amazing work in her term at the helm of the Arts 

Board. 

We all know how important the Arts Board is to arts and culture 

in Saskatchewan. And indeed at the Lieutenant Governor’s Arts 

Awards a couple months ago, all the recipients acknowledged 

the importance that the Arts Board plays in their life. So thank 

you for the work you do and welcome to your Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I’m pleased to introduce guests seated in your 

gallery. They’re members of the southeast health committee 

based out of the Estevan area, Mr. Speaker. And I’d ask if they 

would give us a wave when I read their names. 

 

Joining us today is the mayor of the city of Estevan, Roy 

Ludwig; reeve of the RM [rural municipality] of Coalfields, 

Stan Lainton; the reeve of the RM of Estevan, Kelly Lafrentz; 

reeve of the RM of Browning, Pius Loustel; the reeve of the 

RM of Benson, David Hoffort; as well as representing the RM 

of Cymri, Councillor Harvey Shindel. As well joining them is 

the CEO [chief executive officer] of St. Joseph’s Hospital in 

Estevan, Greg Hoffort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this committee was formed about five years ago to 

help with physician recruitment and improving services at St. 

Joe’s Hospital and, Mr. Speaker, they’ve done a great job on the 

recruitment side. And as well, Mr. Speaker, we were pleased to 

announce that a new CT [computerized tomography] scanner 

will be located in St. Joe’s Hospital, beginning in 2015. And 

that will go a long way to improving access to citizens of 

southeast Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the committee is now amalgamated with the St. 

Joseph’s Hospital Foundation. So really today is among their 

last duties as a committee and, Mr. Speaker, if I can, on behalf 

of the Government of Saskatchewan, I want to thank them for 

their work on their committee and the work that they will be 

continuing to do with the amalgamated foundation. 

 

I know that they have a great heart and a great passion for 

serving the people of not just the Estevan area, but the entire 

southeast Saskatchewan, to help make that area the best place to 

work, live, and raise a family, Mr. Speaker. And so I want to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly and thank them for 

all their good work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Health minister in welcoming these leaders from the 

Southeast who are at the Assembly today, and thank them for 

their contributions over the years. And I know what they will 

continue to do in the years to come, Mr. Speaker, so I’d like to 

add my voice to those words. 

 

I would also, Mr. Speaker, through you and to all members, I 

would like to introduce two individuals seated in your gallery 

and that’s Jeff Harms and his son Isaiah Harms who are with us 

here today. They wanted to see the proceedings. They currently 

live in the Stewart Valley area. Isaiah is a grade 8 student and 



6172 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

wanted to see what happens at the legislature, so he came today 

to see it first-hand. I should also note, Mr. Speaker, that Isaiah 

is an accomplished runner, specializing in 5-K [kilometre] runs. 

He has enjoyed that pursuit over the last year. So, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Jeff and Isaiah to 

the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to join the Minister of Health in welcoming the delegation 

from Estevan and also echo what the minister has said 

regarding their contributions to that community. 

 

They have been just unbelievably willing to step up to the plate, 

whether it is for doctor recruitment, for Estevan getting the CT 

[computerized tomography] scan, and also in areas outside of 

health care. When we had the big flood of 2011, there wasn’t 

one of these gentlemen that didn’t step up to the plate, and they 

are just such an asset to the community, and I’m so proud to 

have worked with them in all these areas. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 

Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 

fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. And 

we know that in September this year, this government walked 

away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable housing 

project in Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take 

control of and then rent the units at full market price. When 

asked how to explain this, the government could allow a private 

developer to back out of a fixed-price contract without any 

penalties, the Minister of Social Services said, and I quote: 

“You’re assuming there’s these desperate homeless people,” 

showing how disconnected this government is from the realities 

within our communities. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 

in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 

now allowing private developers with whom the 

government has close relationships to default on 

fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again 

in the Assembly here today to present petitions as it relates to 

the unsafe conditions created by that government on Dewdney 

Avenue and their failure to act in a way that mitigates and 

responds to those urgent safety concerns. Of course the timely 

completion of the west bypass is critically important, but urgent 

and immediate actions are required by this government. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents here in 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand in my place to present a petition to build a 

second bridge for Prince Albert. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 

serves central and northern Saskatchewan, and as well as 

the city of Prince Albert, will receive a commitment from 

senior governments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

from Moose Jaw and Saskatoon, and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term care. The 

petitioners point out that many aspects of long-term care are 

deteriorating under this government, that the Government of 

Saskatchewan actually recognize the need for safe staffing 

levels to provide hands-on care to residents. The petitioners 

point out that the government is failing to fix the basics in 

long-term care, including rejecting the further urgent requests 

from long-term care facilities for increased and needed staffing 

levels. They talk about the government having removed the 

regulations requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, 

resulting in neglect. 

 

The petitioners also point out that chronic understaffing in 

long-term care facilities results in unacceptable conditions, 

including unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a 

rise in physical violence amongst residents, and that fixing the 

basics and achieving real improvement in long-term care 

services requires a firm commitment to actually listen to 

front-line health care workers, residents, and their families as 

opposed to failing to properly listen to their concerns. I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6173 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: to cause the government to commit 

to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 

members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 

numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 

number of residents under their care in long-term care 

facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents from Swift 

Current. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of better health care in 

Saskatchewan. The petitioners, in the prayer that reads as 

follows: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

provincial government to recognize health care is getting 

worse under its watch and begin fixing the basics by 

listening to health care workers, patients, and their 

families; properly maintaining hospitals and care facilities; 

and focusing its resources on front-line care instead of 

spending millions on its lean pet project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from 

Langenburg and Melville. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to present 

a petition from people who are opposed to correctional service 

job privatization. The government wants to privatize food 

services in the corrections and young offender facilities, but the 

government is failing to listen to the front-line food service 

workers who have many concerns about what the impact will be 

with the loss of these jobs on the correctional system and on the 

local communities. And so in the prayer the petitioners: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan may be pleased to cause the government to 

cancel its privatization in the corrections and young 

offender facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

honour to rise and present a petition condemning this 

government’s dangerous smart meter program. The folks at 

SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] just want to bring to the 

attention of the Assembly the following: this government knew 

about major safety concerns related to its smart meter project. It 

ignored those safety concerns, plowed ahead with the program, 

and the safety of Saskatchewan families was put at significant 

risk. So the prayer reads as follows. The petitioners: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

provincial government to take responsibility for its failure 

to act on readily available information about safety 

concerns with its smart meter program, including through 

the immediate resignation of the Minister Responsible for 

SaskPower and a fully independent inquiry into the 

concerning chain of events that severely compromised the 

safety of Saskatchewan families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this are from Warman, 

Kamsack, Vanscoy, Saskatoon, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Saskatchewan Intercultural Association 

Celebrates 50th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 12th, I, 

along with the member from Saskatoon Southeast, had the 

pleasure to attend the 50th anniversary of the Saskatchewan 

Intercultural Association. The celebration involved a delicious 

multicultural supper, unveiling of their new logo, and some 

great live entertainment by Delhi 2 Dublin. It was a fun night, 

and it’s so important to celebrate the incredible work of SIA 

[Saskatchewan Intercultural Association] over the past 50 years. 

 

SIA took time to recognize those who made an outstanding 

contribution to our community. They were: for volunteerism 

and leadership, Peter Sen; for language and education, Eleanor 

Shia; arts and culture, Terri Rau; intercultural relations, Ila 

Sarkar; organizational work, Nayyar Javed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the SIA is a non-profit organization that provides 

services for immigrants and refugees in Saskatoon. Their vision 

is to “. . . [make] a difference by upholding human dignity and 

promoting harmony among all people,” and their mission is “To 

recognize and support the right of every cultural group and 

individual to retain and develop their distinctive cultural 

identity, language and arts without political or social 

impediment — for the mutual benefit of all citizens.” SIA has 

clients from over 50 different countries and run a number of 

different employment programs, education programs, and 

performing arts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking SIA 

for all the very important work they do in Saskatoon and 

congratulate them on 50 years. We hope to see their work 

continue for another 50 years and more. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Counsel for Children Program 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, while it is often said that children 

are our future, we less often recognize how important it is to 

allow children to be part of the decisions that will shape the 



6174 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

future they are to inherit. 

 

Roughly 15 years ago, Canada became a signatory to one of the 

most important human rights treaties in modern history, the UN 

[United Nations] Convention on the Rights of the Child. The 

spirit of the convention recognized that while children require a 

safe and nurturing upbringing, they are also unique individuals 

with the right to exercise as much agency over their future as 

they are capable. 

 

I am pleased to rise today in recognition of the action our 

government is taking to achieve the aspirations of the 

convention and to provide further support for children in our 

province who are in need of assistance. Today marks the 

official launch of the counsel for children program announced 

in our government’s last budget. It is a means to ensure children 

in protection hearings can have access to legal counsel as 

decisions are being made about their future. For those children 

involved, a protection hearing can determine matters as 

important as where and with whom they are going to live. 

 

To everyone who helped bring this program to fruition, 

including our partners in the courts, Pro Bono Law 

Saskatchewan, the child and youth advocate office, and the 

Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee, you have the 

Assembly’s thanks for your dedicated efforts. With your help, 

some of our most vulnerable children in our province have been 

given a voice. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Creighton Kodiaks Win Championship 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 

recognize the accomplishments of the Creighton Kodiaks, a 

football team in the Cumberland constituency. 

 

On November 1st the northern Saskatchewan six-man football 

league held its championship game in Prince Albert. The final 

was between the defending 2013 champions, the Pinehouse 

Lakers, and the Creighton Kodiaks. Both teams had gone 

unbeaten all season. The Creighton Kodiaks defeated the Lakers 

67 to 41. There were more than 200 fans, faithful fans from 

Creighton, that made the 400-kilometre trek to Prince Albert to 

watch the Kodiaks play. 

 

One of the top players in the game was Creighton’s own Evan 

Linnick, who had torn up the league all year with touchdowns, 

field goal kicks. During the championship game, Evan scored 

five touchdowns, eight kicking converts, and one field goal to 

help the Kodiaks capture their first Ralph Pilz Trophy. 

 

I would like to commend the coaching staff of the Creighton 

Kodiaks: Jason Straille, Ryan Karakochuk, parents, and staff at 

Creighton Community School for showing so much pride in 

your community football team. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating all the players, 

coaches, volunteers, community members whose hard work 

helped to make the league championship a reality. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

National Conference on Women in Engineering 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

month on behalf of the Minister of Advanced Education, I had 

the honour of attending the opening session of the National 

Conference on Women in Engineering held in Saskatoon. This 

is a national student-run event organized annually by the 

Canadian Federation of Engineering Students. 

 

Since its inaugural session in 1990, itself a response to the 

tragic shootings in École Polytechnique in Quebec, this 

conference has grown to recognize the need for greater diversity 

within engineering, science, technology, and mathematics. This 

year the conference theme was clear and concise: Level the 

Playing Field. This was the first time that Saskatchewan has 

hosted this national conference. 

 

I’d like to extend a special thank you to the University of 

Saskatchewan’s Jessica Geddert, Chair of the organizing 

committee, as well as members of her committee and other 

champions and sponsors that made the conference possible. 

Over 140 undergraduate student leaders from across the country 

visited Saskatoon to participate in the conference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this wasn’t just about talking about the barriers 

women face in science, technology, engineering, and 

mathematics, but through collaboration and with courage it was 

about acting to overcome these obstacles. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to invite all members to join me in recognizing the hard work of 

this year’s conference organizers as well as the dedication of all 

conference participants in making vital progress on this 

important issue. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Random Acts of Kindness Day and Giving Tuesday 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The spirit of 

generosity from the people of Saskatchewan is never more 

evident than this time of year. I, along with approximately 20 

businesses, volunteer groups, countless individuals, recently 

had the pleasure of taking part in South Saskatchewan 

Community Foundation Random Acts of Kindness Day here in 

Regina. On this day, we handed out coffee to strangers heading 

to work, dropping off supplies to charities such as the Humane 

Society. We plugged expired meters in downtown Regina in an 

attempt to encourage people to pay it forward in our city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in that same spirit, today Regina has proclaimed 

December 2nd, 2014 as Giving Tuesday. Giving Tuesday is a 

new movement promoting contributions and volunteerism to 

charities. The initiative was first launched in the United States 

in 2012 and came to Canada for the first time last year. 

Described by some by opening day of giving season, Giving 

Tuesday is a goal of acknowledging the importance of giving, 

improving attitudes, and increasing volunteerism. 

 

The success of Giving Tuesday depends on the support and the 

involvement of charities, families, businesses, and individuals 

to transform the way people think about, talk about, and 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6175 

participate in the giving season. Mr. Speaker, I encourage all 

members to join with the people of Saskatchewan in taking part 

in this important movement, Giving Tuesday, by donating to 

volunteering with many of Saskatchewan’s charitable and 

non-profit organizations. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Remembering Wolfgang Langenbacher 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to mark the passing of a trusted adviser, loving father, and 

husband. Wolfgang Gerhard Langenbacher passed away 

surrounded by his family on November 18th. 

 

Wolfgang was born in Bamberg, Germany. In 1956, Wolfgang 

emigrated to Cleveland, Ohio and graduated from Kent 

University in 1971. By 1975, he relocated to Regina after 

finishing studies at UBC [University of British Columbia]. 

 

Wolfgang had a deep appreciation and love of the public 

service. Spending almost 40 years in various positions, he could 

always be trusted to give an honest opinion and sound advice. 

Wolfgang started his career in the provincial Department of 

Revenue, eventually moving to the city of Regina’s 

comptroller’s office where he became the Auditor General. 

From 1998 to 2005, he acted as Dean of Business and 

Agriculture at what was then known as SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. However, my 

colleagues on this side of the House know Wolfgang best for 

his provincial public service. Wolfgang’s last positions were in 

the Premier’s Executive Council and in the Ministry of Social 

Services. 

 

Although Wolfgang officially retired last December, he was 

still teaching M.B.A. [Master of Business Administration] 

classes at the University of Regina in the Faculty of Business. 

 

Our thoughts and prayers are with Wolfgang’s family, 

particularly his wife of 45 years, Linda, and his sons, Eric and 

Mark, and his grandchildren. Mr. Speaker, I would welcome all 

members to join me in recognizing Wolfgang Langenbacher’s 

tireless contribution to his community and this province. 

 

Today I say goodbye to a mentor and a trusted friend. Wolfgang 

may be gone, but he will never be forgotten. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Headstart on a Home for First-Time Homeowners 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform 

members about Maple View Condominiums, a new Headstart 

on a Home project that opened in Moose Jaw on November 28. 

This 12-unit development will give Moose Jaw families and 

individuals the opportunity to own their own home. 

 

I’m proud that our government’s program has provided almost 

$1.8 million in financing for support for these homes. Most 

importantly, we have worked with our partners, Westcap 

Management Ltd. and Schultz Electric, to make this project 

happen. The aim of this program is to increase the availability 

of entry-level housing across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the program is working. These projects have been 

delivered in 16 communities around the province, including 

Moose Jaw. They have collected statistics that show 93 per cent 

of the purchasers have been first-time home buyers. When we 

started this program in 2011, we expected about 1,000 new 

entry-level homes would be built throughout Saskatchewan in 

five years. To the end of October 2014, they have financed 

1,521 new housing units, either completed or under 

construction in three years. An additional 354 units have been 

approved for financing but are not yet under construction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by working together to provide high-quality 

housing at an affordable price, we’re keeping Saskatchewan 

strong and moving the community of Moose Jaw forward. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Fatality in Care Facility and 

Provision of Long-Term Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Lorne Rowell’s daughter recently wrote to the 

Premier: 

 

On April 23, 2014, while a resident in a long-term care 

facility in Saskatoon, my father Norman Lorne Rowell 

was dropped on his head on a concrete floor from several 

feet up. Very painful complications from his injuries led to 

his death on May 16th, 2014. 

 

Others are coming forward about the injuries and deaths 

their family members have experienced which were 

caused by preventable incidents in long-term care 

facilities. I wonder if you truly know the extent of this 

problem. 

 

So on behalf of Lorne Rowell’s family, that’s my question for 

the Premier: does he truly know the extent of this problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, first and foremost, on behalf 

of the government to Mr. Rowell’s family, we extend our 

sympathies, Mr. Speaker. And we express our deep, deep 

concern around the incident surrounding his untimely and 

premature passing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also say to the hon. member in direct answer to his 

question and hers as well — and I think the Minister of Health 

has had a discussion with his daughter later last week, and I’ll 

defer to him to answer the specific questions around the case — 

but to her and to the Leader of the Opposition, yes we have 

been very aware of the importance of reducing all incidents like 

this. Falls are obviously a little bit different than what we’re 

talking about here, but in that particular case we have 

committed to a significant system-wide effort to reduce falls in 

our long-term care facilities, which are down by 25 per cent. 

 



6176 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

We have committed additional front-line staff, Mr. Speaker; 

there’s no question about it — more care aids, more LPNs 

[licensed practical nurse], more nurses, significantly more 

nurses of all designation, 2,400 plus. Mr. Speaker, obviously in 

this particular area there is great work to do, more work to do. 

We’re going to take that work on very seriously, as we have in 

the past, with respect to the deployment of more resources and 

some emergency funding, emergent funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this particular case with these circumstances, I 

know the minister has been in contact with the family and 

wishes to look at them, at this particular incident very 

specifically. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I appreciate that the Health minister spoke with 

Lorne’s daughter. But she drove down from Saskatoon today to 

Regina because she wants the government to know the full 

extent of the problem, and she wants things to change so other 

families don’t have to go through what hers has experienced. 

 

Lorne was dropped on his head while being transferred from his 

bed to his chair. The lower part of his body remained in the 

sling, but he hit his head on the concrete floor. No ambulance 

was called, and the family was not notified. When the family 

showed up later that same day and saw that he was injured, 

there was confusion amongst the staff, and the family was told 

he had simply fallen out of bed. It wasn’t until the following 

day that they finally learned the truth, that he had been dropped 

on his head on the concrete floor. Is the Premier seeing the 

same pattern that I’m seeing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, additionally, in terms of 

information for members about this specific case, the Health 

minister has referred it specifically to the health care 

ombudsman, now in the Office of the Provincial Ombudsman, a 

position that our government has resourced.  

 

The ombudsman is looking at a number of incidents, I would 

expect and has, I think, made it known publicly that she will be 

reporting back to government on the specific cases. And if there 

are other systemic issues to be dealt with, I think we’ll be 

hearing from her on those as well. And, Mr. Speaker, we would 

want her to look specifically at this case that’s been raised to try 

to get answers that are deserved by the family and by all those 

who have loved ones in long-term care in this province. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 

 

Mr. Broten: — Sadly, Mr. Speaker, we have seen a pattern in 

different locations, in different facilities across the province. 

The night of Lorne’s fall, his family found a broken tooth in his 

bedding. And the night before he died, his family discovered 

that he actually had broken three teeth in that fall. So for 23 

days, Lorne had multiple undiscovered broken teeth as a result 

of being dropped on his head. I can’t imagine how painful that 

would have been for him, especially when you think of the 

other injuries that he sustained in that fall. His daughter says 

that her dad was in total agony. 

 

So again to the Premier: not on isolated incidents, but has he 

seen the same pattern that I’m seeing? And what is he going to 

do about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

certainly my heart goes out to the family of Lorne in this 

situation. My heart also goes out to the employees that would 

have been providing care for Lorne when this incident took 

place. I can’t imagine how they must feel, Mr. Speaker, to see 

somebody that they’re entrusted to care for have such an 

accident as this was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health has been in contact with the 

family as well as the health region. The health region has been 

in contact with the facility, Mr. Speaker. There have been some 

changes that have taken place in that facility that I can outline in 

my further answers that will, Mr. Speaker, hopefully not see 

these types of cases take place. 

 

We are also, Mr. Speaker, working with Saskatoon Health 

Region to ensure that the patient safety department of that 

region does review and investigate this case to determine what 

in fact took place, Mr. Speaker, and to make a determination 

around critical incident because it wasn’t reported as one when 

it first took place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can also inform the House that the facility is 

ensuring that all staff have training so that they know that the 

family has to be notified when a fall does take place in 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker. That is absolutely essential. It 

didn’t happen in this case, but the family must be notified. And 

that training is ongoing at that facility, and we’re going to 

remind all facilities that that has to take place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this was not an accident, but this 

was a preventable incident, and the family’s been very, very 

clear and strong on that point. In her email to the Premier, the 

Health minister, she said, “If those of us who have gone through 

these horrific experiences don’t let you know, how many more 

will go through this next?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, she’s concerned about the lack of open 

communication with family members. And she’s concerned 

about the lack of communication between staff at shift change 

because she was the one who regularly had to brief the staff on 

her dad’s injuries. Not once did she find a new nurse or care aid 

that was fully informed of her father’s injuries or the 

preventable incident that caused them. And she is incredibly 

concerned about short-staffing. She even says that her family 

not only went to the facility every day to help, but they also 

hired private help to ensure that their dad was getting the care 

that he needed. 

 

My question is for the Premier. And again, there’s a pattern 

here: how many of these concerns does he need to hear from 

different facilities all over the province before he will admit that 

there is a crisis in seniors’ care? 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6177 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, we take all of these 

types of concerns very seriously, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s why in this particular case my office has already been in 

touch with the office of the health ombudsman that is housed in 

the Office of the Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker. But we’re also . . . 

have been in touch with the region, Mr. Speaker, who are 

working closely with the facility to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that 

there is orientation that is put in place and proper training for 

the use of lifts and transferring, lifting, and repositioning for all, 

Mr. Speaker, staff and students that do work in facilities on 

practicums. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also ensuring that all of our facilities know 

the requirements when it comes to ensuring that staff members 

are up to date in terms of a resident’s needs, Mr. Speaker, 

whether that be medication, whether that be other types of 

needs, Mr. Speaker. But we’re also ensuring, Mr. Speaker, that 

our facilities and our staff know that in the event of a fall — 

and yes, they are preventable, Mr. Speaker, and we’re seeing a 

25 per cent reduction in falls — but every one of them has a 

potential for harm, Mr. Speaker, and the staff need to notify the 

family when a fall does take place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — In the government’s Throne Speech when it 

laid out its plans for the coming year, there was absolutely 

nothing new for seniors’ care. The government just patted itself 

on the back for its horribly inadequate one-time payment fund 

from last year and pretended that all is well. And the Health 

minister, Mr. Speaker, has told the media that there are no other 

plans for seniors’ care. I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the 

ombudsman is looking into major problems in care facilities, 

but we cannot keep waiting for action to happen and for seniors 

to be safe. 

 

Lorne’s daughter is here today because she wants the 

government to know the full extent of the problem, that there is 

a crisis in seniors’ care that needs to be taken seriously. To the 

Premier: will he at least recognize that these are not isolated 

incidents? Will he admit that these problems are widespread 

and that there is a major crisis in seniors’ care in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government has acknowledged that we 

need to make improvements within long-term care for the care 

that we provide to our residents. Mr. Speaker, that’s why, Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite will know that the number of 

residents that had experienced a fall in long-term care was as 

high as a 56 or 5,800 a year in long-term care through the years 

that we’ve gone back to look at — through 2005, 2006, 2007, 

2008, Mr. Speaker — and that’s why the system under the 

former minister wanted to make this a priority. In 2010 a falls 

collaborative was put in place, and since that time the number 

of falls have been reduced by about 25 per cent each and every 

year. And we’re sustaining that, Mr. Speaker, but we know that 

we need to do more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this facility itself has seen an over 60 per cent 

increase in resources from the Government of Saskatchewan. It 

has seen increase in full-time equivalent positions. and through 

the Urgent Issues Action Fund, Mr. Speaker, this facility has 

received 13 new lifts to help in the repositioning and the 

transferring of residents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when a fall does take place, we know that 

there are serious consequences when that happens, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why we take these seriously. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, 

we are investigating through the region, as well as now through 

the ombudsman, what happened in the situation and why the 

proper protocols weren’t followed when the fall did in fact take 

place, Mr. Speaker. And those will help to inform us so we can 

not see these situations in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, sadly we have seen a pattern with 

incident after incident in location after location in a variety of 

facilities throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. And we see the 

government continuing with an approach where there’s patting 

themselves on the back, Mr. Speaker, while there remains a 

crisis in seniors’ care. 

 

My question again, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will he 

recognize that these are not isolated incidents, that these are part 

of a pattern, and that there is a crisis in seniors’ care here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I will say that we are not in 

this province alone when it comes to jurisdictions across this 

country that are looking for ways to improve seniors’ care for 

the people that we provide care for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, I would say that there’s no 

patting on the back, Mr. Speaker. I’m simply referring to the 

actions that we have taken to this point and, Mr. Speaker, I 

think which shows that the government is serious about this 

issue, that this is a priority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that this government would have put 

in funding in place for the regional health authorities to hire 750 

additional full-time equivalent positions into long-term care if 

we didn’t think that it was needed, if we didn’t think that, Mr. 

Speaker, it was needed to address concerns. It’s why, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government did put in place $10 million in 

in-year money last year, Mr. Speaker, something I’m not aware 

had ever been done in terms of the long-term care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Health Region, where this facility is 

located, received nearly $2 million for 130 ceiling tracks. It also 

received $560,000 for 56 total lifts, Mr. Speaker, as well as 

dollars for improved staffing levels at a number of facilities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is no patting on the back. This is our 

response to these types of issues. We’ve acknowledged that 

there’s more work to be done. We’ve acknowledged that there’s 

more training that needs to be done, Mr. Speaker. We are 

implementing some of that, Mr. Speaker, currently and we will 

always look to see how we can improve seniors’ care in this 

province. 



6178 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Agreement with Smart Meter Manufacturer 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we weren’t happy with this 

government’s decision to accept a store credit from the failed 

smart meter manufacturer, but the government repeatedly said 

that if things don’t work out with Sensus, we’ll get all of our 

money back. But in committee last night, SaskPower officials 

contradicted that. They were clear that we won’t get a single 

cent of that credit back if we choose to go with another 

manufacturer. They said that with the SaskPower minister 

sitting right there beside them. 

 

I had a discussion with the acting SaskPower CEO this 

morning, in which he again confirmed that in almost every 

scenario, we won’t get a single cent back. To the SaskPower 

minister: how can he explain that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

developing quite a reputation around .this building for coming 

into this Assembly and presenting half the story. The member 

also, as we know, as we all know, has attributed statements to 

people that never happened in this Assembly. In addition to 

that, now the member opposite wants to take out of context the 

comments that were made by SaskPower officials in the 

committee last evening. It’s not very fitting for this Assembly, 

but I’m sure she will press on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When the agreement was struck in September, Mr. Speaker, the 

president of SaskPower could not have been more definitive 

when he said, Mr. Speaker: “If they [Sensus] are not able to 

produce a meter that’s acceptable to SaskPower or independent 

specifications, they will pay us $18 million in cash.” There was 

a follow-up question from a reporter, “So you have a deal that 

outlines that?” And the response from the SaskPower president 

was “Yes.” 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the reality. According to 

that settlement agreement, SaskPower has to work with Sensus 

to establish the specifications for the new meter. And the only 

way we will get any of the $18 million in credit back is if 

Sensus fails to meet those technical specifications, the same 

technical specifications that Sensus is involved in creating. 

That’s the only scenario in which we can walk away from 

Sensus and get our credit back. 

 

If, on the other hand, Sensus claims they’re able to meet the 

technical specifications but SaskPower deems it a risk to keep 

working with them and chooses to go with another 

manufacturer, we’ll lose every single penny of that credit. To 

the SaskPower minister: will he admit that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, what the agreement outlines 

is is that should SaskPower, through the Sensus situation, if 

there is a meter that does not meet the specifications and is 

independently evaluated by someone like united Underwriters 

Lab, if that is not the case, Mr. Speaker, then SaskPower would 

receive all of its money back, Mr. Speaker. If they’re able to 

create a meter that has independent verifications, SaskPower 

would take a look at using that meter in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

It would be tested under the most rigorous testing that possibly 

can be done right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is 

the way the deal was structured, and it is a good deal for the 

people of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — This whole dragging out the truth bit by bit is 

getting incredibly tiresome. Earlier this session we even had the 

Premier arguing the SaskPower minister didn’t know he was 

being asked for the full truth so he delivered the truth on a 

go-forward basis. And even in committee last night we 

apparently didn’t get the full truth yet again. 

 

We have many, many more questions about this smart meter 

fiasco, and Saskatchewan people deserve answers. So my 

question’s for the Premier. Since we didn’t get complete and 

accurate answers last night, will the government agree to 

reconvene the Crown and Central Agencies Committee so that 

the appropriate detailed questions can be asked of the 

SaskPower minister and his officials? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, obviously this deal was made 

with the best of intentions by SaskPower with respect to the 

taxpayers’ dollars. There was $24 million of cash that was 

repaid to SaskPower immediately. There was $18 million at 

credit, Mr. Speaker. There was $5 million for research and 

development of a meter that meets the standards for our 

province for the difficult climatic conditions that we face here 

in Saskatchewan. All of the money is being returned to the 

province of Saskatchewan, which of course is in sharp contrast, 

Mr. Speaker, to any deal that the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

have ever struck in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you look at, if you look at, for example, when this, when the 

NDP opposite, as an example, Mr. Speaker, as an example, 

when they decided that they were going to go into the potato 

business here in Saskatchewan, what did they do? What did 

they do, Mr. Speaker? They said to the world then, they said to 

the world that they were going to create an industry here in 

Saskatchewan. And what did we find out, Mr. Speaker? There 

was never one NDP potato chip or French fry ever created, and 

thankfully so. 

 

The Speaker: — You know, when the members ask the 

question, you would think they would want to hear the 

response. So please try to restrain yourselves and listen. I 

recognize the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That goes for both 

sides. I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is really unbelievable 

here today. Time and time again, the Premier, the Deputy 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6179 

Premier, and of course the SaskPower minister have all 

repeatedly said that if things don’t work out, we’ll get the 18 

million store credit back from Sensus. But now we know that’s 

simply not true. My question to the Premier: why did he say 

we’d get the money back from Sensus if that’s not the case? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, when 

was asked about this incident, was asked around what would he 

do differently, what would he do differently if the shoe was on 

the other foot? And the member opposite was, he’s quick to 

criticize the smart meter program, but once again it’s the same 

old NDP criticism without providing any alternative. What he 

said, Mr. Speaker, was, those are technical questions that 

politicians wouldn’t be in a position to be directing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So on one hand, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite says this 

side of the House should correct this situation. We should be 

aware of every single part of the deal. And we are, Mr. Speaker: 

a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. But when he is 

asked for an alternative, he ducks and says, we don’t provide 

those because I’m just a politician. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the 

Premier. And you know, I think we have to put in context that 

the guy that’s responding is the one that pretended that he 

wasn’t aware of safety issues that we learned he was fully 

briefed on a full two years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The only way we get money back from this failed manufacturer 

is if they don’t meet the technical specifications that they 

themselves are helping to establish. This is sort of like paying 

John Black to help develop a lean project, paying him to pitch 

himself and then pretending it’s an open competition. It’s a 

sham, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the Premier: will he admit that the only way we get any 

money back from Sensus is if they can’t deliver on the technical 

specifications they themselves are a part of developing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, isn’t that what we’re trying to 

accomplish here? Isn’t that what we’re trying to do, is to put in 

place a meter that meets the needs of the Saskatchewan climatic 

conditions here in our province? And as a result of the deal 

that’s been put in place, if we are going to use any kind of a 

meter in the future, it will have to be verified by a third party 

independent evaluation team like the Underwriters or the 

Canadian Standards Association, a group like that that would be 

put in place to evaluate any kind of a meter that would be used 

in the future. And that is exactly what we have done, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to this agreement. 

 

Of course which again, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the member 

opposite and their team over there in terms of the type of deals 

that they have structured for the people of Saskatchewan, we’ll 

look at a few more if you like, Mr. Speaker. For example, they 

lost $8 million in bingo. How do you possibly lose money in 

bingo, Mr. Speaker? You put a prize up, and then you sell 

tickets to it, and then you have a bingo raffle. Everybody gets 

an opportunity. It’s only the NDP that can lose money in bingo, 

Mr. Speaker. And then if you look down . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that government 

knowingly strapped dangerous meters to the homes of 

Saskatchewan people and have wasted their money. And now 

today it’s a great big joke? They should be ashamed of 

themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s get this straight. The Sensus 3.2 meters were fire-prone 

duds, but Sensus promised the government that the 3.3 versions 

would be so much better, and the government simply believed 

that. Sensus 3.3 meters turned out to be fire-prone duds, but 

Sensus promised the government that the next version would be 

so much better, and if only the government would give them $5 

million and an $18 million store credit. And again, this 

government believed them. 

 

And contrary to everything that the Premier and Deputy 

Premier and the SaskPower minister were saying, we know now 

that we won’t be getting that money back. To the Premier: why 

wasn’t he just upfront with Saskatchewan people? Why won’t 

he put Saskatchewan people first? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, what should be embarrassing 

in this Assembly is the track record of the members opposite 

when they were in government. And we’ll just go down the list, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s example after example of when they were 

in charge, of how they handled these types of situations. They 

lost $15 million in Channel Lake, a SaskPower . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If I have to, I will start naming names. 

So please listen to the answers to the questions you asked. I 

recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, their 

track record is one of the complete failure here in the province 

of Saskatchewan. When they were in charge of SaskPower, they 

lost an additional $2 million in a power scheme in Guyana, of 

all places, Mr. Speaker. Then they took their hand to Chicago 

and went in with a company called NST Chicago and lost $16 

million in that venture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then they decided they’d go over to Newfoundland and take a 

chance at business there, and they lost an additional $9.4 

million of taxpayers’ money. And then they went down to 

Atlanta, Mr. Speaker. And what happened in Atlanta? They lost 

$24.7 million on Retx.com company, Mr. Speaker. In Nashville 

they lost 6.7. In Clickabid they lost $3 million . . . 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 171 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 



6180 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 171, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved first reading of Bill No. 171, The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 172, 

the naturopathy Act, The Naturopathic Medicine Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 172, The Naturopathic Medicine Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 

report that it has considered certain supplementary estimates 

and to present its 10th report. I move: 

 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone has 

moved: 

 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

I recognize the Chair of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 

been, that it has considered certain supplementary estimates to 

present its sixth report. I move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Human Services: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

I recognize the Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report that it has 

considered certain supplementary estimates and to present its 

seventh report. I move: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6181 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

I recognize the chairman of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 

considered certain supplementary estimates and to present its 

sixth report. I move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:29 until 14:59.] 

 

The Speaker: — On the motion moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies, motion 

reads: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 46] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Wyant Duncan Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Reiter Toth Huyghebaert 

Doherty Moe Docherty 

Campeau Heppner Cheveldayoff 

Harrison Tell Ottenbreit 

Norris Hart Kirsch 

Bjornerud Brkich Makowsky 

Weekes Cox Draude 

Wilson Marchuk Ross 

Bradshaw Michelson Merriman 

Hutchinson Young Jurgens 

Steinley Hickie Lawrence 

Tochor Parent Phillips 

Doke   

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 9] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 

Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 

46; those opposed, 9. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I ask for leave to introduce a motion regarding the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

a leave to introduce a motion regarding the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Reappointment of Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I move: 

 

That the Hon. Ronald Barclay, Q.C., of the city of Regina 

in the province of Saskatchewan, be reappointed to a 

second term as the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

pursuant to section 18 of The Members’ Conflict of 

Interest Act. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the Hon. Ronald Barclay, Q.C., of the city of Regina 

in the province of Saskatchewan, be reappointed to a 

second term as Conflict of Interest Commissioner pursuant 

to section 18 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



6182 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 528 through 551. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 

to questions 528 to 551. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Principal Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — The committee will commence. The business 

before the committee is the resolution. I call on the Minister of 

Finance to move his resolution. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chair. Mr. Chair, I would like to move the following resolution: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2015, the sum of $157,479,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2015, the sum of $157,479,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I 

move that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to a certain resolution and ask for leave to 

sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to 

sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It has been moved by 

the Minister of Finance that the committee rise and that the 

Chair report that the committee has agreed to certain resolutions 

and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I move that the resolution be now read 

the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolution. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 173 — The Appropriation Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 173, The Appropriation Act, 

2014 (No. 2) be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 173, The Appropriation Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — By leave of the Assembly and under rule 

32(1)(e), I move that the bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6183 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. It has been 

moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 173, The 

Appropriation Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read a second and third 

time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second and third reading of this bill. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. This bill, if passed, 

will replace The Fire Prevention Act, 1992 and update the powers 

and responsibilities of local fire services and the provincial fire 

service. 

 

This bill will accomplish this by doing three things. First, in 

replacing the current Act with the new Act, it will update powers, 

definitions, and other terminology to better reflect the current 

realities and requirements of the full scope of modern fire 

departments, and better support fire safety and response across the 

province. 

 

Second, it will provide local authorities, their firefighters and fire 

inspectors with more transparent rules regarding entry in situations 

involving fire, along with additional measures to prevent the 

risks of fires and other emergencies. 

 

And third, the new Act will provide the province, through the 

fire commissioner, with clear authority and greater ability to 

assist and support communities and local fire departments when 

requested or required by a fire situation or emergency event. 

 

I will briefly expand on how the new Act achieves these 

objectives. The current fire prevention Act, 1992 is dated. 

While local and provincial fire responsibilities have changed 

considerably over time, there has been very little in the way of 

amendments to the current Act since it came into force over 20 

years ago. For example as we have seen in recent months, fire 

departments now respond to industrial accidents, train 

derailments, flooding, hazardous materials spills, and other 

emergencies. They provide fire code and other bylaw 

enforcement, search and rescue services, fire prevention 

awareness, and general public safety education. 

 

The proposed new Act will first and foremost update the 

province’s fire safety legislation to be current with everyday 

fire and emergency response services, with advances in 

technology and with best practices such as incident command 

structures. It will recognize in its definitions of firefighter and 

fire safety services that today’s fire departments do more than 

put out fires. They provide the broad range of services and 

respond to the wide range of situations that I just mentioned. 

This will ensure that powers and liability protection extend to 

all of these roles and situations. 

 

In terms of liability protection, the new Act will make it clear 

that municipalities, fire departments, and all fire personnel, 

including volunteers, are legally protected whenever responding 

to a fire or emergency, including ones that are outside of their 

community. This is important for municipalities and their fire 

departments when aiding another community, when responding 

to non-fire emergencies, or when acting to prevent a fire or a 

risk. Similarly this protection will extend to the provincial fire 

commissioner, his or her deputies and provincial inspectors, and 

it will extend to any fire department called upon by the province 

to assist in a situation requiring a provincial response. 

 

The second key area of improvements in the new Act provides 

municipalities and local fire services with more transparent 

rules regarding entry in situations involving fire, along with 

additional measures to prevent the risk of fire and emergencies. 

Specifically the proposed new Act will authorize actions to 

prevent and address the imminent risk of fire or an emergency. 

The current Act focuses almost entirely on putting out fires and 

very little on preventing fires. As a result it does not provide 

adequate authority to firefighters to take pre-emptive measures 

that protect persons, property, or the environment from 

potential harm or danger. The new Act will explicitly authorize 

such measures.  

 

The proposed new Act will also provide the ability to inspect 

places open to the public without notice or warrant to better 

deal with situations such as overcrowding and hazardous 

materials. However, it will provide clear direction that a warrant 

or consent is required when entering private residential property 

for inspection or investigation purposes. This balances 

protection of public safety with the rights of property owners. 

 

The new fire safety Act will allow municipalities to register fire 

safety orders on land titles. This is something the municipal 

sector has requested to assist in compelling property owners to 

comply with these orders and to improve transparency for 

potential property buyers that a fire safety order is outstanding. 

 

The new Act will also allow municipalities to pass bylaws that 

exceed the minimum requirements of the National Fire Code. 

This was also requested by the municipal sector, particularly the 

cities, to establish standards beyond those in the code that they 

feel are necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of 

residents. However, these bylaws cannot conflict with the 

National Fire Code without provincial approval. This ensures 

the province can modify and adapt provisions of the code by 

regulation to establish province-wide standards. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The proposed new Act maintains the autonomy municipalities 

currently have to pass bylaws regarding fire service levels and 

any other fire safety and prevention matters. Most importantly, 

it maintains the autonomy municipalities currently have to 



6184 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

decide what fire services they will provide and how best to 

provide them. Whether volunteer or paid departments or shared 

services and mutual aid agreements with other municipalities 

and First Nations, the new Act ensures these are accommodated 

and not limited in any way by legislation. In fact, the new Act 

will better facilitate inclusion of First Nations, regional entities, 

and private industry in fire service agreements and 

arrangements to encourage area and intercommunity 

co-operation. 

 

While the new Act does not change the autonomy of local 

authorities regarding the fire services that they provide, it will 

introduce requirements for municipalities to report locally and 

provincially on the fire services available in their community. 

This is intended to inform residents, property owners, 

neighbouring communities, and the provinces of these services 

in order to improve accountability, mutual aid, and provincial 

support. 

 

For the province, this information will help the ministry identify 

situations where it may need to advise, assist, or respond. It will 

also help the fire commissioner identify training or 

programming supports to improve local and area capacity. The 

new Act will provide other benefits to the province, and this is 

the last key area of changes I will speak on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the province, The Fire Safety Act will provide 

clear authority to assist and support communities dealing with 

fires and related emergencies, not all fires but those that 

constitute a significant threat to public safety in which local fire 

response capacity is overwhelmed or non-existent. This is not 

clearly provided for under existing legislation. 

 

Local authorities and local fire services often request the 

province to assist or to take on a larger role when they do not 

have the capacity to adequately respond to a fire or other 

emergency event. The new Act will give the province clear 

authority to provide this assistance, such as equipment and 

resources, if a fire situation or other emergency requires this. It 

will also give the province the authority to coordinate the 

response of various fire and emergency services or to call in 

resources from other parts of the province. I want to emphasize 

that the new Act requires this be done in consultation and 

collaboration with local authorities. These provisions were 

developed with considerable consultation and collaboration 

with municipal and public safety stakeholders. 

 

Finally, for the province this bill will broaden the ability of the 

fire commissioner to advise on and recommend improvements 

to local fire services, whether volunteer or professional. It will 

allow for training guidelines and other programming to be 

developed to address gaps in firefighter capabilities and to 

support persons conducting fire investigations and inspections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, numerous meetings, presentations, and 

consultations with municipal and public safety sector 

stakeholders and associations have occurred between 2006 and 

the present to discuss and draft new fire safety legislation. This 

has involved elected municipal officials, municipal 

administrators and city managers, volunteer and professional 

firefighters, fire chiefs and fire inspectors, city solicitors, and 

other legal counsel. 

 

Stakeholders support the direction of the new legislation, 

particularly that it reflects the current realities and situations 

local fire departments deal with while retaining local autonomy 

to decide the level and type of fire services provided to 

residents. I want to thank all who have contributed to the 

development of this draft legislation over the last past number 

of years for their involvement, their patience, and their 

suggestions for improvements. 

 

In closing, the proposed new fire safety Act will better support 

municipalities and their local fire departments to respond to fire 

and emergency situations and risks. It will protect firefighters 

and improve public awareness of the fire safety services in their 

communities. And it will better enable the province and the 

ministry, through the fire commissioner, to help local 

authorities develop stronger fire safety services and better 

response capacity. And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading 

of Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m pleased to stand in my place today to give the initial 

first comments on the bill that was just introduced, Bill 170, 

The Fire Safety Act, Mr. Speaker. And just a note that the bill 

itself talks about The Fire Prevention Act and actually taking 

the old Act and replacing it with a new one, a totally new Act. 

And it’s nice to be able to listen to the minister give some 

explanatory notes as to the focus and the intent of the new Act. 

And, Mr. Speaker, certainly the notes and the information that 

he presented a while ago certainly does give us some indication 

as to what the province is planning when it comes to The Fire 

Safety Act that they’re proposing through Bill 170. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that’s really important for us as 

the opposition is to really see what bills are being brought 

forward and what’s the components of the bills and where some 

of the bills may be lacking. And certainly, as I mentioned with a 

number of the other bills, we want to make sure that there’s 

been good consultation. And we would encourage those people 

that are involved with the delivery of services such as fire 

prevention and fire preparedness, and of course to respond to 

the emergencies associated with fires, Mr. Speaker, because 

obviously this is something that has to get some very serious 

focus on and something that we need a lot of partners involved 

with. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk briefly about some of the 

partners and some of the discussions that we have had over time 

with a number of organizations such as the professional 

firefighters associations, some local mayors and chiefs, and of 

course some of the people, the front-line workers that provide 

volunteer services for the fire services and fire departments 

throughout our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really, really important is that there’s 

a couple of new twists and turns in this particular bill apart from 

the old bill. First of all, section 11 of this bill allows for the 

creation of fire chiefs in provincial and regional parks, a 

provision that did not exist in the old Act, Mr. Speaker. We 

obviously need information on that as to what the intent there 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6185 

is. Because obviously we don’t want to assume that all the fire 

protection Act guidelines and intent with this bill applies to as 

many areas and regions as possible, and parks are a big part of 

our province. So we just need to get some basic information as 

to who was consulted on that front. 

 

Again, the Professional Fire Fighters of Saskatchewan, as I 

mentioned earlier, they’ve raised a number of issues during 

their lobby day. A very informative group, very well-organized 

group, very articulate group, Mr. Speaker, and we think at the 

outset we need to compare the notes of the professional 

firefighters and also what the minister just basically explained 

to see whether it’s collaboration and corroboration on some of 

the issues that they’ve raised. 

 

And right at the outset, Mr. Speaker, we see there’s a lot of gaps 

there as well. We need to be able to identify those gaps and try 

and do justice to the Professional Fire Fighters Association in 

terms of recognizing and raising the issues that they feel this 

government has been ignoring. And there are many examples 

that they have shared with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other section that does give us some concern is 

51(e) in a sense that the bill gives cabinet many more powers to 

create regulations and provide exemptions for almost any 

provision of the Act. So here we have a minister talking about 

the importance of preparedness, the importance of awareness, 

the importance of providing good quality service, highly trained 

professional people. And then towards the end of the Act it 

basically, the minister says well, well I’m also giving powers to 

the cabinet to do what they want and to exempt many 

organizations and people from following this Act. So it’s kind 

of counterproductive, Mr. Speaker, and that’s one of the things 

we want to touch on about today as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a bit about the, you know, all 

the firefighting resources that many of our First Nations people 

struggle with. I think that’s really important because one of the 

notes that I made earlier is that we are now looking at 

provincial and regional parks being included in the Act, so 

obviously you want to see what other parts of Saskatchewan 

that may be underserved and many First Nations communities 

are underserved. 

 

We would hope, and we were hoping, that there would be some 

collaboration and discussion on that front, on certainly as a 

really critical part of this bill. Mr. Speaker, we don’t see any 

evidence of that whatsoever. And while the minister did make 

reference to First Nations partners, there was no real discussion 

as to what that partnership might entail and what the partnership 

might look like. 

 

Certainly again from this bill, Bill 170, there’s also the notes 

indicating that they wanted to update the fire safety regulations. 

They want to provide local authority with more rules and 

obviously some of the things that are very basic, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the regulations need to be more modern. The language 

needs to be more modernized, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we need to take into account some of the flooding 

challenges and the train derailments or the industrial fires that 

many of our local firefighters are dealing with because it is a 

changing environment. It is a changing world. So we need to 

incorporate all those particular aspects to the bill as we move 

forward to come up with the proper legislation to ensure that we 

prepare our firefighters. And we understand that some of the 

roles and responsibilities have dramatically changed and altered 

over time. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke briefly about liability 

protection. Obviously it’s important for local firemen and fire 

chiefs and the fire department themselves to be protected 

because obviously they are providing a service, and it is a 

protective service. So if something were to go wrong, which we 

all hope and pray it doesn’t happen, that there is some 

protection from, you know, from the liability or from a lawsuit 

for many of our local volunteer firefighters that go out there at 

great risk to themselves and possible harm to themselves, and 

yet they’re trying to do their very best under certain 

circumstances. And there may be occasion where a problem 

may exist totally beyond their doing and could result in some 

legal action. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we protect 

the firefighters on that front. 

 

So there’s a wide variety of issues that the minister spoke about. 

He spoke about the need to modernize the language, modernize 

the regulation, the need to increase our presence at the regional 

parks or provincial parks. Spoke about some of the rules and 

regulations that have changed, the importance of liability 

protection, of training, of bringing in new regulations, of 

preparing for flooding, derailments, and of course, large 

industrial fires. These are some of the things that we obviously 

have to really pay close attention to as a government and as an 

opposition, and certainly the information that we received just a 

few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice to be able to have those 

discussions, but we need the detail. 

 

We need to know what exactly is involved with the new rules 

and regulations. Are there going to be resources available to 

train some of the local firefighters or the volunteer firefighters 

throughout Saskatchewan when it comes to derailment of 

combustible goods? As we all know, there’s a lot more oil and 

gas that’s being transported by rail, in particular oil, Mr. 

Speaker. And we see the volume of railcars being used now for 

the transportation of oil, so it is certainly creating risks to a lot 

of communities when you convert that from a pipeline to rail. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had examples of that. 

 

And I’m not certain who would be the responsible party to 

ensure a lot of the communities along these train tracks or these 

train routes that they’re properly prepared in the event that there 

is a derailment, that there is potential for fire or potential for a 

large environmental catastrophe, that the local fire department 

are prepared, and they know what needs to happen. We need to 

clarify that from the discussions and observing the Act as to 

who is responsible for that training. Who’s responsible for 

paying for that training, and how are you going to qualify and to 

verify that the training is in place for all the different 

departments that may be impacted by the train derailment 

possibility? 

 

So we need those discussions, Mr. Speaker. How many 

communities are being impacted by this, in the sense of how 

many communities actually live along the rail system that 

would require this training? Are there any costs attached to 

that? We need to find this information out and find it out fairly 



6186 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

soon. 

 

And obviously SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] would have some of the 

information but, Mr. Speaker, we need certainly some 

concentration on those particular communities that live along 

the rail service. And those rail services, if they are indeed 

transporting oil through some of these communities, then these 

communities have every right to know that it’s happening. And 

they also have to make sure that their local fire department is 

trained. So there’s a lot of questions that we have in this regard 

and, Mr. Speaker, it is important. 

 

It is important that we know that the trained people that are out 

there, ready to respond to an emergency will certainly give the 

provincial government and certainly the opposition a peace of 

mind knowing that our firefighters, volunteer or paid, are really 

updated in terms of their ability to fight a wide variety of new 

fires in this day and age. And those of course could include 

large industrial fires, include things like train derailment fires, 

and so on and so forth. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So it is important that we identify which communities are at 

risk, the preparation or preparedness of each of the local 

departments. How well are they funded? How good is their 

equipment? How good is their technical knowledge of what 

they’re fighting? If we do a thorough assessment of all those 

particular departments that live along our rail system, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it would be great justice to them all if we really 

done a thorough, comprehensive study of how these 

communities are prepared and how they’re financed, if they’re 

financed well, and see if there’s any particular area that’s 

lacking. So their community and especially themselves do not 

become, are not put at risk because of poor training, poor 

equipment, or being under-resourced in any way, shape, or 

form. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is something that’s really important that we 

understand and hear from the concerned parties. Obviously as I 

mentioned, SUMA and SARM would be key players in 

determining the challenge with that. We need to see some of the 

documentation and some of the information and the 

correspondence that may have been shared with the government 

from both of these entities because they are, quite frankly, the 

municipal leaders of our province and they’re a great source of 

advice, a great partner to the Government of Saskatchewan 

with, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, they could give us some very, 

very good preliminary advice on how to make this fire Act or 

fire safety Act a lot stronger, a lot more relevant, and of course 

a lot more effective. 

 

So I would really encourage the continued dialogue with 

SUMA and SARM and other organizations that are out there, 

Mr. Speaker. It is important that we prepare them and work 

closely with them in the event that there is a catastrophe by way 

of a train derailment or some flooding or a large industrial firm. 

We think that it’s appropriate that we do this and that we need 

to make sure that they’re all prepared. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the bill, as I indicated, we looked through 

the bill fairly thoroughly and there’s a number of things that are 

lacking and missing, Mr. Speaker. And I want to make 

particular note of one typo on the very first page of the Bill 170 

where it says part II. Underneath there’s a typo in the sense of 

the letter “d” is missing from the administration title. And one 

of the things that we thought at the outset that we know that 

there are things lacking in the bill itself and because of the typo 

it really caught our attention in the sense that, what else is 

missing in terms of the actual bill itself? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a bit about our First Nations 

partners in the province of Saskatchewan. As we all know, there 

has been some very difficult challenges and times for many of 

the First Nations communities. They have always decried the 

fact that they are in need of some very good support from a 

number of organizations to understand exactly the plight and 

the danger and the threat that many First Nations communities 

face in our province because they are under-resourced in the 

sense of needing more and more support dollars for fire 

preparedness, fire prevention, and of course to be ready to 

respond to emergency situations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to share with the Assembly and with 

many of the people that are listening, a letter that was written to 

the Prime Minister a number of months ago. And this is where 

we spoke about the incredible risk and the incredible challenge 

that many First Nations in our community find themselves in 

when we talk about The Fire Safety Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is passing reference made to First Nations by the 

minister. We cannot no longer tolerate the passing reference to 

First Nations. We have to make sure that there is a concise plan, 

a real, true engagement with our First Nations leaders to ensure 

that fire safety, fire preparedness, and to minimize the loss of 

life in any part of the corner of Saskatchewan is something that 

shouldn’t be tolerated and something that needs your total 

concentration. So I go back to the typo on the first page where 

the letter “d” is missing. I hope that doesn’t represent the 

number of the other areas that we think are missing in the bill 

that it was that the minister was mistaken to not include that “d” 

in the typo but is also mistaken in not including First Nations 

protection in this provincial bill which I think that they would 

welcome and they would support if there was certain, if there’s 

incentive and there’s good collaboration and partnership to 

reduce harm or potential harm to many of our First Nations 

families throughout the province. 

 

So if we’re going to have the new Act come along and they’re 

going to have some new inclusions of powers for the cabinet, if 

they’re going to have some new inclusions for regional and 

provincial parks, Mr. Speaker, I dare say that they should also 

have inclusion on First Nations efforts at trying to strengthen 

their local firefighting and fire departments overall so that they 

can train with our local firefighters. They can train with the Fire 

Commissioner’s office. They could ramp up their ability to 

respond to a local fire. And the list goes on as to all the 

technical, legal, and financial advice that many First Nations 

fire departments need, Mr. Speaker, because obviously it is a 

crisis situation and we can no longer simply make passing 

reference to First Nations when it comes to protecting their 

particular families from the ravages of a home fire or future 

challenges when it comes to firefighting overall. 

 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6187 

I want to read for the record, Mr. Speaker, a letter sent to the 

Prime Minister of Canada. And the letter reads: 

 

Dear Prime Minister, 

 

On March 2, 2014, Iesha Rabbitskin, age 10, died in a 

house fire on Witchekan Lake First Nation, 125 kilometres 

northwest of Prince Albert. The full circumstances of this 

fire and the subsequent response to it are under 

investigation. 

 

In January of 2014, Solomon Ballantyne, age 10, and 

Josiah Ballantyne, age 9, died in a house fire on the Peter 

Ballantyne Cree Nation in northeastern Saskatchewan. The 

fire truck would not start, so efforts to fight the fire and 

save these children were hampered. 

 

Less than six months ago, in September 2013, Denasia 

Highway, age 10, perished in a house fire in Pelican 

Narrows, a member community of Peter Ballantyne Cree 

Nation. This young girl died after going back inside the 

house to ensure that her great-grandfather was no longer 

inside the burning building. 

 

We know, from a study commissioned by your 

government, that people living in First Nations 

communities are 10 times more likely to die in a house fire 

than people in the rest of Canada. This is unacceptable and 

it has to stop. 

 

The federal government needs to increase its funding to 

help First Nations get the training and equipment needed 

to effectively save lives and fight fires in their 

communities. The current program for on-reserve fire 

protection, prevention and suppression is inadequate. 

 

I respectfully ask that your government urgently fix the 

current program and provide this funding. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

Cam Broten 

Leader of the Official Opposition 

 

And Mr. Speaker, the letter was cc’d to Chief Peter Beatty of 

the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation; Chief Steven Jim of the 

Witchekan Lake First Nation; the Hon. Thomas Mulcair, MP 

[Member of Parliament] and Leader of Canada’s Official 

Opposition; Jean Crowder, MP, the critic for Aboriginal 

Affairs; myself, the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] for Athabasca; and Mr. Vermette, the MLA for 

Cumberland. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member is a veteran member, and 

I would like to remind him not to use the names of the members 

in the House. I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I was merely reading the letter 

and all that received the cc. The bottom of the letter, it 

identified which individuals received the cc of the letter, and 

that was part of the letter that I was reading. So it’s a quote 

from a document in which I made reference to the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

So I think it’s important to note that this particular letter that we 

engaged is something that needs to be incorporated. And the 

memories of the young children that perished in some of these 

fires, that were a short period of time, must not be forgotten. 

 

So the First Nations communities themselves, they obviously 

need some greater focus on providing supports for their fire 

departments. And there’s none other greater support than senior 

governments to be able to provide that support under the 

direction and guidance of First Nations leaders. We could really 

do our part to ensure that First Nations families and 

communities have adequate fire protection in their communities 

so they are able to respond to some of these fires. It is a 

situation that needs our attention. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the particular bill that we’re dealing with 

obviously spoke a bit about First Nations partners, but Bill 170 

needs to go much deeper than that to ensure that we have some 

good collaboration and corroboration with the First Nations 

leaders to talk about how we as a province can engage many 

First Nations on thoughtful dialogue as to how we could 

prepare them in the future so we don’t have tragic events that 

were identified in the letter occurring anymore on First Nations 

land. There’s simply no reason to allow that to continue, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So this is the point where I think as legislators we would 

encourage people to look at that option. We would encourage 

the minister and the government with all their resources, the 

provincial government to not simply sit on their hands and say, 

well they are a federal matter; we can’t engage. There’s got to 

be ways and means in which we could engage to ensure that we 

provide as much technical supports and advice and preventative 

advice and just generally advice overall. 

 

And when we engage with the First Nations leaders as to how 

we can, from the provincial perspective, we could assist in 

making sure some of these communities are better prepared and 

certainly are able to respond in a situation, where they’re able to 

embark on an awareness campaign to deal with the schools as 

well, to look at home inspections opportunities, just to reduce 

the threat of fires, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is what’s really, really important is that there’s ways and 

means in which this particular Act could really incorporate a 

First Nations perspective as we are bringing in new areas that 

have been under-served in the past, which include provincial 

parks and regional parks. 

 

So I think there needs to be a good compelling argument as well 

for the First Nations communities in the sense that they should 

be engaged with this process because obviously the more 

firefighters that are trained, the more fire departments that are 

prepared, and also they are trained and prepared in the most 

modern language in the most modern way would certainly 

support a lot of calls for people in First Nations communities to 

make sure their fire departments are up to snuff and that they’re 

able to respond to fires that claim so many lives of young 

children. 

 



6188 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

And that letter I wanted to read into record. And I would hope, 

Mr. Speaker, that there’s that concentrated effort by the minister 

and by the Saskatchewan Party government to be inclusive, to 

be engaging, and to make sure that they’re also effectively 

supporting and recognizing First Nations when it comes to 

firefighting services. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we had the privilege of sitting with the 

Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association, and many 

members of the firefighting association spoke highly of the 

need to be engaged with not only training and preparedness at 

their local level but, Mr. Speaker, they also talked about 

engaging the First Nations communities. And while some of the 

professional fire fighters want to go above and beyond their 

role, they really take their role seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The firefighters have obviously . . . very dedicated to their job. 

They have gone through a lot of training. They continue 

remaining to be in very good physical shape, Mr. Speaker, 

because obviously it’s a very physically demanding job, and 

they’re always alert. They’re always ready, and they’re always 

prepared to do what they have to do to save lives and save 

property and of course to serve their community. 

 

So a lot of the professional firefighters that we sat with, they 

spoke about a host of issues that were really, really important. 

And one cannot but admire, Mr. Speaker, their dedication to 

their job and certainly the fact that they want to do their job so 

well and that they don’t want to have a loss of life or nor do 

they want a loss of property on their watch. So they’re really 

dedicated, and they are prepared. And, Mr. Speaker, they will 

continue holding that torch quite high in the sense that this is a 

duty for them, and they’ve done so many things that are above 

and beyond their duty, Mr. Speaker. It is always good to be able 

to honour the Saskatchewan professional firefighters and their 

association and their members for doing a lot of great work. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the firefighters association brought up a 

number of issues that were important. And I want to say that 

they made a great connect with the opposition, and I’m sure 

they also connected with the government in the sense of making 

. . . They certainly encouraged a lot of First Nations 

participation. They were aware of the deaths, you know, and 

they were also aware of the incredible challenge that many of 

the fire departments find themselves in on First Nations land. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So they know that they could help. They know that they could 

offer good advice. They know they can offer good technical 

advice and training. They can do a lot to engage the First 

Nations community, and they’re just more than willing. They’re 

more than willing to do their part and to reach out so that from 

their perspective and from their point, they’re saying a loss of 

life in any part of Saskatchewan is unacceptable and that we 

need to do all we can to prepare every single department, 

on-reserve or non-reserve, to be able to protect children and 

families and property, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s what’s really important is that they are dedicated to a 

point where they’re not just concerned with their own local 

needs, that they look at this as a province-wide effort. And 

certainly the Professional Fire Fighters Association are more 

than willing to engage, more than willing to share the 

information they have and in any way, shape, or form more than 

willing to help. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Professional Fire Fighters Association 

brought a number of issues forward. You know, they talk about 

the number of challenges that their association finds, Mr. 

Speaker. They’ve been very, very respectful in their dialogue 

with the opposition. They have not been disrespectful to any 

other party. 

 

So they have made a number of recommendations, Mr. Speaker, 

a number of issues that they have had and will continue 

bringing forward on behalf of their members. And the 

documentation that I have in front of me, Mr. Speaker, talks 

about those issues. 

 

And I can remember having a number of discussions with the 

firefighters over time. And a lot of people may not know this, 

but when we talk about great risk to the firefighters themselves, 

at the local level, there is great risk, Mr. Speaker, because they 

have been saying something that the minister just woke up to 

today. When you talk about a new fire Act is that they’re . . . 

It’s a modern world. And to be able to fight large industrial 

fires, to be able to fight train fires, Mr. Speaker, or to be able to 

deal with some of the massive challenges that many 

communities find themselves under, whether it’s natural 

flooding as the example that I would use and, you know, they 

have used, we count on these firefighters to come to our aid. 

We count on the people that are there to help us deal with the 

crisis because many times the average person is not trained, is 

not properly equipped to deal with the crisis. So we count on 

these firefighters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s amazing. It’s actually amazing what the firefighters 

themselves are subjected to. When we talk about an example I 

would use, Mr. Speaker, and we talk about a large industrial 

fire, we don’t know what chemicals exist in that particular 

building. But the firefighters are there for one specific reason is 

to control the blaze so it’s not threatening to light other property 

and to protect human lives. And at the end of the day, the 

firefighters are the ones that go into these buildings. The 

firefighters are the ones that get subjected to many of the 

chemicals that may be burning in these particular buildings. 

They get subjected to the reaction of fire with different building 

products, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what’s happening is you’re finding over time that more and 

more and more firefighters are dealing with a wide variety of 

ailments, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s just injury, you know, as a 

result of them fighting a fire, or the more serious threat to our 

firefighters’ health is the different cancers that could occur as a 

result of the firefighters, the professional firefighters . . . that 

they’re being exposed to. 

 

And over time, Mr. Speaker, over time, there has been some 

incredible stories of how firefighters have done their service, 

have subjected their bodies to gruelling training, and then they 

enter a fire that has some chemicals or the combustion of 

different chemicals create an incredibly dire threat to their 

health. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t try and dissect what kind of fire 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6189 

they’re fighting. Obviously they do this on a large scale, but in 

terms of the minute details of what chemical is in one corner, 

what chemical is in the other corner, they don’t do a thorough 

enough analysis on all that. They just go there and fight the fire 

and they are subjected to all the different dangers that may 

occur as a result of chemicals burning. 

 

And what we’re finding now, Mr. Speaker, is that many of 

those firefighters, over time, you get subjected to that, and as 

they age, many of the cancers begin to show up. And this is a 

direct link to the job that they’ve done, a direct link to the 

chemical fires that they may have fought, a direct link to some 

of the by-products of buildings that are burning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that the evidence has shown 

that the firefighters themselves are subjected on a continual 

basis to these kind of dangerous noxious fumes that sometimes 

result in a wide variety of cancers, everything from pancreatic 

cancer to lung cancer to bladder cancer, Mr. Speaker. The list 

goes on as to the type of cancers that could be sparked as a 

result of some of the activity that a fireman is involved with, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s really, really important that the most compelling 

argument that the Professional Fire Fighters Association have 

presented time and time again is the risk and the threat to many 

of their member firefighters. It’s greater than the average 

person. And yet through it all, Mr. Speaker, they have remained 

professional in their job, dedicated to ensuring they protect lives 

and protect property to the best of their ability, Mr. Speaker. 

But when we need them, that’s important to note that senior 

governments need them as well, so it’s important to talk about 

the Professional Fire Fighters Association today because we 

want to make sure we take every opportunity to recognize the 

challenge they have and some of the issues that they have 

raised. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the other issues that they’re talking 

about when we see what they’re doing out there is to also treat 

them fairly. We know that some of the issues are around the 

proper complement of manpower. This is really important, you 

know, being treated fairly in the sense of salaries. We obviously 

know that many, many communities have different ways of 

dealing the local fire protective services, Mr. Speaker. Well we 

need to make sure that all the firefighters throughout 

Saskatchewan are treated fairly, and that certainly means 

benefits, health coverage, and of course salaries as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

These are things that just need to be aired in a sense that 

fairness is key. And we didn’t make any . . . We didn’t see any 

reference in this Bill 170 to speaking of the value and the threat 

and the dangers that many of our firefighters find themselves in 

on a regular basis, and we need to incorporate some of those 

issues when we talk about the fire Act itself.  

 

Because Bill 170, like I mentioned at the outset, they have a “d” 

missing in one of the first words in the bill. But there’s many 

other things that are missing and that includes, as I mentioned, 

due acknowledgment of what the professional firefighters are 

going through. It means to respect the challenge and the risk 

they face to their health. And it also means that you have to be 

prepared from the government perspective to do all you can to 

protect these crucial people that attend fires in our communities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to touch a bit about the 

communities themselves. When you look at the number of the 

communities all throughout the province of Saskatchewan, have 

we done a thorough analysis? Like some of the communities do 

have larger fire departments, and they do have regular training. 

But how about the smaller communities, the hamlets, the 

villages, you know, the resort communities? How are they 

prepared? Have we done a thorough analysis of their role as 

well? 

 

I know that SUMA has had these discussions as well as SARM, 

but we need to know how many communities out there that are 

not prepared. We don’t have that information. It’s important to 

note that in order for us to be able to put a new Act in front of 

the Assembly today, we should have some of the most basic 

information as to say, okay, because we have a new Act that’s 

replacing an old Act and that there’s no accompanying notes 

that talk about the issues that I think need to be included in this 

report, and that one of them of course includes to do a thorough 

assessment of what kind of preparedness model do we have in 

the smallest of our communities and the largest of our 

communities on First Nations land, Mr. Speaker, and of course 

to treat our firefighters well. 

 

So there’s a large, large area that has been omitted from the bill. 

We need some of that information and we need some of that 

collaboration from those groups to be able to determine if the 

bill meets the criteria which the minister alluded to in the sense 

of it’s a priority for them. But it was one thing to say priority, 

Mr. Speaker, but it’s certainly another thing from our 

perspective when you see the performance to meet the priority 

of, you know, of this government. They have continually shown 

that they’ve under-resourced crucial areas like firefighting 

protection, and they have not followed through and been 

thorough enough in their legislation to make sure they do 

justice to Acts of this sort. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of issues that we can and will 

speak about. And as I travel from the small northern . . . or from 

different northern communities, Mr. Speaker, I always ask 

questions about the fire departments in some of our 

communities. 

 

And I can remember when I served as the mayor of my home 

community of Ile-a-la-Crosse that we often had meetings with 

the fire department. And it took a lot of work. It took a lot of 

preparedness, you know, with the crew that was in there. And 

we’d meet with them on a regular basis just to find out if there’s 

something that they needed because we understood that they 

were underserved and that certainly that there was risk to 

families within the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. So you know, 

it’s actually an amazing thing to watch as some of the volunteer 

firefighters that are out there, they are really, truly dedicated to 

their job. It’s not just a volunteer thing that they go to a meeting 

once a month. 

 

In the event that there is a fire in the community, they know 

what to do. They’re immediately there to respond. And there 

are many, many examples I can share with you, not just in my 

home community, but the number of neighbouring communities 

in my area in which they are very serious about providing 



6190 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

top-quality fire protection services to their local fire brigade, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s something that I think we need to continue focusing 

on and to always be vigilant in the sense of ensuring that the 

local councils know that this is important. That’s why there’s a 

bit of interest that we spoke or the minister spoke about 

providing the local authority with more clearer rules, more 

definitive rules on how you can engage and support your local 

fire department. It’s important to know what those rules are. 

 

So it’s one thing, Mr. Speaker, to be critical of those that may 

not be prepared as best as they should be. But, Mr. Speaker, we 

can’t simply point fingers from the distance. We have to be 

engaging, we have to be upfront, and we also have to resource 

some of these communities. 

 

And that’s the important message I would certainly want to 

share on behalf of some of the small northern communities in 

northern Saskatchewan: to do a good, thorough assessment of 

what’s there and what they’re able to fight, and how they will 

be able to prepare in the event that there is a fire. And much 

more so, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the promise made by the, 

you know, by the minister in the sense of saying, it’s not just 

about fighting fires and being prepared and being aware and 

being fire smart and being pre-emptive in a sense of teaching 

people what to watch out for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think that this is a whole new ball game when 

you look at the preventative aspect of it. There’s so much more 

that could be done. None of the issues had been raised, you 

know, in the bill itself. It’s just been sporadic in the sense of 

naming First Nations as partners, talking about engaging or 

involving fire chiefs at the regional or provincial park level. It 

talks about powers for the cabinet. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a lot of different areas the minister spoke 

about, but we need more definitive ideas, more definitive 

examples of how they’re going to make a difference for many 

of these local fire departments that are out there. Whether 

they’re on First Nations land or whether they’re in a small 

northern community or whether in a small hamlet between two 

large centres in the South, wherever they may be, Mr. Speaker, 

we need to ensure that they are prepared as best they can, and 

they have best practices and the best information and the best 

protection of their workers, so in the event that there is a fire, 

then they know what to do and that they know that we have 

their back as they have the backs of many of our families that 

may be threatened by fire. 

 

So the bill itself has a lot of issues that we want to talk about. 

There’s much more that I wish to share in the sense of the 

northern perspective, Mr. Speaker. I know that when we have a 

fire threatening some of the northern communities, and there’s a 

number of examples — Black Lake, Stony Rapids — over the 

last number of years, when we wouldn’t mind clarifying the 

rules through this particular Act as to how we would interact 

and work with the federal government on issues such as 

evacuations of some of the communities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is what’s really, really important. Many 

of the leaders in some of these northern communities, they have 

a very difficult time. They’ve got a very difficult time in 

determining whether they want to evacuate people or not 

evacuate. It’s such a tough call for many northern leaders. So 

the net effect is that when there is a fire threat to a community, 

there was a lot of discussion around, well what is it more viable 

to do, to have the proper resourcing to fight the fire that 

threatens the community or to remove the community from the 

fire’s path? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we have to do is really start to 

determine who has that authority and who makes those 

decisions. And the reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s 

many examples that I’ll share with you as to why that’s an 

issue, is that I understand that if you do not fight the fire, then 

the provincial government who has the responsibility of 

fighting fires in northern Saskatchewan may or may not fight 

that fire. There could be a different number of factors. I think 

those discussions and those decisions are made out of Prince 

Albert, Mr. Speaker. So the net effect is that, who makes the 

determination to fight this fire or not? 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now I understand that if there is a large-scale evacuation of a 

threatened community, and it is a First Nations community, 

then I’m assuming that the federal government would pay the 

bill, so to speak, of not only transporting people out of harm’s 

way but the accommodation and the services that are required to 

take care of these evacuated people in a more southern 

community such as Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve visited a few evacuation sites in Prince Albert and it’s very, 

very difficult on the elders. Many times they’re housed in 

arenas or larger buildings. Some of them are housed depending 

on their ailment because some of the older people cannot sleep 

on cots. There’s a number of issues, health issues, that they 

have to deal with. So it’s a combination of the majority staying 

in a central evacuation site and, of course, some that need 

proper beds get put up in the different hotels, Mr. Speaker. So 

it’s not as if it’s being abused in any way, shape, or form. It is a 

huge, huge undertaking and, Mr. Speaker, it’s also a huge 

challenge for many of the elders to be moved from their 

northern homes to be placed in Prince Albert for a week to 10 

days at a time, and it creates all kinds of challenges for them as 

well. 

 

So one of the points that I was made aware of when I did travel 

to one of the evacuation sites is many of them wanted to go 

home as quickly as possible. Some of them don’t like where 

they’re staying because obviously you want to stay in your own 

bed. Some of them had issues around their health, that they’re 

quite worried about their health in the city. Others just simply 

wanted to be able, to be able to sleep in their own bed, Mr. 

Speaker, so there’s always the longing to go home. 

 

There’s always a longing to be back in your own house and this 

is kind of where I think a lot of elders, they ended up getting 

sick because they don’t sleep well. They constantly worry. It 

does have an effect on their health. And some of them 

mentioned this is the second or third time over a period of time 

in which they were evacuated from their home community and 

that they had to be staying in the city for a long period of time 

and it does have a dramatic negative effect on them. So there’s 

always the questions of, when do we go home? Why were we 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6191 

evacuated? Why didn’t they fight the fire instead? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is that the rules that 

the minister spoke about, we need to determine the viability of 

those rules. We really need to know who is making the 

decisions around fighting the fire or evacuating the members of 

a threatened community. Who pays those particular bills when 

the evacuation’s in place? Because, Mr. Speaker, what I’m 

thinking is happening is a lot of times the provincial 

government does not want to have, nor put the resources into 

fighting some of these fires, Mr. Speaker. So the net effect is 

they don’t fight the fires and they evacuate a whole bunch of 

people under the premise of being concerned about their safety. 

And the federal government pays all of those costs, and it’s 

much easier and much more cost-effective for the province to 

simply evacuate people as opposed to fighting the fire that 

affects their community because when they evacuate, the 

federal government pays most of those costs. So, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s that confusion there as well. 

 

What is the intent behind this whole fire suppression model 

that, you know, the government talks about, that the minister 

talks about, if they’re not practising what they preach in the 

event that there’s evacuation, a large-scale evacuation of some 

of the First Nations communities that may be threatened by fire, 

Mr. Speaker? And that’s what’s really, really important to us. 

 

I can remember a number of years ago that there was a number 

of the opposition MLAs at the time that flew out to the Far 

North, and I think one of the MLAs that took that flight is now I 

think the Minister of Agriculture. And one of the points that he 

raised in his trip is that . . . The government of the day at the 

time was the NDP. He accused the NDP of developing this 

let-it-burn policy, saying that that’s their response to northern 

fires, of letting it burn. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have not heard a peep from that member 

or the other Sask Party MLAs that took that tour. They’ve not 

said a word of this since they’ve been in government because 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what they done at the 

time is they created a policy of let it burn, and they’re following 

that let-it-burn policy to this day. Yet they’ve done it neatly in 

the sense of saying, it’s not us that created it; it was the NDP 

that created it. 

 

Now today their let-it-burn policy is creating havoc with not 

only people’s lives, Mr. Speaker, but it’s destroying a lot of 

valuable land, traplines, and it’s forever marring the landscape 

of northern Saskatchewan. And I would ask today, why would 

those three members go up to the Far North decrying this whole 

lack of response to fighting some of the forest fires in northern 

Saskatchewan, and when they’ve become government, they 

don’t acknowledge any of these issues have ever existed? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we don’t forget some of those points that were 

raised by the government today. We know that as a result of the 

bill that’s being introduced today that they’re going to continue 

sitting on their hands. And despite the fire Act being proposed 

today, I can guarantee today that the minister that is sponsoring 

the fire protection Act, he turns to his colleague from 

Saskatchewan Environment and says, we need to fight those 

fires. 

 

Well the big question is, what kind of budget have they got to 

fight these northern fires, Mr. Speaker? We’ve seen that budget 

declining, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen the let-it-burn policy being 

expanded under their watch. So it’s one thing to be able to talk 

about the issue, but it’s another thing to get in the government 

and forget the issue ever happened and to actually create more 

problems, to build on that original vision they had of letting 

northern Saskatchewan burn. 

 

So their let-it-burn policy, Mr. Speaker, is in effect today. And 

many northern Saskatchewan people are getting awfully tired of 

watching their land, their cabins, their traplines burn up because 

the Saskatchewan Party have a let-it-burn policy — a let-it-burn 

policy that, I dare say, was developed while they were in 

opposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say again today that there is a lot of 

concern when we look at the notion of, in this particular bill, 

when they say that there is certain powers that the cabinet will 

have when they may be “exempting on any terms or conditions 

. . . any land, premises, person or thing, or any class of land, 

premises, person or thing, or from all or any part of this Act or 

the regulations.” 

 

Now what is that about? Is that a precursor to their let-it-burn 

policy where they can say, okay, we have this provincial fire 

strategy in place, but we’re going to let the cabinet decide 

whether we’re going to let certain pieces of land burn in the 

northern parts or even southern parts of Saskatchewan. Well 

we’re able to give cabinet the authority to say we’re going to 

fight that fire or not.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that really qualifies my particular point, is that 

it’s one thing to talk about being fire smart, being prepared for 

fires, but it’s another to thing to watch that the Sask Party talks 

about that, but in the meantime they have a let-it-burn policy 

that is quite frankly allowing this government to sit on their 

hands and half the North burns. And it’s a creation of that 

particular policy that I give full marks and full credit especially 

to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

And I’ll remember the two other gentlemen that travelled with 

him. I’m sure my memory will come back, and I will note their 

participation at a later time because, Mr. Speaker, that was their 

intent right from day one. And I think the members that actually 

went were Allchurch and Brkich or Last Mountain . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. This is the second time that I’ve 

cautioned, this is the second time that I have cautioned the 

member. Don’t do it again. I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I think it was 

the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood that accompanied 

the Minister of Agriculture to the North to talk about the 

let-it-burn policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the people of the North were asking questions about, you 

know, why are they talking about this particular policy? Well 

here it was, Mr. Speaker. They were doing a trial balloon of 

what they thought would be a great policy for northern 



6192 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

Saskatchewan. And when they got a lot of the feedback from 

the people that were quite angry, well instead of them claiming 

it was their policy — as we see evidence of today that it was 

indeed their policy, they were developing this policy, Mr. 

Speaker — they then tried to blame the NDP of having this 

let-it-burn policy. 

 

And since that date, Mr. Speaker, when they assumed 

government there has not been one little peep from any of those 

three members of the Saskatchewan Party caucus that travelled 

up there to talk about repealing this whole supposedly nefarious 

plan to let it burn by the previous government. It was their 

policy, their language, and we’re seeing that particular policy 

being put in place today. And when we talk about it today, Mr. 

Speaker, all of sudden you can see they’re sitting on their 

hands. They’re very quiet in their chairs because, Mr. Speaker, 

they knew it was not the responsible thing to do then, but 

they’re practising what they decried many, many years ago was 

an unacceptable practice. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why, on this side of 

the Assembly, when the people in the Saskatchewan Party go 

out into especially the Far North and talk about issues that are 

concerning to them, I tell the people, don’t listen because, quite 

frankly, they’re not intending to do anything about that 

particular situation. It’ll only make matters worse because they 

certainly don’t respect what the local people have to say when it 

comes to being fire smart, being prepared in terms of making 

sure they have the proper equipment and having good trained 

manpower that is respected, supported, and appreciated, Mr. 

Speaker. So I think there’s a lot of issues that I think is 

important that we speak about with this particular bill. 

 

The Fire Safety Act itself, Mr. Speaker, there are so many 

components to it. Grassland fires, obviously the RMs are 

involved. How is the collaboration for regional team-building? 

Is there some of that work happening? Because we know that 

on many occasions it is usually the fire department that’s first 

called, and I know we have a 911 system now. How is the 

process developed? Like who are the first people on site? Who 

are the first responders that are out there that would actually be 

able to respond to a crisis, whether it’s a car fire, a grassland 

fire, or whether it’s an accident or whether it’s a derailment, any 

of these sort of accidents? 

 

Who are the first groups of people that are usually on site, Mr. 

Speaker? It is usually the firefighters and it may be the 

ambulance service. It may be a first-aid crew, Mr. Speaker. 

These are the first people that respond to these crises. And I 

wouldn’t mind knowing each of the areas that we have in each 

of the regions we have, and especially the underserved and the 

remote areas. How is that team-building going on? How is the 

analysis of the training that is required for that particular area? 

How is it being delivered? Are they being thorough in that 

training? 

 

The other issue that we can talk about, Mr. Speaker, is how 

about an inventory of the equipment? What equipment does that 

region have? How far away are they and who makes the calls? 

These are very complex, a complex situation, Mr. Speaker, in 

the sense of when you look at these situations overall, you want 

to make sure that there’s decisive, immediate action, that there 

isn’t confusion, and that everybody knows what they’ve got to 

do. And that’s one of the messages we got from the professional 

fire fighters, is that you’ve got to have a good plan. You’ve got 

to have a good strategy, and you’ve got to have immediate 

action that is thought out, that is careful, and that is 

comprehensive. And that’s one of the messages I want to share 

today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier that some of the 

northern communities are working very hard to continue to 

maintain a good, responsive local fire department. But I can tell 

you today that because they’re so far apart from each other, 

each of these communities have to have good training. Each of 

these communities have to have a good volunteer base. Each of 

these communities have to have a fire hall, fire equipment, a 

rescue vehicle of some sort, and that costs a lot of money. 

 

I know a lot of communities are really, really stretched to the 

limit in the sense of making sure they have the basic programs 

in place, the basic services in place. And one of the . . . The 

premise of some of these communities, that you’ve got to have 

water and sewer, you’ve got to have services such as fire and 

rescue, you’ve got to have issues of making sure that the streets 

are safe — these are all the work that the local community 

leaders do on a continual basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So a lot of times, a lot of times, a lot of times if you look at how 

these communities are really trying and struggling hard, Mr. 

Speaker, it is important to note that they’re doing this at great 

cost to their community in terms of dollars. And many of these 

communities are absolutely stretched to the limit in the sense of 

making their budgets work. And that’s why in some of my 

closing comments I want to point out it’s unfair for the province 

and the federal government to put more strain on these northern 

communities by forcing them to take money from their 

operating budgets that would operate fire departments to put 

towards meeting another strong need in our communities, the 

need to build more housing. 

 

And I noticed that the minister for housing and her federal 

cousin, the MP came to our community and announced housing 

starts, but the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse had to pay 

something like close to 60 per cent of those costs. And that’s 

the first time we’ve seen communities having to pay that money 

from their operating budget. And that’s a crying shame, Mr. 

Speaker, because what the signal is is the federal and provincial 

government are getting out of providing housing supports for 

low-income families and those that need homes, decent homes, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen that evidence occur. And the point I 

would make is, that has a negative dramatic effect on the local 

budgets. Now what happens next year if there’s more housing 

that’s going to be needed? Does the community go into further 

debt? Do they begin to compromise essential services like fire 

departments training and preparedness for fires and educating 

people on being aware of some dangers associated with house 

fires? 

 

So the list goes on as to how this government has said some, 

have used some crafty words in their legislation. But their 

actions in the background does not constitute any of the good 

values that we have spoken about with the impacted 

communities when it comes to being prepared for fire, 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6193 

understanding and being aware of the challenges of fire and, 

above all else, respecting and demanding we all have good 

protection from fire threats to our homes and to our families by 

having a well-resourced, well-trained, well-trained, and highly 

effective firefighting team locally. I think that goes without 

saying. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues will have a lot more to 

say about say about this. So on that note I move that we adjourn 

the debate on Bill 170, The Fire Safety Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 145 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 145 — The Fee 

Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Glad to 

join debate today on Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act. 

Certainly this pertains to the ability of individuals of all 

incomes to access the legal system, be it the different levels of 

court or the different tribunals and quasi-judicial processes that 

we have in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And on the face of this it looks like a good piece of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, inasmuch as it will hopefully rely on the good 

work of the Law Reform Commission and in response to other 

court decisions that have been made. But again I think the main 

thing that it’s driving at, Mr. Speaker, is the ability of poor 

people to access the legal system. And I guess something we’ll 

be watching very closely, Mr. Speaker, is how that actually 

plays out, whether or not the measures contained in this 

legislation aid in greater availing by low-income folks of their 

legal rights or not, or whether in fact this . . . Does this have a 

possibility of further bureaucratizing and complicating the 

access of individuals to their legal rights? 

 

In the second reading speech of the minister, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister referred to again creating “. . . an updated fee waiver 

program in Saskatchewan allowing for the waiver of 

administrative fees at courts and tribunals for lower income 

litigants” and implementing “. . . various enhancements to the 

existing fee waiver program.” 

 

In terms of there being no fee waiver program available at 

present in a small claims court, Mr. Speaker, this would 

purportedly address that inadequacy, Mr. Speaker. And where 

the Court of Appeal currently accepts fee waivers issued for the 

Court of Queen’s Bench, there being no process to obtain a new 

waiver at the Court of Appeal, and this Act again, and we’ll see 

how this plays out, purportedly will allow individuals to apply 

for a fee waiver at all three levels of court. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of processes that are 

envisioned in the . . . or that are encompassed by the three 

levels of court, but there’s also bodies such as the Automobile 

Injury Appeal Commission or the Office of Residential 

Tenancies, Mr. Speaker, that are specifically iterated under the 

Act. There’s a power to add that is envisioned in the Act, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of folding in other judicial bodies. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking to see how this plays out and 

how it’s informed by the experience from other jurisdictions. 

 

Where the Act transfers administration of the fee waiver 

applications from the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission to 

individual courts and tribunals, again, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be 

interesting to see how that plays out. Will this in fact bring 

these remedies closer to the individuals and make for a better, 

smoother processing of or accessing of one’s legal rights 

through these different courts and tribunals? Moving that from 

the Legal Aid Commission, it will be interesting to see, Mr. 

Speaker, if this alleviates . . . how much work this has 

constituted for the Legal Aid Commission. 

 

At present we know that certainly legal aid and the funding 

thereof is a point of some contention between the provincial and 

federal government, and certainly the significant duress that the 

resources in the Legal Aid Commission are under. But whether 

or not it accomplishes that, Mr. Speaker, or if it makes it harder 

for individuals to figure out how to access these resources, it’ll 

be interesting to see. 

 

In terms of the court and tribunal officials having the authority 

to administer application processes and having discretionary 

authority to refer applications to the court or tribunal for 

determination where appropriate, again hopefully that situates 

the ability to make that judgment call closer to where it serves 

the individuals looking to access their rights under these 

proceedings. But again, Legal Aid has such a presence of . . . is 

so well known in terms of where people would turn for help. 

Does it make more sense to move it from Legal Aid or does it 

make more sense to situate it with a court tribunal processes? 

We shall see. 

 

In terms of “application processes being kept simplified in order 

to ensure that eligible individuals as well as courts and tribunals 

are not negatively impacted by administrator processes or 

delays,” fair enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the eligibility for the few waivers being based on 

simplified criteria set out in the regulations, again referencing 

the minister’s second reading speech, as is the case with many 

things, Mr. Speaker, we will be interested to see whether or not 

the regulations are as good as that contention and will in fact 

simplify things, or if the criteria is onerous to the point of again 

making this seem like a good measure. But if you can’t access 

these resources, or these measures, Mr. Speaker, then what 

good is that? 

 

In terms of there being “discretionary authority to grant fee 

waivers in special circumstances to individuals who do not meet 

regular qualifications,” and thereby ensuring that “the fee 



6194 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

waiver program remains flexible enough to respond to the 

unique circumstances of individual litigants,” referencing the 

minister’s second reading speech, that would seem to be a 

reasonable measure, Mr. Speaker, but . . . and again, 

empowering the various judicial officials and to make those 

calls closer to where these things are happening, but how that 

flexibility works out, we shall see. 

 

In terms of the current regime where litigants “must apply for a 

fee waiver for the Court of Queen’s Bench prior to taking any 

other steps in a proceeding. [Wherein] As a result, individuals 

who are unable to apply for a fee waiver prior to issuing a claim 

are prevented from receiving a fee waiver even if that individual 

does not have the means to pay the court fees,” and the new Act 

removing this rule and allowing litigants to apply for a fee 

waiver at any stage of the proceedings, that again would seem 

to be a favourable change, Mr. Speaker, making it more 

adaptable, more flexible to respond to the situation as it 

presents, but we will see how that plays out. 

 

In terms of the, again, and I’ll get to this in my remarks, a bit 

further in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, but in terms of Ontario and 

British Columbia, which again the experience of those two 

jurisdictions informs a lot of what we see or what we’re told we 

see in this legislation in terms of self-represented litigants to 

apply for fee waiver certificates, again it would seem to be a 

good step but we’ll see what the incidence of that approach has 

been like in those jurisdictions. 

 

In terms of fee waivers being only available to individuals 

represented by legal counsel, of course I don’t know if it’s the 

wide spread of programs like Law & Order, but certainly I 

would imagine there’s a broader sort of trend towards 

individuals self-representing. And certainly I know various 

lawyers that would make the point that you don’t, you don’t do 

home surgery, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a skill and a talent and 

a knowledge that comes with the legal credentials and that that 

is important to be able to be accessed. So again trying to 

balance that off between individuals representing themselves, 

but having similar resources if they’re in fact available. 

 

I guess in terms of the courts granting . . . or in terms of the Act 

granting: 

 

courts and tribunals discretionary authority to determine if 

costs should be awarded to or against a litigant who has 

been issued a fee waiver. In making this decision, courts 

and tribunals may take into account special factors 

including access to justice and fairness to the parties . . . 

[maintaining] a balance between promoting access to 

justice and deterring meritless or frivolous litigation by 

individuals who have been issued a fee waiver. 

 

Again there needs to be those kind of safeguards in place in the 

regime, Mr. Speaker, to make sure these things are not, that 

they’re being used as intended, but not abused. So again we’ll 

look to see how that plays out in reality. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this would seem to be a decent piece of 

legislation. It would seem to reflect the increasing, the 

increasingly litigious nature of our society. And how do you 

balance off individual rights, and not just having those rights 

but being able to avail yourself of them, Mr. Speaker, in the 

legal processes and at the same time have a system that has 

some relative ease of access and a straightforward quality to its 

process? That effort I’m sure continues, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of trying to find that balance. 

 

But as it stands right now, I’ve got further remarks I’ll reserve 

for the consequential amendment piece of this. But at the 

moment, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to move adjournment of 

Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — The nays have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 16:30 until 16:40.] 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the House is the motion to 

adjourn by the Opposition House Leader on Bill No. 145, The 

Fee Waiver Act. All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 8] 

 

Broten Forbes Vermette 

Belanger Chartier McCall 

Nilson Sproule  

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 36] 

 

Morgan Stewart Wyant 

Duncan Boyd Eagles 

McMorris Toth Moe 

Docherty Campeau Cheveldayoff 

Harrison Tell Ottenbreit 

Norris Kirsch Bjornerud 

Makowsky Weekes Cox 

Wilson Marchuk Ross 

Bradshaw Michelson Merriman 

Young Jurgens Steinley 

Hickie Lawrence Tochor 

Parent Phillips Doke 

 

Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 

8; those opposed, 36. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is lost. Debate will continue. I 

recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — On we go, Mr. Speaker. It’s a new one on me, 

but on we go. 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6195 

One of the interesting pieces of research that I think informs the 

work on The Fee Waiver Act is a work that was done May 2013 

from the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan. It’s 

entitled the Access to Justice — Needy Person Certificates and 

Waiver of Fees, Final Report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’d like to take some time to better acquaint the House with 

certain of the measures therein, and of course I bring this 

forward in hopes that unlike other pieces of Law Reform 

Commission work, that this government is actually paying 

attention to the suggestions from the Law Reform Commission. 

Certainly we know that as recommended around long-term care, 

Mr. Speaker, that recommendations of the Law Reform 

Commission not being observed by this government. But that’s 

the way it goes.  

 

It’s a quote from the top of the report: 

 

As the costs of litigation and other legal services rise, 

concern about financial barriers to access to justice is 

increasing. Under The Queen’s Bench Rules, a potential 

litigant may, in some circumstances, obtain a waiver of 

court fees by obtaining a Needy Person Certificate. Needy 

Person Certificates are useful, but challenges exist 

respecting their scope and availability under the QB Rules. 

A further challenge is that Certificates are only available 

to litigants in the Court of Queen’s Bench and Court of 

Appeal. Individual rights are also adjudicated in the Small 

Claims Court and by boards and tribunals, which have 

varying policies regarding fee waivers. Responses to the 

Consultation Paper generally affirm that Needy Person 

Certificates and fee waivers in Saskatchewan need to be 

updated and expanded. This Final Report sets out the 

Commission’s proposals on improving access to justice for 

the less advantaged members of our community through 

fee waivers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to state at this point a little 

bit about the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan. It was 

of course established by An Act to establish a Law Reform 

Commission, proclaimed in force in November 1973, and began 

functioning in February 1974. The commission, it was 

incorporated by an Act of the Saskatchewan legislature. 

Commissioners are appointed by order in council. The 

commission’s recommendations are independent and are 

submitted to the Minister of Justice and Attorney General of 

Saskatchewan for consideration. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I might add parenthetically, this 

government’s got a fairly checkered past when it comes to 

listening to the advice of the Law Reform Commission. Would 

but that they paid closer attention to the good counsel being 

provided by the Law Reform Commission.  

 

“Projects . . .” Again returning to the report itself, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Projects are initiated by the Commission in response to 

suggestions from the public and the legal community, or at 

the request of the Minister of Justice and Attorney 

General. After preliminary research, the Commission 

usually issues background or consultation papers to 

facilitate consultation. Tentative proposals may be issued 

if the legal issues involved in a project are complex. Upon 

completion of a project, the Commission’s 

recommendations are formally submitted to the Minister 

of Justice and Attorney General as final proposals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this commission is funded by grants from the Law 

Foundation of Saskatchewan and the Ministry of Justice. And 

just to keep everybody up to date, the commissioners are Mr. 

Donald H. Layh, Q.C. [Queen’s Counsel], Chair of the 

Commission; Ms. Susan Amrud, Q.C., no stranger to 

individuals here I would submit, Mr. Speaker; Professor 

Ronald. C. Cuming; The Honourable Georgina R. Jackson; 

Professor Michaela Keet; Mr. Michael Milani, Q.C.; and Ms. 

Reché McKeague being the director of research. And the 

commission, of course, can be contacted at the Law Reform 

Commission of Saskatchewan, situated at the lovely University 

of Saskatchewan, room 209, College of Law, 15 Campus Drive, 

Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 

 

And as with the other reports from the commission, Mr. 

Speaker, this report and other Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan publications are available on their website which 

can be found at www.lawreformcommission.sk.ca. 

 

Turning to the report itself, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the fairly 

wide-ranging discussion, certainly it’s ranging from the 

recommendations stated right off the top, moving through the 

discussion of needy person certificates and fee waivers in 

Saskatchewan. Again needy person certificates themselves and 

fee waivers in other courts and tribunals. The discussion of fee 

waivers in other jurisdictions, with Ontario and British 

Columbia coming in for particular attention in terms of 

availability of fee waivers with self-represented litigants. The 

timing of how these things are administered, Mr. Speaker. 

Application in the Small Claims Court, tribunals. The 

qualifying process for a fee waiver, measurement of need, 

reasonable grounds, the evidence of need. And of course the 

consistency of fee waivers, and how to administer, name, and 

educate thereon. 

 

In terms of the recommendations itself, Mr. Speaker, first off 

under the heading of availability of fee waivers, we’ve got five 

recommendations. Again, good recommendations and we’ll be 

looking closely to see if they are to be located in the legislation 

brought forward by this minister, the first one being “Needy 

Person Certificates and fee waivers should be available to 

self-represented litigants.”  

 

Again if I could add as a tangent to that, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important that with this increasing trend towards 

self-represented litigants that these opportunities are made 

available. Again how that is mediated with the appropriateness 

of the counsel being provided and how that’s working out and 

what the numbers are around that trend, Mr. Speaker, is 

something that we’re very interested in finding out more about. 

 

Secondly, “Needy person certificates and fee waivers should be 

available at any point in a proceeding.” Again, Mr. Speaker, we 

think that one’s located in the legislation. We’ll be making sure 

that’s actually the case. But in terms of how that works out, 

again it may not be readily evident off the top in a proceeding 

that needy person certificates are required or a fee waiver. 

 

The third recommendation being, “A fee waiver program 



6196 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2014 

should be established in Small Claims Court.” The fourth being, 

“Administrative tribunals in Saskatchewan that regularly 

adjudicate matters for members of the public should adopt fee 

waiver policies for individuals.” The fifth recommendation 

being that “The fee waiver application policy and process 

should be the same across all Saskatchewan courts and 

tribunals.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, these things being provided under the 

availability of fee waivers. And we’ll get into a more fulsome 

discussion of that shortly. 

 

Coming in for the qualifying for a fee waiver, recommendation 

no. 6: “Fee waiver eligibility should be determined with 

reference to the Low Income Cut Off (LICO) [and there’s a 

reference I’ll get to there, Mr. Speaker], with flexibility to 

consider an applicant’s extraordinary circumstances.” 

 

Again, it refers to Statistics Canada table 18, low income before 

tax cut-offs, the 1992 base for economic families and persons 

not in economic families 2005, modified the 11th of December 

2007, available online at the Statistics Canada site, Mr. Speaker. 

And again, LICO referring to the income level at which family 

spends 20 per cent more of its income on food, shelter, and 

clothing than the average family, and of course being a 

commonly referenced measure of poverty here in Canada. 

 

[Recommendation] 7. [Mr. Speaker, where] No merit or 

“reasonable grounds” test should be included in the fee 

waiver application process. 

8. A fee waiver application form should be easy to use, 

clear and in plain language. 

9. A litigant who has qualified for Legal Aid or met the 

income testing requirements of a Saskatchewan-based pro 

bono organization, such as Pro Bono Law Saskatchewan 

. . . or Community Legal Assistance Services for 

Saskatoon Inner City Inc. (CLASSIC), should 

automatically qualify for a fee waiver without further 

application. 

10. A fee waiver application should be made directly to a 

court official or officer of a tribunal. 

11. A fee waiver application form should require a 

declaration of receipt of social assistance or a simple 

financial statement, with additional proof to be provided 

only upon request. 

12. An applicant for a fee waiver who does not meet the 

financial eligibility requirement should be entitled to apply 

for a fee waiver on the basis of extraordinary 

circumstances to a court official or officer of a tribunal 

and the application may be referred to the court or tribunal 

for decision. 

 

Carrying on the report here, Mr. Speaker, we then come to a raft 

of recommendations under the heading of: 

 

Consistency of fee waivers 

 

13. Courts and tribunals should be responsible for issuing 

fee waivers for the fees they charge. 

14. Court and tribunal staff should be trained about the 

process and be willing to assist people to fill out the 

application form. 

 

15. All courts and tribunals should name their fee 

waiver . . . 

 

Be it the court, you know, insert name of court here, Mr. 

Speaker, or tribunal, concerning the Court of Queen’s Bench 

fee waiver, the Highway Traffic Board fee waiver. You get the 

picture. 

 

Point no. 16, Mr. Speaker, or recommendation no. 16: 

 

Education programs and materials should be available to 

inform people on the availability of, and application 

process for, fee waivers in Saskatchewan courts and 

tribunals. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, a seemingly sensible raft of 

recommendations. 

 

And now we’ll get into a discussion of what the meat of the 

report had to say. Under the introduction, and this of course can 

be found on page 3 of the report, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Access to the courts has been described as “one of the 

foundational pillars protecting the rights and freedoms of 

our citizens.” In BCGEU, Chief Justice Dickson stated: 

“There cannot be a rule of law without access, otherwise 

the rule of law is replaced by a rule of men and women 

who decide who shall and who shall not have access to 

justice.” As the costs of litigation and other legal services 

rise, concern about financial barriers to access to justice is 

increasing. 

 

Carrying on with the report, Mr. Speaker: 

 

In 2006, the Canadian Bar Association (CBA) stated that 

“advocating for access to justice for poor people” had 

become its “top priority.” A report issued by the CBA 

observed that: 

 

As lawyers, CBA members know that too many people 

have no access to the rights and protections our laws 

notionally provide. The poor people who are denied 

access to justice are the same people who already 

experience disadvantages of many other kinds, 

including women, children, people living with 

disabilities, Aboriginal people, members of racialized 

minorities, the elderly and refugees. 

 

And again, coming from the Canadian Bar Association: 

 

The problem of access has no simple answers. Changes in 

procedures to assist unrepresented clients, improvements 

in legal aid programs, support for legal clinics such as 

Community Legal Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner 

City Inc. (CLASSIC) and encouragement of lawyers who 

are willing to act pro bono are among the strategies that 

have identified. This Final Report [again, from the Law 

Reform Commission, Mr. Speaker] discusses, and makes 

recommendations for, another piece of the search for 

solutions: fee waivers for individuals unable to pay the 

costs of litigation. 

 

And might I add here, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite familiar with 



December 2, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6197 

some of the folks that do pro bono work here in the city of 

Regina. I’ve heard some great things about the folks that work 

with CLASSIC up in Saskatoon. And again these are highly 

skilled, highly educated individuals, Mr. Speaker, that could be 

making a pretty good buck elsewhere in the system but have 

devoted their services to make sure that we all have those legal 

rights under the constitution that again has been referred to one 

as of the foundational pillars protecting the rights and freedoms 

of our citizens. 

 

Returning to the report, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Court fees are charged when a civil case is initiated by 

filing the proper documents with the court, and sometimes 

at later stages in a proceeding. Under The Queen’s Bench 

Rules, a potential litigant may, in some circumstances, 

obtain a waiver of court fees by obtaining a Needy Person 

Certificate. A Certificate is granted on application to the 

Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission if a means test is 

met and if the applicant “has reasonable grounds for taking 

or defending or being a party to proceedings.” A 

Certificate also relieves the proposed litigant from 

responsibility for paying the other party’s court costs if the 

litigation is unsuccessful. 

 

Again, carrying on with the report here, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Needy Person Certificates are useful, but challenges exist 

respecting their scope and availability under the QB Rules. 

Certificates are only available to litigants in the Court of 

Queen’s Bench and Court of Appeal, which is a further 

challenge. Individual rights are adjudicated in the Small 

Claims Court and by boards and tribunals, which have 

varying policies regarding fee waivers. 

 

Again, carrying on from the report, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Court fees may be a bar to access. CLASSIC surveyed its 

clients to determine how frequently tribunal and court fees 

were a barrier to pursuing legal avenues: 

 

Of the clients . . . 

 

Quote from the report from CLASSIC, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Of the clients who faced fees, 21% [who] were not able 

to pursue their matter because they could not afford the 

fee and no mechanism existed to have the fee waived. It 

is of significant concern that approximately one-fifth of 

low-income clients are not able to move forward with 

meritorious claims because they were not able to afford 

the fee. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, to have access to your rights, you’ve got to 

have access to the courts. And these are some of the steps that 

will address, we hope, the tremendous inequity identified there 

by CLASSIC. 

 

Returning to the report, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Legal aid in Saskatchewan is only available for criminal 

and family law matters, and not to individuals who wish to 

sue for injury or breach of contract, or who seek other 

remedies available only in court. CLASSIC provided the 

Law Reform Commission with two examples of situations 

in which fees were a barrier for its clients. The first 

involved an application in the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll get to that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6171 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6171 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6171 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6171 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6171 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6171 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6172 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6172 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6172 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6172 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6172 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6173 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6173 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6173 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Intercultural Association Celebrates 50th Anniversary 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6173 

 Counsel for Children Program 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6173 

 Creighton Kodiaks Win Championship 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6174 

 National Conference on Women in Engineering 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6174 

 Random Acts of Kindness Day and Giving Tuesday 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6174 

 Remembering Wolfgang Langenbacher 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6175 

 Headstart on a Home for First-Time Homeowners 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6175 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Fatality in Care Facility and Provision of Long-Term Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6175 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6175 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6176 

 Agreement with Smart Meter Manufacturer 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6178 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6178 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6178 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 171 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6180 

 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6180 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6180 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6180 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6180 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6181 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 6181 

MOTIONS 

 Reappointment of Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6181 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6182 

 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6182 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6182 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 173 — The Appropriation Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6182 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 

  Reiter ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 6183 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6184 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6193 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 6194 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


