




















































Hansard: March 03, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 26B  MONDAY, MARCH 3, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4479 

 March 3, 2014 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, the House is resumed 

and debate will continue. I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government 

Administration Act 
 

Mr. Belanger: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m pleased to enter into the debate, and again we’re 

talking about Bill 129, An Act Respecting the Administration of 

the Executive Government of Saskatchewan. And again as I 

mentioned just before our supper break, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very 

complex bill. And this bill, of course as I mentioned earlier, is 

designed to replace a number of Acts governing executive 

government responsibilities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the important notes that I’ve said 

from time to time is that it’s very important to look at the 

language and I think it’s also incumbent upon the government, 

and certainly opposition as well, to explain to the people how 

the government operations are broken down. And one of the 

examples I would use obviously is you have Executive Council 

and you’ve got of course the executive office which is the 

Premier’s office, and of course Executive Council serves at the 

pleasure of the Premier. And it talks a lot, this particular bill 

talks about a number of things that alarms the opposition. 

 

Now I look at some of the language here, and a good example I 

would use is on the first page it says transfer of powers, etc.: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may, on the 

recommendation of the President of the Executive Council: 

 

(a) assign to any minister any power, duty or function 

conferred or imposed by law on a minister; 

 

(b) transfer any power, duty or function assigned to a 

minister pursuant to clause (a) to any other minister; or 

 

(c) transfer any power, duty or function that is conferred 

or imposed by law: 

 

(i) on any minister or any other minister; or 

 

(ii) on any ministry to any minister or other ministry. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again these are some of the things that we 

want to know is attached to this particular bill. It is complex in 

the sense of trying to follow what the intent of the bill is. Now 

obviously what we want to do is we don’t want to curtail things 

that are meant to be efficient, things that are meant to be 

responsive. But, Mr. Speaker, any time we talk about transfer of 

powers, any time we talk about committees, any time we talk 

about the relationship of Executive Council to the executive 

office, any time we talk about secretaries . . . Mr. Speaker, the 

list goes on in terms of what the relationships are between 

legislative secretaries, ministers, Executive Council, the 

Premier’s office. It really becomes convoluted and gets 

confusing to the average person. 

 

And that’s one of the reasons why Bill 129 is a bill that we want 

to really break down. And we’ve got a bunch of questions that 

I’m sure my colleagues will have the opportunity to ask during 

the committee hearings because it is an important bit of 

information that the people of Saskatchewan ought to be able to 

hear and ought to understand as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of consultation is necessary on any bill. 

We want to see that happen. We want to make people aware 

that there may be some concerns and changes that people need 

to know about. And again there’s a very wide net of law that are 

going to be affected by this Act. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, as we tell people from right across 

the province, it’s important that you pay attention to these bills. 

It’s important that you pay a lot of attention when you’re 

talking about transfer of powers to one central office such as the 

Premier’s office. What are those powers, and what are the 

intentions of those powers? And how does that affect people’s 

understanding of how government works? It’s a very important 

issue that you have to pay attention to, and we certainly intend 

to do that. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 129. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 129, The Executive Government 

Administration Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 130 — The Executive Government Administration 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive 

Government Administration Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Executive 

Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is the bilingual companion to The 

Executive Government Administration Act. The most significant 

amendments are the amendments to The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act, 2007. 

 

Amendments will permit members of the Legislative Assembly 

to be marriage commissioners while continuing to be members. 

It will also permit them to be members and chairpersons of the 

boards of Crown corporations without being a member of 

Executive Council. 



4480 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

The bill also removes part V of The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, 2007 and incorporates it into The 

Executive Government Administration Act. Part V as it now 

exists establishes the Office of Executive Council. It is 

appropriately placed in the main bill. This will also result in the 

change of the name of the Act as the words Executive Council 

are removed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill also amends several bilingual acts in a 

manner similar to the consequential amendments found in The 

Executive Government Administration Act. For example, 

references to department are replaced with ministry in several 

Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Executive 

Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved Bill No. 130, The Executive Government 

Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the 

member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, 

this bill is attached to the previous bill, and that’s exactly our 

point that we made earlier, that Bill 130 was a bit more of 

information in terms of what the consequential amendment Act 

would certainly entail. And that’s the kind of information that 

the opposition needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is important to note that Bill 130, which is a companion bill 

to the earlier bill that I spoke about, Mr. Speaker, we need to 

find out exactly what the plan of action is on that side of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I understood the minister to say that 

this bill would allow members of the Assembly, and certainly 

from my perspective I know it will all be on the government 

side, to allow MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] to 

sit on certain Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And it doesn’t 

necessarily have to be members of Executive Council, which 

could be referred to as the cabinet overall. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s exactly my point. If you are going to 

politicize the Crown corporations by putting some of your 

MLAs on their board, the point that I would raise is why is it 

that you have to do this? You can attract a lot of private sector 

people, highly qualified people that give very sound business 

advice on how to run your Crown corporations. 

 

And instead, Mr. Speaker, from what I understand and interpret 

from Bill 130, they are going to now allow members of the 

Legislative Assembly on the government side, Sask Party 

MLAs, to sit on various boards, and that includes the Crown 

corporation board. Now if that is the case, Mr. Speaker, then 

people of Saskatchewan ought to be alarmed. Because we 

should never, ever have any MLAs that don’t have the 

necessary skills, don’t have the necessary knowledge of a 

particular Crown corporation to simply sit on that board by 

virtue of being a Sask Party MLA. 

 

You’ve got to run those Crown corporations as efficiently as 

you can. You’ve got to run them as solid as you can. You’ve 

got to run them as they should from the business perspective. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be interesting to see how the 

Sask Party, a few of their business friends, would react to the 

knowledge that they are now managing Crown corporations 

from the political perspective, Mr. Speaker. A lot of chartered 

accountants I know will not like that at all, Mr. Speaker. They 

won’t like the notion that politicians should be allowed to run 

Crown corporations by virtue of them being elected in their 

particular seat, not because, not because, Mr. Speaker, not 

because they have a good knowledge of how a business should 

work, Mr. Speaker. Not because they may have a degree in 

admin. Not because they’ve got experience. Not because they 

know what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. The only reason they’d 

be on this board is because they are a Sask Party MLA. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people in the business community 

would not like the notion of politicians running the Crown 

corporations. They should leave it in the hands of people that 

sincerely know how to operate these companies and manage 

these companies. And if the government should be able to find 

people that are qualified enough and certified enough to run the 

Crown corporations as they should be — professionally, 

efficiently, and of course being very, very transparent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again we look at these bills and we begin to have the alarm 

bells go off. And I’m going to say this to the business 

community that is out there. The government is now in a 

situation where they’re allowing MLAs to sit on Crown 

corporations and allowing them to run these Crown 

corporations. And if they don’t believe for one minute that they 

won’t politicize the Crown corporations for their own purposes 

and for their own needs, Mr. Speaker, then they obviously don’t 

give the people of Saskatchewan credit for them to recognize 

that that’s exactly what the SaskParty wants to do. 

 

So there’s a lot of issues that we’re going to be looking at in 

this particular bill. I think Bill 130 is a bill that deserves a lot of 

attention. And that’s exactly what we plan on doing, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to let the people of Saskatchewan know 

exactly what is being planned. We will be following this bill 

thoroughly. We will be asking questions in committee. And 

we’ll find exactly what the SaskParty plans are when they allow 

provisions to have MLAs sit on Crown corporations to run 

these corporations from the political perspective. And that’ll do 

a great injustice to the people of Saskatchewan, the history of 

our Crowns, and their future of their operations in our province. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this 

bill. And I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 130. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 130, The Executive Government 

Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4481 

Bill No. 126 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 126 — The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to stand and enter into the debate on Bill No. 126, The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). 

And this has been evolving and it’s been a pleasure in the 

House to watch the evolvement of this tool that’s important to 

our police and to our justice system, how we can deal with 

criminal property. And I remember the last time we dealt with 

this, where we talked about particularly through organized 

criminal activity, and so this is another refinement. And this is 

what happens, that the work that we do is that we find out what 

are the unintended consequences? What can we make better? 

 

And I read the minister’s remarks with interest. We do have 

questions of course and those questions will come up during 

committee. But I know that many of us will want to speak to it 

because we know the police are doing great work. And I have to 

tell you that in my riding of Saskatoon Centre this is a 

significant issue, criminal activity, and we take it very 

seriously. 

 

And we want to make sure that when we provide the police and 

the justice system with their tools that they have the best tools 

possible that they can do the job that they’re expected to do. 

And people expect them to do it quickly and efficiently but also 

with a real sense of due process. And that in Canada we have a 

strong sense of that you are not guilty until you’re convicted of 

that, but at the same time innocent until proven guilty. And I 

think that’s an important principle in our justice system, and it’s 

one that we strive very hard to protect. 

 

And so we have to watch the speed that we move these things 

along, but at the same time it does frustrate people when things 

get bogged down. And we know that across Canada we see a lot 

of initiatives that people are bringing up that we have a lot of 

questions about because of the due process and about the core 

principles that we hold near and dear in what it means to be a 

Canadian. 

 

And so we have some of those questions here. I would be 

curious to know what’s happening across the country. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if you might remember my remarks from a couple of 

years ago when we talked about this bill last time go-round 

when we were talking about seizing cars and how it is kind of 

interesting how now we’re moving to sums of money and 

forfeitures of different amounts. 

 

So I’d be curious to know what is happening across Canada. 

The minister did not reference any sort of work that’s been done 

at a national level that brings this into line with other provinces. 

It seems that we’re working hard to make sure that there’s a 

pan-national approach so that it makes sense that we don’t have 

wide-ranging laws just when you cross a border of one province 

to another, in fact that it all fits together and that justice can be 

well served and yet protect the interests of those who are 

innocent or those who are victims. 

 

[19:15] 

 

You know, it’s very important that we think about the victims 

of crime in this case too, and that’s been an emerging issue as 

well. What role . . . Or what’s the perspective of the victims in 

this? And so we haven’t heard that much from the minister 

when he made his comments, and so we’ll have those questions. 

And that’s a very important, a very important aspect. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think I want to go through the bill here a bit, 

the minister’s comments. And he talks about that we would be 

remembering The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2009 that 

“. . . represents a balance between ensuring due process for 

individuals who may face an allegation of holding criminal 

property and ensuring that criminals do not benefit financially 

from their criminal activities.” And that’s hugely, hugely 

important. And there was ways of blocking that process so that 

they did not benefit in the long run from their criminal 

activities. And so this one really focuses on the administrative 

seizure of property, a process in the Act that’s a further option 

in this tool kit of seizing criminal property. 

 

So it “. . . will authorize the administrative seizure of cash or 

personal property with a value under a prescribed amount.” So I 

assume that means it’s going to be . . . When it’s prescribed, it 

usually refers to regulation. 

 

. . . allow the director to issue a notice of administrative 

forfeiture proceedings directly to interested parties 

regarding property that the director has reasonable grounds 

to believe is either the proceeds of crime or an instrument 

of unlawful activity.  

 

So again an interesting term, interested parties. Who would be 

the interested parties? Are they the victims of crime? Is it the 

community? This will be interesting to find out more. What 

does that term really mean? 

 

And what happens if there’s “. . . no notice of dispute is filed by 

an interested party, provide for the seizure, forfeiture, and 

distribution of the property; provide that if a notice of dispute is 

filed, the director must instead proceed to apply for seizure 

through a court process . . .” 

 

And so if you give out the notice and if there’s no response, 

then you can proceed. And then you have “. . . an interested 

party to file notice of dispute within six months after the 

deadline if they can show they had a reasonable excuse for 

having failed to respond to the initial notice.” 

 

So it’s all very procedural in many ways. And that’s fair 

enough, and I guess what they’re trying to get around. 

 

It is interesting that the minister remarks and has found out that 

unfortunately the same amount of work “. . . requires extensive 

legal document preparation . . . before the courts, either by 

notice of application or statement of claim.” The same amount 

of work has to be done, and that’s about 15 hours of document 

preparation, even if you’re talking about 100,000 or $100. So 

this is why they want to have a benchmark. And that does make 

some sense because 15 hours, that’s a good two days of work, 



4482 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

solid work on this, and it may not just be worth it if it’s $100. 

So you want to make sure you have some effective way of 

measuring what is a good use of time. 

 

So it goes through the whole process and then it talks about the 

fact that “We estimate that approximately 20 per cent of 

forfeiture applications are contested.” So that means 80 per cent 

are not contested. And now he does say this is “. . . consistent 

with findings in other provinces.” So maybe this is lining up 

with other provinces, and if that’s the case, that’s of interest and 

that I think is a good thing. 

 

So I think that he said that the process will be “. . . limited in the 

regulations to the seizure of cash or personal property under a 

particular value such as $75,000, and could not be used for 

larger cash amounts or for real estate seizures,” because it’s 

pretty hard to find a piece of property in Saskatchewan less than 

$75,000. And so that’s, it seems like that’s going to be the 

benchmark. He hasn’t said that firmly, but that’s what he’s 

implying because of the . . . It will be set in regulations, and of 

course we haven’t seen the regulations. So that’s fair enough. 

And he’s saying, “. . . 80 per cent of seizures in Saskatchewan 

would fall under this dollar threshold.” So the 20 per cent that is 

contested is people get interested when it’s more than $75,000. 

 

Now interestingly, I would be interested if it was $75,000 or 

less, so I’m not sure why that . . . It would be interesting to 

know more details about when we’re using 75,000 versus 

50,000 or 25,000, why people become more interested when it’s 

75,000 as opposed to 50,000 or 25,000. So we’ll have a 

question about that for sure. Why that just seems to fall on that 

amount, I can understand for real estate, but for cash purposes 

or for other kind of property, I don’t know. I mean, if you’re 

talking about seizing a vehicle, I mean that doesn’t get up to 

75,000. That, you know, you might be more interested in a 

vehicle that’s worth 30 or 40 or $50,000, but still you’d be 

interested in that. 

 

So we just talked about the fact that all funds that are seized: 

 

. . . are retained in the Criminal Property Forfeiture Fund to 

support police operations or the Victims’ Fund. Following 

the payment of the costs and expenses of seizure, funds 

seized through the new . . . process would be subject to the 

same process. 

 

And so we’d be interested, and you know we’re always 

interested, in hearing more about these things. So what kind of 

breakdown do they have between the Victims’ Fund and the 

police costs? I mean, I think that’s very important. 

 

But as I said, this is one that’s very important right across the 

province. I think that we want to be as rigorous and as 

innovative as we can when it comes to fighting crime. And 

what happens when you solve some of these crimes and then 

you realize that there’s a lot of property or funds that are 

involved? What’s the process there? 

 

And so this goes a long way and, as I said, this is an evolvement 

of legislation that was introduced in, I believe it was 2005 and 

then again in 2009. And here we have it again back in 2013-14 

in this third session, and so we’ll have some questions about 

this. I think it’s important that we move this kind of legislation 

forward. As I said, that in Saskatchewan and in our cities and 

our towns and villages and in the country, it’s important that we 

do all we can to make our communities as safe as we can. 

 

And it would be of interest to hear from the police as well on 

this, and if there’s any legal associations, if they have some 

opinions, if they’ve made their points to the minister, that 

would be good. I mean I do note that he did not reference any 

consultations. It seemed like it was a process that was driven by 

efficiency. And that’s fair enough; I mean we do that kind of 

stuff if that’s the case. Then it’s efficient and that’s what has to 

happen, but it would be good to hear if there’s any of these 

unintended consequences. We want to make sure we tie up all 

the loose ends and be as effective as this as we can. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know many of my colleagues will want to be 

anxious to speak on this bill as it comes forward now that we’re 

back. And I’m looking forward to the weeks ahead as we put 

these bills forward, talk about them in committee, deal with 

them, deal with the budget, deal with the estimates. It’s good to 

be back. But we’re right back at work on Monday night. And 

here we are. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 

adjourn Bill No. 126, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 126, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 109 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 109 — The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

tonight to weigh in to Bill 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporations Amendment Act. 

 

I think I’d like to start tonight, Mr. Speaker, by talking a little 

bit about what this Act originally did, or the purpose of 

labour-sponsored venture capital, the corporations Act that I 

believe was from 2001. I may be mistaken about that, but I 

believe it was 2001. 

 

So at about that time, Mr. Speaker, the government of the day 

was looking for ways to help small- and medium-sized 

businesses gain investors at the time. It was not an easy task if 

you had something you’d like to take forward, perhaps a 

slightly riskier business or a business that wasn’t quite as 

established. In order to find investors, it could be quite a 

challenge. So the government of the day, in keeping with what 

some of the other governments across Canada were doing, and 

started in probably in the ’80s I believe in Quebec, decided to 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4483 

pursue The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 

Act in order to help encourage and spur on investment in 

smaller and medium-sized Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

So that was the original purpose of the Act, Mr. Speaker. And 

today, what is this Act, the amendment Act, what is the goal of 

the amendment Act? The minister points out that the goal is to 

have 1 per cent of the pool fund’s annual net capital invested 

into innovation-type investments. As well, it includes some 

basic housekeeping amendments, like for example changing the 

word department to ministry — very minor housekeeping — 

changing sub-section to section. Some very minor 

housekeeping. But the big piece of the Act here is the 1 per cent 

that will need to be invested into innovation-type investments. 

The minister points out that there have been more than 40,000 

Saskatchewan people that have become investors and believe in 

backing local enterprises and believe that many of these funds 

are carefully invested in traditional businesses. But the 

minister’s outlined the government’s goal to encourage 

investment in more of the innovation-type businesses. 

 

So that 1 per cent, the minister has pointed out that they’d like 

to see the labour-sponsored venture capital corporation step up 

investments in the innovation sector. These funds would 

increase the amount of innovation investments in this portfolio 

by up to 25 per cent by the year 2016. So that is the goal, to 

increase those investments to about 25 per cent. 

 

The federal government . . . I think there’s some concern 

though, and my colleague from Regina Lakeview pointed this 

out. One of the mechanisms . . . So Saskatchewan has a tax 

credit or the goal is to incent investment in these Saskatchewan 

businesses, these small- and medium-size Saskatchewan 

businesses. So there’s the Saskatchewan tax credit piece but 

there’s also a federal government piece. And my colleague had 

pointed out from the SaskWorks annual report that in fact the 

federal government is looking at phasing out the federal tax 

credit to some extent, which could be problematic in terms of 

that spurring on investment here, Mr. Speaker. So that is some 

concern, that the feds would be wanting to back off some of the 

tax incentives that have been in place for a number of years for 

these funds that do help ensure that Saskatchewan people can 

invest in Saskatchewan companies. 

 

I think it’s important to ensure that . . . I know that the minister 

outlined the intent to increase investments in what are 

innovation-type investments, but we also want to ensure that 

investments are properly managed and that the funds are 

carefully invested in local businesses and continue to be 

invested in traditional Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

One concern here, Mr. Speaker, that always is a concern when 

things are prescribed in regulations, that there’s some deference 

to the executive arm of government, some more power being 

placed in the executive government to pass regulations. So 

that’s always something to be mindful of, Mr. Speaker. But the 

reality is The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 

Act has helped spur growth and ensure again that Saskatchewan 

people have the opportunity to invest in Saskatchewan-based 

companies, keeping money here in the province and helping 

grow our economy. 

 

So this is good. And obviously innovation is about always 

growing, always moving forward, seeing how you can do things 

differently. So I think that there is some merit to ensuring that 

these funds are directed in that regard as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I do know that I have colleagues who will be interested in 

weighing in on this discussion as well. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

[19:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 108 — The 

Athletics Commission Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Good evening, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very 

pleased to rise tonight to speak to Bill No. 108, which is An Act 

respecting The Athletics Commission and Professional Contests 

or Exhibitions. And the short title is The Athletics Commission 

Act. 

 

This is an interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. I have to 

say that it’s not one that I have received a lot of calls on as the 

critic for culture, sports, and parks . . . Parks, Culture and Sport, 

but it’s one that obviously is of great interest to the people who 

brought it forward. 

 

There was a successful lobby on the part of the mixed martial 

arts groups to encourage this government to create this kind of 

commission. It’s been happening in other provinces as well, as 

the ministry indicated, and it’s something that I think was the 

next logical step in terms of some amendments to the Criminal 

Code that passed last year. Those amendments, what they did is 

they amended section 83 of the Criminal Code, which legalized 

this sport of mixed martial arts across Canada. 

 

Yes, so that’s what’s been happening federally. It’s now legal to 

have these sports, which apparently until now they were illegal 

in terms of . . . Well they just have been unsanctioned to this 

point. And I think there’s a number of concerns that have been 

raised by the athletes themselves, by the organizations that 

represent them, that there needs to be sanctions in place and that 

there has to be an oversight of some form because of the nature 

of the sport itself and the fact that it’s combative. So I think that 

alone is enough to suggest that there needs to be some oversight 

to ensure the health and safety of the people that engage in these 

types of sports. 

 

I was a bit confused by the name of the bill because when 

you’re talking about an athletics commission, Mr. Speaker, my 



4484 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

first impression would be that this would deal with all athletics. 

And it’s very clear that this is specifically focusing on mixed 

martial arts and professional boxing, so I’m not sure why this 

government choose to call it the Athletics Commission. 

 

I know that other provinces have different names, and there are 

a couple of others that also refer to this type of commission as 

an athletics commission. But I think Nova Scotia, Quebec, and 

Manitoba’s titles are much more descriptive and I think would 

lead the public to a quicker understanding of exactly what this 

commission is designed to do. In Manitoba it’s called the 

Manitoba combative arts commission, which I think is quite 

descriptive. In Nova Scotia it’s called the Nova Scotia Boxing 

Authority, which may be a bit limited when we’re talking about 

martial arts as well, martial arts contests. And in Quebec it’s 

called the Quebec regulation regarding combative sports. 

 

So again we get combative arts, combative sports. We get 

boxing. So there’s a real mix of names that is being used by 

various provinces to describe this type of oversight of 

professional boxing, mixed martial arts contests and 

exhibitions. 

 

And in fact the rest of the name of the bill is professional 

contests or exhibitions. It’s quite ironic, Mr. Speaker. When I 

think of a professional contest, I think about it in terms of 

fiddling because there’s lots of professional contests in fiddling, 

but I guess I’m not sure this Act would apply . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Very similar. Mixed martial arts and 

fiddling — very similar. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Yes, exactly. So it’s a very general term, 

professional contests, and I’m not exactly sure why it isn’t more 

specific to that which the bill is trying to regulate, according to 

the minister. So you know, having come from the first 

Saskatoon fiddle contest in the month of February, you know, 

there’s 46 young people engaged. When I see professional 

contests, I think . . . I’m not sure this bill would want to apply. 

 

And the other one is exhibitions. When I think of exhibitions 

I’m thinking of Saskatoon exhibition. I’m thinking of the 

Regina exhibition. And somehow that’s also a term that’s being 

used to describe these martial arts events and exhibitions. 

 

So what I did then is I turned to the proposed definition in the 

proposed legislation of what is a professional contest or 

exhibition. And there I found out a little bit more information, 

Mr. Speaker. The definition that’s being proposed is this. This 

is section 2(o), “‘professional contest or exhibition’ means a 

contest or exhibition of [here we go] professional boxing, 

mixed martial arts . . .” And then it goes on to say, “. . . or 

another prescribed sport.” 

 

So there could be other sports I suppose that will come under 

this commission at some point in time. Certainly based on the 

minister’s comments, it appears to be specifically directed 

towards the mixed martial arts and the professional boxing. So a 

little bit of interesting comments there. 

 

Now part I of the Act is the definition part. Part II is where the 

commission itself is set up. And what we see in section 3 is that 

the minister, the minister will appoint an employee of the 

ministry. So that’s the commission. 

 

I’m just going to read this section because it’s a bit confusing. 

Section 3(2), “The commission is to consist of an employee of 

the ministry who is to be appointed by the minister and who is 

to serve as chairperson of the commission.” And that’s all we 

have. We don’t know who else is on this commission, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s silent. And yet the minister in his comments 

indicated that the commission will be five members. 

 

He went on to say that the minister’s going to establish an 

advisory committee with three subject matter experts as well as 

the commissioner who’s appointed by the ministry. And then 

the fifth person, according to the minister, would be the 

adjudicator that would be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council. So I’m not sure why that’s not in the Act because 

it’s very clearly not in the Act. 

 

Perhaps the minister is aware that it will be included in the 

regulations, and in the regulation authority we’ll have to see 

whether the Lieutenant Governor in Council has that authority. 

I don’t see it. It isn’t jumping out at me at this point in time, but 

I’m just curious why the minister would indicate that when it’s 

. . . I can’t find it in the proposed bill. Now I could be missing 

something and maybe when it comes to committee time, I’ll 

have to raise that question with him and find out exactly how it 

is he’s determined that there will be five members on the 

commission. 

 

At any rate we do know that the ministry will appoint the 

commissioner, which is an employee of the ministry, and the 

responsibilities of the commission is just going to be to regulate 

and supervise these contests or exhibitions and all the licensing 

and enforcing under the Act. So there’s a number of authorities 

that the commission will have. 

 

Part III of the Act is split into, I think, three divisions. The first 

division is in terms of the issuing of licences. So there’s a 

number of licences that are being proposed here and I suppose 

there’s going to be a few fees that will come into the 

government as a result of that. 

 

So there’s four different kinds of things that you will be 

required to get a licence for. First of all, anyone who wants to 

promote, conduct, or hold a professional contest or exhibition 

needs a licence. So the promoters and the people that are 

putting them on. 

 

Secondly anyone who wants to participate as a contestant in the 

contest. So you need a licence for the event and now you need a 

licence for the contestant. 

 

Thirdly, and again coming from a layperson’s perspective I 

found this very interesting, anyone who wants to provide 

services as a matchmaker. So I’m wondering. Matchmaker for 

me, Mr. Speaker, is something completely different. I think that 

must be . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Exactly, what’s being 

proposed in this bill. Anyways, this matchmaker will require a 

licence and I assume a matchmaker in this context means 

something to the people in martial arts but to me it means . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well they make matches. 

 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4485 

Ms. Sproule: — They make the matches. Yes. My colleague 

has helped to point out what this was would likely be in 

application. Anyways, so that’s the third type of person that 

requires a licence under this bill, if they are a matchmaker or an 

official or a second. And I don’t know what a second is here 

either. Again the context is a bit strange but apparently if you 

are a second — to me that’s something in time — or second in 

line, but maybe there’s a second involved in these matches as 

well . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Dually? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Duelling. 

  

Ms. Sproule: — Oh duelling. Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you for 

the help here but I’m just not familiar with this sport at all, 

obviously. So I’ll have to ask the minister to maybe clarify that 

a little bit as well. But in this case, the second also requires a 

licence. So there is a number of areas here where licences are 

required and I think it’s quite fascinating to see this process 

unfold, if you will. 

 

There’s a number of sections in the proposed bill that deal with 

the types of licences, how they’re issued, when they can be 

suspended or cancelled, and they’re fairly standard clauses, Mr. 

Speaker. So now you’ve got your licence. We’ve got a 

commission. We’ve got a licence. We’ve got somebody holding 

an event. We’ve got some people that are competitors and 

we’ve got a matchmaker and we’ve got an official, so we’re 

ready to roll. Now what happens next in division 2 of this Act, 

or section of the Act, you need a permit. So you’ve got your 

licences. Now every time you have an event, you are required to 

have a permit. And that’s section 15 of the proposed bill. 

 

There’s a number of subsequent clauses in terms of the event 

permit, how you apply, how they are issued, refusals, when you 

will be refused, suspended, and again a number of different 

types of clauses relating to the issuance of a permit. Interesting. 

Section 23 talks about requiring all the applicants to post 

security to ensure compliance, so they are going to have to 

actually put up some money in order to get this permit, which 

seems to be interestingly appropriate, I suppose you could say. 

 

Finally, section 24. What is the fee required for this permit? Or 

. . . yes, the event permit. In this case it’s not a standard fee but 

it’s actually 5 per cent of the gross gate receipts. This is a bit 

concerning, Mr. Speaker, because those are very difficult to 

monitor when you’re dealing with cash receipts. So I’m not sure 

why the government would choose a percentage in this case and 

I fear that there could be under-representation of the gross gate 

receipts because of the fact they’re handling cash at the gates. 

But there must be a reason and again this will be something I 

would be interested in asking the minister about, why they 

chose gross gate receipts rather than a straight-up event fee or 

some sort of schedule of fees that might make sense. 

 

On the next division here is notification by the commission. So 

they can’t do a lot, any of these things, issuing the licences or 

the permits or cancel them unless they give the event holder or 

the permit holder an opportunity to make representation. I think 

that’s fine. 

 

Part IV is now the next part of the Act, and that’s about 

enforcement. Quite a long part of the Act. It talks about 

inspections, investigations. And those are your standard types 

of clauses where a judge can issue a warrant for an 

investigation, and those all seem to make good sense, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Division 2 talks about administrative penalties and division 3 

talks about the offences and penalties. So the fines in this case 

could be as high as $25,000 for violations of the Act, all which 

seem very, very normal and appropriate. 

 

Part V is the section regarding appeals. Now we have an 

adjudicator, and this talks about how you can appeal decisions 

here. The Lieutenant Governor in Council can appoint the 

adjudicator, and it could be any number of adjudicators 

according to clause 32, which again is in contrast to the 

minister’s comment that the fifth person on the committee will 

be this adjudicator, if that’s the way that’s going to work. And I 

need to ask him more questions about that. At any rate, the 

adjudicators can be appointed to hear complaints or concerns 

about these contests and events. 

 

And I think the only thing that I found interesting here, and this 

is coming from some of the work I’m doing in my constituency 

office, Mr. Speaker, is that in section 40 there’s a right to appeal 

the adjudicator’s decision to the court. And I’m just curious 

about this because I’ve been doing some work with the 

Workers’ Compensation Board, and one of the things I’ve 

discovered is that you can’t appeal a decision of the Workers’ 

Compensation Board. But in this case you’re allowed to appeal 

an adjudicator’s decision. So it just seems to me, and I’m not 

sure why that would be, but it would be interesting to know 

why the different approach is being used here and not in the 

case of the board of the Workers’ Compensation Board. But 

that’s just an observation at this point. 

 

Part VI is just the general clause nearing the end of the bill, and 

in that case where the minister can apply also to the court for an 

order to comply. So somehow I think the ministry felt it was 

important that if individuals weren’t complying with the 

provisions of the Act they could force them to comply. 

 

[19:45] 

 

I’m trying to picture this and where this would happen. Most 

cases, if you’re not meeting the terms of your licence or the 

permit that you’re issued for the event, you would just cancel 

the licence or the event. But somehow I think the ministry is 

interested in forcing compliance. And again I think these are 

questions that I will look forward to posing to the minister once 

we get a chance to examine this bill in committee, to find out 

exactly what the thinking is because we don’t have any 

indication here under the comments that were provided by the 

minister. 

 

So then we get into the regulations, which is a long list of things 

that are being allowed, being provided for in the Act. Again I 

don’t see anything here in particular describing the composition 

of the commission except for I guess the very last clause, which 

allows the lieutenant to do anything necessary to carry out the 

intent of this Act. I would prefer to see it in the Act just so you 

know what you’re dealing with right upfront instead of having 

to hunt it down. And again, that is a question I will want to pose 

to the minister when we get a chance to talk about it in 

committee. 



4486 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

I guess some general comments. That’s basically the content of 

the bill. We are hoping that people are, you know, bringing 

forward concerns that they have about this Act. I don’t know 

anything about mixed martial arts. It’s not part of my world at 

all. The most competitive sports I was involved in is, you know, 

curling and volleyball, which are basically non-contact sports. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Bridge. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Bridge is something very interesting because, 

you know, competitive bridge can be contact. Contract bridge 

or competitive bridge, they tried to actually have it listed as a 

sport in the Olympics. And I was thinking about this because 

when you see someone kicking someone or punching them, and 

that’s called a sport, is always something that I’ve found kind of 

interesting. And I’m just observing that, Mr. Speaker, without 

passing any sort of judgment on it. But if you’ve ever played 

contract bridge against some of the elderly citizens at the bridge 

club, I can tell you it’s every bit as competitive and cutthroat as 

any sort of contact sport could be. So perhaps there’s room for 

bridge in this bill as well. If there’s a professional bridge 

contest, maybe they’ll have to apply for a licence. Duplicate 

bridge is a wicked, wicked, competitive sport. At any rate, Mr. 

Speaker, I know there’s, as I indicated . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Scars. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Scars from . . . Mr. Speaker’s showing me his 

scars as a result of his competitive sports. 

 

I do have a number of questions that I want to pose to the 

minister when we are able to talk about this in committee, and 

so that will conclude my remarks at this point. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 108, The Athletics Commission Act. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Opposed say nay. The ayes have it. Carried. It 

has to go, it has to be voted to go to committee. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill 108, The Athletics Commission Act be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 102 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 102 — The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to wade 

into Bill No. 102, An Act to amend The Builders’ Lien Act, this 

evening. I think I’d like to start by talking about what the 

original, The Builders’ Lien Act itself was set out to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So The Builders’ Lien Act is legislation in Saskatchewan to 

protect tradespeople and professionals who do activity to 

improve a property. So I think if we look at the definition in the 

original Act, what does improving a property mean? It means: 

 

“improvement” means a thing constructed, erected, built, 

placed, altered, repaired, improved, added to, dug or drilled 

or intended to be constructed, erected, built, placed, 

altered, repaired, improved, added to, dug or drilled on or 

into, land, except a thing that is not affixed to the land or 

intended to become part of the land and includes: 

 

landscaping, clearing, breaking, excavating, digging, 

drilling, tunnelling, filling, grading or ditching of, in, on 

or under land; 

 

the demolition or removal of any building, structure or 

works or part thereof; 

 

[and] services provided by an architect or engineer. 

 

So that was the original Act, Mr. Speaker. So that’s what 

improvement means and what one of these things that this Act 

has done . . . Or sorry, Bill No. 102, An Act to amend The 

Builders’ Lien Act will now be adding to the definition of 

improvement. It now includes the services of land surveyors. So 

land surveyors who would work alongside architects and 

engineers and other professionals and tradespeople previously 

would have no opportunity or very little recourse if they 

weren’t paid for a job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So back to I guess my point here. I never finished that. What the 

purpose of the original legislation does, it allows certain groups 

who make an improvement to a property to put a lien or a 

warning in essence on the property if they don’t get paid for the 

work that they’ve done. 

 

So could you imagine, Mr. Speaker, going to work and working 

very hard to ensure that someone for whom you’ve been 

contracted to, to improve a property . . . You do your work in 

good faith. You spend the resources to hire your own 

employees, perhaps. You spend money on materials and 

subsequently you don’t get paid for the job that you’ve done. 

That would be incredibly frustrating. And beyond frustrating, it 

has a huge impact on a business’s bottom line if they don’t get 

paid or an individual’s bottom line if he or she doesn’t get paid 

for work that they’ve done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So up until this point, land surveyors, who again as I said have 

been working alongside with these other professionals and 

tradespeople, haven’t had the ability to use the process to put a 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4487 

lien on a piece of property or work that they’ve done, Mr. 

Speaker. So this amendment will allow land surveyors to be 

included in the Act and be able to take measures to get paid if 

someone has not done so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know the land surveyors were here in the fall and they are 

very pleased and looking forward to having that opportunity if 

need be. Obviously it’s not something you want to have to do, 

Mr. Speaker, but when it comes to being paid for your work, it 

is a necessity. 

 

So what else does this amendment do, Mr. Speaker? It updates 

the section in the Act that determines when a contract is deemed 

to be complete. So at this moment the original Act says a 

contract is complete when the price of completion is not more 

than 1 per cent or $1,000, whichever is less. And this number, 

$1,000, was established in 1986, so a fair length of time ago, 

Mr. Speaker, and definitely no longer reflects the current 

construction costs. So this bill, this amendment, Mr. Speaker, 

will appeal or repeal the $1,000. A contract will be considered 

complete when the price of completion is not more than 1 per 

cent of the contract price. 

 

The minister had said in his comments that this is used as a 

flexible benchmark that assists to what . . . I should give you his 

exact quote. Actually he said, “. . . this is viewed as a flexible 

benchmark that will adjust automatically with the scale of 

construction projects.” 

 

I don’t know if there would have been room. This is a question 

that we can ask, Mr. Speaker, that the $1,000 or the 1 per cent 

of the project, is the 1 per cent the right number? Did the 

government do any consultation with those affected parties to 

find out if 1 per cent was the right number? I don’t know, Mr. 

Speaker. The minister didn’t allude to those comments at all or 

to that consultation at all. He’s simply saying that that is the . . . 

He says that’s a flexible benchmark, but who knows? We’re not 

sure. Is that number the right number? We will continue to talk 

to stakeholders and find out if that’s the case. That’s a question 

to ask for sure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing this bill does is it increases the limitation period 

that applies to trust claims from one to two years. So right now 

it provides that a trustee is discharged from his or her 

obligations at one year after the contract is complete or 

abandoned. So as the minister points out, this period does not 

match up with the general two-year limitation period in The 

Limitations Act. So this can be a problem, the minister points 

out, because a trust claim is usually brought at the same time as 

a lien claim, which is a two-year period. So this legislation is 

trying to make those two things match up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I know that as I had said, that the land surveyors are very 

happy with these changes. Like I said, to be left out of a process 

where you’re working alongside other professionals and 

tradespeople and not have the opportunity to have the 

mechanisms to get paid for work that you do, if someone 

decides not to do that, that is definitely a problem. And so that’s 

good that the government is rectifying that situation. 

 

I’m just going over the notes here. I think, Mr. Speaker, that 

that covers the bases on this bill. It’s not a lengthy bill, but 

again it is designed, the original bill is to make sure that those 

involved in the construction industry get paid for their work and 

materials, which is only fair. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 103 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in on discussion as it relates to Bill 103, The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act. This bill 

is pretty straightforward. It is simply intended, as I understand, 

to be another tool to go after parents who don’t pay for child 

support. In this event it provides a tool of not providing them a 

hunting or an angling licence. And certainly that seems to be a 

very reasonable tool to extend to have just another mechanism 

to make sure that those parents that aren’t paying for child 

support are doing so. 

 

Just when I look back I guess it’s interesting to note that there’s 

other tools that government would utilize first, as I read the bill, 

before they would utilize this mechanism here. They would 

garnish wages, they would consider suspending a driver’s 

licence, they would intercept funds receivable such as GST 

[goods and services tax] dollars available to a person. They 

could collapse pension entitlements or RRSPs [registered 

retirement savings plan]. And of course there’s seizure of 

property. So there’s quite a few mechanisms already in place to 

ensure the collection of dollars that are owed for child support. 

 

And the office that administers the maintenance orders does 

important work on this front on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 

Certainly for someone to not be following through with the 

payments owed for child support is something that should not 

be accepted, something that there should be severe and several 

mechanisms to intervene and cause proper payment. And 

certainly government has many of those tools. This bill itself 

expands those tools, and as I say would allow government — 

the Ministry of the Environment — not to grant a fishing or a 

hunting licence to someone who hasn’t paid child support. And 

you know, Mr. Speaker, I support that step. I support not 

allowing someone who hasn’t paid child support to access a 

hunting licence or a fishing licence. 

 

Now what I should say is that it’s interesting though, it says that 

the maintenance enforcement office regularly reviews and 

suggests updates to the legislation to ensure that it’s offering the 



4488 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

best possible service. I’m just wondering if this was the only 

recommendation that came forward. This is one that we would 

support, another tool that would provide some protection for 

families. That being said, I’m wondering if there’s other tools. I 

wonder what other provinces are doing on this front. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And that’s some of the work and consultation that the official 

opposition will be doing over the coming weeks and months, 

just to make sure that we have as robust of tools as we should 

have as a province and that, while opening up the Act to make 

this step, one that I support, to prohibit or be able to prohibit 

someone who hasn’t paid child support from receiving a 

hunting or angling licence, I’m wondering if there’s other 

mechanisms, other actions that other provinces are taking. 

Because certainly this is a matter that just, you know, shouldn’t 

be taken lightly at all; it has, when someone’s in breach of those 

obligations, it often leaves families in very vulnerable economic 

and social conditions. And it’s something that certainly we 

shouldn’t accept. 

 

Just on the point though, and stepping aside from the actual 

changes as it relates to the enforcement Act, but on to the piece 

of hunting and fishing licences, it’s fair to say that there’s many 

concerns with what this government’s done on that front, Mr. 

Speaker, where they’ve overhauled a system and made, built a 

system that’s housed out of Tennessee, I understand, Mr. 

Speaker, that is now managing all these licences and created 

technology that so many Saskatchewan vendors, Saskatchewan 

outfitters, Saskatchewan recreational companies and gas 

stations can no longer provide. And it doesn’t make sense, Mr. 

Speaker, to shut out Saskatchewan retailers from authorizing 

fishing and hunting licences and to be exporting all that activity 

and those contracts down to a Tennessee company with all sorts 

of concerns from a privacy perspective of the collection of that 

information. 

 

And I recall, as you know, Mr. Speaker, I am an avid fisher and 

hunter, and I recall chatting with many here this past summer 

and throughout the fall, and chatting with some of the retailers 

as well and outfitters across our province, and there’s great 

frustration with Saskatchewan people with outsourcing to 

Tennessee the system to license hunters and fishers in this 

province. Many hunters and fishers haven’t been able to access 

their fishing or hunting licence. 

 

I think of a time I stopped in up at Canadian Tire north. I think 

it was May long weekend or just . . . right around May long 

weekend. Many fishers were in there trying to get their angling 

licences, lined up frustrated that they couldn’t get them 

anymore. And chatting with individuals there at Canadian Tire 

north, a big retailer, they said that they couldn’t make the 

investment in the technology required, the high cost to get into 

that service. And of course this impacts so many, and many of 

them were seniors, Mr. Speaker, who I think we should be 

thinking of because many of those seniors have been great 

stewards of the land and have been fishers and hunters their 

entire life and it’s part of their cultural being. And we shouldn’t 

be doing . . . Taking actions as this government has to prohibit 

them from or to challenge them from getting licences. 

 

So you know, as it relates to the outsourcing to a Tennessee 

company and the security of information and the shutting out of 

Saskatchewan outfitters and gas stations and retailers from the 

selling of fishing and hunting licences, that just doesn’t make 

sense. Exporting those profits and jobs to Tennessee doesn’t 

make sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What does make sense is the portion of this bill that we will 

support or do support, and that is the changes made that if 

someone hasn’t been paying their spousal support or their child 

support, that they won’t be able to get a hunting or fishing 

licence in Saskatchewan after other actions have been taken by 

this government. I’ve gone through the list of those other 

actions, but that’s something we support. 

 

But I do wonder as I say, Mr. Speaker, when this was reviewed, 

if this was the only recommendation that was brought forward 

or if there wasn’t an opportunity to further strengthen 

legislation and protections for families and provide greater 

enforcement of maintenance orders. And I wonder what the 

model is in other jurisdictions that might have been able to be 

learned from on this front. And certainly as part of the official 

opposition, we’ll engage in that sort of consultation, bring that 

forward to the process. 

 

And as I say, Mr. Speaker, though, as it relates to no longer for 

many Saskatchewan people being able to actually find a fishing 

or hunting licence at their local retailer, that’s a disappointment 

to most Saskatchewan people. 

 

At this point in time as it relates to Bill 103, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, I will adjourn debate. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 104 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise tonight and enter into this debate on Bill No. 

104, An Act to make a consequential amendment resulting from 

the enactment of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

And my colleague from Regina just gave a pretty good 

discussion about our hopes and fears around what this all 

means. And of course you know, as he said clearly, we want to 

do all that we can to make sure maintenance orders are 

enforced. And that only makes a lot of sense. And we have a 

pretty high standard here in Saskatchewan of achieving that and 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4489 

we are very proud of that, of the office that looks after that. And 

so if this is one more tool that they need in their tool kit, that’s 

fair enough. We are very interested in hearing about that. 

 

But I do have some questions, and very similar to what the 

member had earlier said about when they did the consultation, 

about what can we do to make our maintenance orders — the 

enforcement rate — much higher? Was this the only thing they 

could think of? Was this the only thing they could think of? 

 

Now interestingly, we do have a pretty high enforcement rate. 

The office that works out of Justice is a pretty effective office. 

And we were able to and I, just a few months ago, we were able 

to question them a bit about their work, and the auditor had 

their comments and they were pretty favourable, if I recall that 

correctly.  

 

But this was an interesting one. I mean, it’s interesting. I didn’t 

realize, you know, when you have preconceptions about 

maintenance orders that, you know, it only relates to a certain 

age group, and when kids grow up and they hit 18 that the 

enforcement is done. And that’s not the case. In fact, 

maintenance orders can go on for quite a while. Or the payment 

that didn’t happen is actually still outstanding, and this in fact 

could . . . in fact I understand that there are actually seniors who 

are still involved with making sure that they pay their 

maintenance orders. It’s not all done just because the child hits 

18. 

 

And so this is an interesting one about fishing licences, because 

what’s interesting is that you’re not really . . . It’s more of a 

punishment. And that’s fair enough. We want to do all that we 

can if that’s the case. But I’m wondering, in terms of the 

amount of red tape, and we want to be effective. You don’t 

want to have just a piece of legislation that says we’re going to 

take away your fishing licence but we’re not really going to do 

that because it’s just too much work to actually do that. 

 

And you know, I know this government, to a fault almost, I 

mean, they’ve really on one hand gone in and cut a lot of red 

tape, where sometimes I wonder if they have gone too far 

because we don’t know what’s going on anymore. And here 

they are creating another step that we really want to know how 

effective it can be. How effective can it be? 

 

It’s really important that there is some . . . You know, when you 

think about a tool or a hammer or whatever, you’ve got to make 

sure you don’t make a hammer out of something really soft 

because it won’t do any work. It won’t hurt. So how will this 

really . . . Are they really planning on, you know, the Nerf 

hammer? 

 

How do you really make sure this will achieve the results, you 

know, that we’re going to drive up the enforcement order, the 

enforcement compliance from 90 to 95 per cent? That last 5 per 

cent can be pretty difficult. And I’m wondering, is it because 

they have fishing licences, you know? I don’t know. Maybe 

they do. Maybe that’s something that we’ve heard from the 

office, but we’ll have lots of questions about that. 

 

They’ve done very good work, very effective work. But will 

this be as effective as putting another law on the table? And 

then you do have a responsibility. These folks over here will 

have a responsibility to make sure that’s carried out. It’s not just 

something that we’ve spent hours debating in the House and 

they’ve spent and the Department of Justice has spent a lot of 

time thinking about. It has to be something that has some teeth 

and has some effect. It has to have an effect. 

 

And so I’m curious about this. I’m really . . . And it’s 

interesting. As my colleague said, was this the only suggestion 

they had? Or were there others, and they discounted them and 

put them off the side of the table? And we know that often, and 

we’ve seen this earlier, even earlier today my colleague from 

the North was talking about how we’ve been paying for seven 

years the rush to put essential services legislation through 

improperly. And they’ve done it improperly because they didn’t 

listen. They didn’t listen to the people who really have some 

experience in this. 

 

So this is, while it is a small thing, it’s a pretty significant thing. 

And I know that in fact we have a lot of beautiful lakes in our 

province. We have a lot of people who love fishing, and this is 

one more wrinkle in that case. 

 

And as my colleague earlier said about the snafu that happened 

when we moved to having the local co-ops or the local 

Canadian Tire selling the fishing licences, and it was pretty 

much a small-business type of thing. And I know this 

government prides itself on being small-business oriented, 

except for when it comes to fishing licences, the bigger it can 

be. If we could have an international conglomerate look after 

our fishing licence, it must be a good thing, you know. And so 

only when you have international businesses, when you have an 

international office dealing with this. 

 

So it’s really important that, I mean, here’s where we have this 

inconsistency. You know, we love the small business but we 

don’t want the Co-op selling a fishing licence. We don’t want 

the Canadian Tire selling the fishing licences or the local gas 

station. 

 

You know, I think this is really, this is the inconsistency, the 

incongruency we see of this government. When on one hand 

they love small business and they hate getting rid of red tape, 

and here we introduce red tape and we want the big business to 

deal with it. So it doesn’t make common sense at all. There’s no 

common sense in this at all. And we have said when it makes 

sense we will be right there. We will step right up and work 

with the government. 

 

But we’ve seen this Tennessee licence boondoggle that they 

had. And I mean, they may be proud of it. It sounds the minister 

thinks it was the greatest thing since sliced bread to bring the 

Tennesseans up to sell the fishing licences. He really likes that 

idea . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Davy Crockett. He must 

have been sold on the Davy Crockett thing. 

 

But here we have a situation. Here we have a situation where 

what we’re trying to do, a simple thing, is get more people to 

pay their maintenance orders. And is this going to really 

achieve that? I don’t know. So we’ll have lots of questions. 

We’ll have lots of questions and what the consequences of this 

legislation will be, will be of interest. I think that it’s an 

important area and we want to make sure that we do the right 

thing. And if this the right thing, then fair enough and we’ll go 



4490 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

with it. But I do have to send out some flags that we’ve had 

some big questions about the lack of common sense from the 

other side when it comes to some of the things that they’ve 

done. That just seems like when if it ain’t broke, then why are 

you fixing it by bringing up Tennesseans to deal with this. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s lots of interest. And I know 

that the members on the opposite side have really sparked up on 

this a bit. But I think that we’ll have questions in committee, 

but I know many of my colleagues will want to speak to this 

piece of legislation. As small as it is, it just sort of indicates 

that, you know, have they done their full . . . have they done all 

their homework? Have they done all their homework? That’s 

the question we have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn Bill No. 104, 

An Act to make a consequential amendment resulting from the 

enactment of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2013. I do so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Bill No. 105 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 105 — The 

Informal Public Appeals Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter the debate tonight about Bill 105, The Informal Public 

Appeals Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that we always do as 

opposition and the general public needs to do when a bill is 

before us, we need to understand where it’s coming from, 

who’s asked for it, what is the impetus for the bill being before 

us. That’s one of the first questions you need to ask. And in 

fact, the minister outlines in his second reading speech that in 

2011, the Uniform Law Conference of Canada recommended 

that the Uniform Informal Public Appeals Act be adopted by 

Canadian jurisdictions to govern the operations of informal 

appeals. So this, the minister has laid out, that this is come from 

a national body, the Uniform Law Conference of Canada. 

 

So when we think about public appeals, people in 

Saskatchewan are very good at coming to the aid or to 

assistance of those who have maybe fallen on harder times, 

whether it’s . . . You just need to think back: news stories that 

we all hear in our own communities about when perhaps a 

parent has died tragically and doesn’t have life insurance. We 

have situations where there’s been a fire and families lose 

absolutely everything. A home floods and people don’t have 

insurance. Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan are incredibly 

generous, and when they know that an individual or a family is 

in need, they will often come to the table to help try to resolve 

some or to ease some of that suffering. So we do have a very 

proud history of helping our neighbour here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this particular Act, Bill No. 105, The Informal Public 

Appeals Act, public appeals or informal appeals are exactly that 

— informal appeals to the public for donation, but they’re not 

campaigns established by organizations. They are spontaneous 

appeals and are usually initiated by private individuals without 

first obtaining legal advice. 

 

So the goal of this bill, the minister outlines, is to facilitate and 

enhance the practice by addressing some of the unintended 

consequences that can arise when we have well-intentioned 

people from the public who embark upon one of these informal 

appeals without knowing all the ins and outs of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the minister outlines that The Informal Public Appeals Act 

will define public appeal for the purpose of the Act to limit the 

scope to sporadic and informal appeals. So it can’t be a constant 

permanent appeal, Mr. Speaker. These again are to be sporadic 

and informal. The Act will confirm that funds raised through a 

public appeal are held in trust, and it will establish a default 

scheme that will apply only where a public appeal is not 

regulated under legislation or a formally created trust. It will 

also establish a mechanism for disposal of surplus funds or an 

ability to provide refunds where needed. It creates a power for 

the courts to direct application of surplus funds. And it sets out 

the powers and duties of trustees, including investments of 

funds, further public appeals, and the transfer of funds to 

another body. And it provides for regulatory authority to set out 

user-friendly forms with examples, to be used by members of 

the public. 

 

So I think in this day and age particularly, Mr. Speaker, 

obviously we’ve been very good in Saskatchewan in taking care 

of our neighbours. But in this time of technology where crowd 

funding is a very common thing . . . People do it for their 

businesses. Sometimes start-up entrepreneurs do this. But I’ve 

also seen crowd funding for these very appeals, for informal 

appeals, so doing some online fundraising when someone 

comes across hard times and needs some help. 

 

So there’s one particular site called CauseBox that helps people, 

helps an individual put out a public appeal and raise money for 

just such occasions. So particularly in this day and age of 

technology, this bill becomes even I think more helpful in many 

ways. 

 

People in Saskatchewan are generous, but if you embark upon a 

fundraising effort and don’t have some parameters laid out, it 

could prove to be problematic. So I know that the minister talks 

about instead of putting up hurdles it’s this government’s hope 

to seek to remove the traps he says that have evolved so that 

well-meaning trustees who commence an appeal are not made 

victims of their own good intentions. 

 

One of the things he talks about is having electronic forms and 

making sure that . . . So if you want to embark upon a public 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4491 

appeal for someone in your community who has fallen on hard 

times, you can access these forms online. But often people go to 

their local credit union or their local banking institution. And I 

understand that these forms are going to be made available in 

these kinds of locations as well. 

 

So again, as members of the opposition and citizens of 

Saskatchewan, one of our jobs is to take a look at where a bill is 

coming from. And we’ll pursue this a little bit further, but the 

minister in his comments again laid out that this was the 

Uniform Law Conference of Canada recommending that other 

jurisdictions do this as well. It makes sense to put some 

parameters in place to make sure that those raising funds are 

protected. People in Saskatchewan have big hearts and need to 

make sure that their work is not put in jeopardy or it causes any 

difficulties, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this at first reading here makes good sense, Mr. Speaker, but 

we will continue to consult and talk to various stakeholders and 

try to understand if this is in fact the best way of doing this. The 

minister has laid out a specific way, and those are other 

questions that we ask as opposition. So what are other 

jurisdictions doing? The Uniform Law Conference of Canada 

has recommended a particular bill, but how does this differ 

from it? Is there another way of doing this? How have other 

jurisdictions done it? Is there a more effective way? What could 

be added or enhanced to make this even more effective? So 

those are all questions that we will be asking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I do know I have colleagues who will also weigh in on the 

discussion about Bill 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act, and 

with that I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 106 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 106 — The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in on Bill 

106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013. And I guess 

to give some comments, and going from some of the comments 

that the minister has put forward in his I guess response when 

he introduced the bill and his second reading. And I guess I 

look at it two different ways. We’ve always said very clearly 

that we have to consult the industry, and in some of the 

comments I have seen, the minister has commented that he has 

done the process and on the wishes of the Law Society has 

requested these changes and these amendments be changed to 

accommodate, and I guess some of the members, and the way 

. . . And I’ll go over some of it and some of the response. 

 

In a provision clarifying regulating the profession so the public 

interest is paramount, he talks about I guess making sure the 

public clearly is being looked after here and the best interests of 

the public, from what I can understand, they’re clarifying. So 

that part of this provision here, which is good because it talks 

about making sure the public interests are protected and looked 

after and I think that’s one of the provisions in here they’re 

amending. And that’s good. 

 

The society is given the authority also to regulate not only 

individual members but law firms. And I think that’s 

amendment that’s changed. And this is good. I think from what 

I could see if this is, if the Law Society has brought this 

forward, if law firms have asked for this . . . And maybe, you 

know, I don’t know. I haven’t talked to any. But it’s interesting. 

I know we will do our research and some of my colleagues will 

talk to, you know, some of their law firms that they know that 

are maybe running for and have established a long and a good 

law firm, a practice that’s very professional, and truly we’ll get 

their input that this is something that they’ve called along. 

 

Not only that. There might be individuals within the Law 

Society that have shared their view to some of my colleagues 

that sit on this side of the House and maybe members on the 

other side. And hopefully that has happened, that dialogue is 

taking place and, you know, I have no reason to believe that 

hasn’t happened. It sounds like this is a provision that the Law 

Society has requested on behalf of government to do on their 

behalf and that’s a good thing so in that case. 

 

You know, they talk about in there about deadlines and making 

sure that whether there’s I guess a hearing, a panel, a decision, 

they’ve made some amendments to allow for a process when 

they had a timeline to make sure that whatever comes before 

that panel . . . And they’re even suggesting that it would be a 

panel rather than the full I guess committee, board, whatever the 

Law Society, how they normally would handle things. My 

interpretation of this is it’s a smaller group that would have an 

opportunity to hear some of the information and then I guess 

make a recommendation. We’ll have to figure that out in 

committee and exactly ask for clarification on that. 

 

But so what I could see so far from the minister’s second 

reading comments he talked about, there are some provisions in 

there to do that, which is good. You know, it’s admissions panel 

is what they refer to, the actual panel that would look at this. 

And it would try to make a decision and they refer to in a timely 

manner like I said, rather than there was a number of days. I 

believe it was 45. It is now they’re looking at different options 

in a timely manner so that these I guess interests of 

Saskatchewan residents are being taken in account but also for a 

law firm or an individual that I guess is going before this 

admissions panel. They get an answer in a timely manner, 

which is probably something that’s needed so they can go on 

and provide should they be found . . . 

 

So I know in committee we’ll have to ask some of these 

questions, and we’ll ask. Some of, you know, our colleagues I 

know will go out and ask some of the professions where they’re 

going with it. 

 

But I also want to make this . . . There is a provision in there 

about the board and the Law Society in itself. When you’re 

looking at the . . . There’s an exemption here. And they talk 



4492 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

about getting not only lawyers on this panel, committee, but 

then on the Law Society they’re opening up for I guess 

appointment of individuals maybe who bring a different 

perspective other than a lawyer to the table to assist. And I, you 

know, I think that’s a good idea. They’ll look at different 

individuals, and they’ll go through a process how they 

determine that. I’m not sure how they’re going to do that, but 

it’s from my understanding, what I can see in here, it’s a 

provision that they’re going to use. 

 

But here it’s interesting. And I’m looking at it as I read this. We 

have a provision in there. It’s an exemption to protect 

individuals who volunteer from liability for good faith decisions 

that people do in good faith. They’ve made a decision. They’ve 

done their due diligence with looking at the information. They 

made a decision, and something comes back later. There is 

some protection in there for liability, and I know Saskatchewan 

has that provision for volunteers. 

 

Having said that, there’s limitations on one taking a volunteer to 

court or for wrongdoing. If they can show that they’ve done 

their due diligence, it protects individuals. And I think that’s 

important because we have a lot of volunteers, people who sit 

on boards, and they should be protected. They’re not 

compensated a lot. They volunteer. And as long as they’ve 

shown their due diligence, there’s provisions in there to protect 

them. I think that’s a good thing. I said that when I heard about 

this change a long time ago. It was good. It gave some added 

protection and comfort to those that are volunteering because in 

some situations you volunteer, Mr. Speaker. And you do, you 

volunteer your time. And Saskatchewan is known for the 

volunteer work that we do as Saskatchewan . . . We look after 

one another. 

 

Having to go into that about this liability, currently probably 

right now this government, the Sask Party government that 

currently wish it had some provisions where they would not be 

held accountable by the Saskatchewan residents. They wish 

they had an exemption. But I tell you, Saskatchewan people, 

when you look at affordability . . . And I want to show some 

examples of how you can use liability to protect you. 

 

They can’t stand behind and say . . . And I think one day the 

people will judge them on affordability, on seniors. There are so 

many things we talk about in this Legislative Assembly. Our 

farmers. We look at what’s going on right now, the crisis 

they’re going through with grain, with the producers, and the 

challenges they’re facing. 

 

[20:30] 

 

I think individuals, hard-working families that are out there 

working and they see some of the legislation that this 

government did, they will not have no protection. They will not 

have the protection they think they’re going to have. They will 

have to answer to Saskatchewan people. And Saskatchewan 

people entrust in all of us that we’ll stand up; we’ll do the best 

for Saskatchewan. And there will not be no liability insurance 

or that they will be able to sneak and hide under because I think 

the public will know what’s going on. We’re going to help 

show the public what’s going on. Saskatchewan people, they’ve 

worked hard and they have a right to live in a province that’s 

affordable. 

And right now they’re seeing nothing but costs going up for our 

seniors, for people who are living in low-income housing, 

seniors’ units — 30 per cent. There are some things going on, 

and there should be some protection. And I would think some 

of those members would want to try to see if they can get some 

provisions. I don’t know if the Premier will grant them, you 

know, your liability; you’re exempt. Good luck with that one. 

See how that works for you. 

 

But at the end of the day, I just want to say about the liability. 

There are some things going on, Mr. Speaker, in this province 

that families are truly struggling. And you know, whether 

you’re in northern Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, whether 

you live in the urban centres, there are challenges when you 

look at the cost of utilities, when you look at the cost of just 

trying to survive and take care of their families. They are being 

asked to do less and less with while this government receives 

huge, huge revenue to its coffers to do what it wants. It’s 

missed priorities. It’s taking care of the money. Well you know 

what? I think people are starting to question that, and they will 

be judged on that. There’s not no liability going to cover them. 

 

So it’s time that they’re going to stand up. They’re the 

government. They’re responsible for the decisions they’ve 

made. They’ve had seven years, and they’ve made the 

decisions. They’re going to have to live . . . You can’t keep 

passing it on to the NDP [New Democratic Party] and it’s all 

their fault. They’re going to have to stand up. And the people 

are going to hold them. People don’t even listen to that 

anymore, 16 years. They don’t even want to hear that because 

they’re saying they’re tired of that. That might’ve worked when 

you first got in, but no longer. 

 

So I just wanted to show some comparisons, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, just wanted to show some comparisons on this bill. Now 

we’ve had many years of this current administration, and I think 

people are starting to question. I’ve had people who come up to 

me and talk about liability. They’re going to hold that 

government to account. 

 

People are making some clear, clear expectations of the 

government, and they’re not happy. They did put a lot of trust. 

I’ve had people come up to me. I trusted them. I put my trust in 

them, and they haven’t done what I wanted to do. They haven’t 

taken care of what we’ve asked them to take care of, for our 

next generation, for our grandchildren, our children, to make 

sure there is something there left over. When our economy was 

doing so great, there was no province that had the revenue that 

this government has had and unfortunately has done a terrible 

job of. But let the people judge that. And the people will judge 

them on that. It’ll come a day of reckoning. Trust me. 

 

You know, sometimes they have what they have to say, you 

know, and they talk about the large majority, the large majority 

over there. They kind of mock about the members opposite, 

about the numbers. And that’s fine. We’re here representing the 

people of this good province, holding this government to 

account, and the people are talking about that. And some of 

those backbenchers better be careful because they may get a 

message they don’t like. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I know there is time to ask 

some of these in committee, and I don’t want to lose the area 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4493 

where I was going. I just wanted to show an example, some of 

the comments about liability and stuff. So at this point, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 106. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 113 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 113 — The Powers 

of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la 

Loi de 2002 sur les procurations be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to enter 

discussion here as it relates to Bill No. 113, The Powers of 

Attorney Amendment Act here this evening. 

 

In essence this is all about giving some more powers to public 

trustees and guardians without having to appear before a judge. 

It allows for trustees and guardians to continue to make gifts on 

a person’s behalf if they’ve been known to do so. It also sets out 

a fee schedule for power of attorneys. And as well it ensures a 

process for an accounting to be conducted and actions if that 

accounting isn’t satisfactory. 

 

Really at the heart of this bill is the importance of protecting 

vulnerable adults, protecting seniors, protecting vulnerable 

seniors, making sure that they’re treated with respect, dignity, 

and protection. What we see here today is something that 

certainly we’ll be considering and consulting directly with 

seniors on. Certainly most of what’s put forward appears to be 

common sense at first blush, appears to be the kind of changes 

that we would be supportive of. But we want to make sure 

we’re understanding the full intent of government with these 

changes and the full consequences, intended and unintended. 

 

We want to make sure that we’ve done proper consultation with 

seniors on this one, Mr. Speaker. Far too often with that 

government they fail to reach out to seniors across this province 

to understand the realities that they’re facing. And we see that 

most directly in seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker, with a crisis, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s leaving far too many across this province 

without the dignity and quality of care that they deserve and a 

government that seems to simply brush off or dismiss those 

concerns. And when they pretend to be paying some attention to 

it, Mr. Speaker, what they bring forward is a drop in the bucket 

of resources needed to address the challenge. 

 

That being said, some of the measures that are in this Act here 

today seem to make sense. We’ll be consulting directly with 

Saskatchewan seniors to make sure this Act, these changes, 

meets their needs, provides the protection that they deserve. 

And we’ll conduct that over the coming weeks and months. 

 

I will speak just specifically. This sets out certain clarifications 

for how a gift can be administered from a power of attorney. 

For example, first it says if the document creating the . . . It can 

occur if: 

 

First . . . the document creating the power of attorney 

specifically authorizes the making of gifts. Secondly, if an 

amount not to exceed the value prescribed in the 

regulations, and if there are sufficient funds to make the 

gift, and if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the 

adult would have made the gift if she or he had capacity. 

And finally, if the court authorizes the gift. 

 

Those are specific conditions. Of course, they’re set to be in 

place to protect the vulnerable adult. 

 

There’s also, this bill will allow for regulations to set a fee 

schedule, yet it’s less than clear from the introductory words 

from the minister as to how that fee schedule will be managed, 

how it will be established. So certainly we will be looking for 

some further detail on that front, but it seems reasonable to 

make sure there’s clarity as it relates to fees, a fee schedule for 

someone acting under a power of attorney. 

 

And the third part is to make sure that “The Public Guardian 

and Trustee is given new powers to carry out an investigation to 

ensure the accuracy of an accounting.” This is important. It also 

prescribes regulations to form an accounting. It speaks about 

the importance of a midterm accounting and provides as well 

the court the powers to remove an attorney if the accounting is 

not satisfactory. This is important, seem like important 

measures, Mr. Speaker. It’s all about protecting vulnerable 

adults, making sure that they’re not taken advantage of, Mr. 

Speaker. And certainly we’ll just be looking for some further 

detail as to how that accounting process will occur. 

 

It speaks directly to about how a final accounting will occur and 

the time period and when a final accounting needs to occur. 

This is important to ensure the integrity of the process and to, as 

I say, protect the vulnerable adult, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, but I can’t resist when I’m reading about a mid-term 

accounting, and what does it say, Mr. Speaker, that the court 

has given the power to remove an attorney if the accounting is 

not satisfactory, Mr. Speaker? Certainly, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, I think we need to make sure the integrity of seniors’ 

estates and vulnerable adults’ finances are protected. That’s 

important. 

 

But it’s interesting coming from a government who, when it 

relates to the accounting of all of our public finances — the 

public debt, the public revenues, our public resources, our 

public assets — that this government, Mr. Speaker, failed its 

accounting. It failed its accounting, Mr. Speaker, in an 

unprecedented move. And, Mr. Speaker, the first jurisdiction in 

Canada to fail an accounting on its GRF [General Revenue 

Fund] books with an auditor who has reported to Saskatchewan 

people that the books put forward by this government aren’t to 

be trusted, that they’re materially wrong, that they’re 

misleading, Mr. Speaker. And all of those should be big 

concerns for Saskatchewan people, and I know that they are. 

 

But I find it interesting. We support protecting vulnerable 

adults. We support, it would appear, many of the changes that 



4494 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

are brought forth here today, but as it relates to the accounting 

measures, I wish this government would hold itself to the same 

sort of standard, Mr. Speaker. I wish this government would 

comply with accounting standards, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to 

rejecting Canadian GAAP [generally accepted accounting 

principles], Mr. Speaker, and provide the full picture to 

Saskatchewan people because certainly all Saskatchewan 

people deserve nothing less. 

 

But as I say, when we’re looking at the protections here as it 

relates to the powers of an attorney, when it relates to fee 

schedules, when it relates to protecting their estates, their 

books, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be working directly with 

Saskatchewan seniors to make sure that this bill and its 

measures make sense. And we’ll be looking to see if there’s 

areas that could be improved. 

 

And as well, as I say, Mr. Speaker, far too often that 

government rams forward without consulting with the parties 

affected. That’s why we’re going to engage seniors on this 

front. And if there’s consequences, unintended or intended, Mr. 

Speaker, that aren’t satisfactory, we will bring those forward to 

this discussion. If there’s opportunities to improve protections 

for vulnerable adults, we’ll be doing just that as well. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for having me enter debate. And at 

this point in time, I’ll adjourn debate for Bill No. 113, The 

Powers of Attorney Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 114 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 114 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

happy to rise tonight to speak to this bill, again another bill with 

a fairly long name, The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as indicated by the minister, this is another proposed 

bill in the suite of bills that are being brought forward to look at 

the legislation affecting vulnerable adults. And certainly this is 

an area that I think requires constant scrutiny. 

 

We know that elders, many of the senior citizens in our 

province are probably amongst the most vulnerable because 

quite often they’re not able to speak for themselves. And 

certainly I think we see that in increasing numbers as we see 

things like dementia and senility really taking its toll on some of 

our senior citizens. And quite often decision-making is 

obviously affected as these individuals age. 

 

And certainly it’s the role of government and the role of society 

to make sure that these vulnerable people are looked after, that 

they have advocates, they have people speaking for them on 

their behalf with the best of intentions and without any ability 

for them to be abused or violated. That’s not always the case, 

and we know that there are terrible stories of awful things 

happening in elder abuse, and certainly advocacy groups are 

working hard to ensure that these types of situations are caught, 

they’re monitored, and that our regulatory scheme and our 

legislative scheme will reflect the importance of that. 

 

In this case it’s dealing with health care directives and a couple 

of other things that are happening here. But I remember, Mr. 

Speaker, when I was a younger person taking classes in law 

school and the whole idea of a health care directive was a fairly 

new concept. Now it’s close to 20 years ago now, actually over 

20 yeas ago, and the whole idea of being able to express your 

wishes when you were no longer able to do so physically or 

mentally was being attempted through things called health care 

directives. And certainly at the time I took care to ensure that I 

have a health care directive and I know one of my parents has 

also issued one and asked me to look after it. 

 

[20:45] 

 

So this is one way I think that through legislation we have 

provided people with a voice when they no longer have a voice. 

And health care directives I think are a very important tool for 

people to rest comfortably, knowing that their loved ones and 

the people that will be making decisions for them have some 

direction from that individual when those tough decisions . . . 

comes time to make those really tough decisions, often at 

end-of-life situations. 

 

So the minister’s indicated what’s being attempted in this 

particular bill, Bill 114, and one of the I think the issues that 

arises is that often there’s day-to-day decisions that are made 

for individuals who are not able to make decisions for 

themselves — vulnerable adults. And sometimes the caregivers 

are . . . They’re in a long-term care home so these would be the 

staff, the people that are working hard in the long-term care 

homes to ensure that the needs of the particular individual are 

being met. 

 

And one of the things he indicated is that, you know, you don’t 

want to have to phone the person who has authority, their proxy 

or their guardian or their nearest relative or their doctor, when it 

comes to things like dental work. Consenting to dental work is a 

fairly minor decision and so maybe it would be appropriate . . . 

I think that’s what this bill is trying to do, is just to find a 

legislative provision to allow for a day-to-day caregiver to make 

those kinds of decisions. 

 

So I think what’s being proposed here, Mr. Speaker, is basically 

a new clause, section 17.1 which allows a “caregiver” to give 

consent to day-to-day treatments for a person who lacks 

capacity to make a health care decision where there’s no proxy 

or nearest relative willing and available to make that decision. 

 

Now I don’t know about dental work because certainly dental 

work is something that can be required and there’s time in that 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4495 

case for a caregiver to consult with the proxy or the personal 

guardian for these people. But I can see where there would be 

situations where caregivers are needing that flexibility to make 

some of those, as they call them, day-to-day decisions. 

 

One of the things that I was not quite sure about was the 

definition of caregiver. There is a definition within the new bill 

that’s being proposed and it reads as follows: 

 

‘caregiver’ means a person who occupies a position 

designated in the regulations as a caregiver position; 

 

And then there’s provisions now being made for regulations to 

designate a position as a caregiver position. So we’re not 

exactly sure again. We have to wait and see what the 

regulations say in order to ensure that this is appropriate 

because it’s going to list a bunch of positions that make a 

caregiver a caregiver. So it seems a bit circular, Mr. Speaker, 

and certainly we’re going to want to look more closely at that to 

make sure that it’s not creating opportunities for inappropriate 

actions. 

 

I guess another issue of clarity that the good folks over at the 

Ministry of Justice have felt is appropriate and necessary is a 

clarification that an enduring power of attorney doesn’t have the 

authority to make health care decisions, and I think that’s an 

important point. Certainly your enduring powers of attorney 

have to make decisions regarding your financial situation, but 

you may or may not want them having the authority to make 

health care decisions. And that’s a different kind of authority 

that you might want to pass on to a completely different person. 

And so I think that amendment is appropriate and necessary, 

and hopefully the wording will capture what’s required here. 

 

I think that’s, at this point in time, the extent of the comments 

that is required to be made on my part by this thing. We see the 

good folks over at Justice, as I said, carefully going through 

legislation, make sure it’s reflecting the times. 

 

And you know, some of these changes that are being made are 

clerical or administrative in nature. The Children’s Law Act is 

now being struck and it’s being reflected properly as The 

Children’s Law Act, 1997. So it’s just some technical or 

administrative corrections that are being made, typographical 

corrections really. 

 

And I’ve commented before and I’ll say it again. I find the 

legislative agenda for this last year is heavy on these types of 

bills, Mr. Speaker, where we see the clerical revisions that are 

necessary when we have a thorough going through of the bills. 

And this is something that our public servants are doing a really 

good job of and I think bringing forward to the ministries that 

they work in. And certainly the Ministry of Justice is no 

exception to that. And you know, I guess my concern is that it’s 

a little light. This legislative agenda is a little bit light on 

substance. And so we at least have the public servants busy 

bringing forward these types of bills to keep us going here in 

the evenings at the legislature. So for that, we thank them. And 

I would like to move to adjourn debate on Bill 114. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 114, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 115 — The Public 

Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going 

to provide some fairly cursory comments on this bill. It’s The 

Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013. Again this 

is a part of this package of bills that we’ve already been 

commenting on that are going to protect those very vulnerable 

people in our society, those adults who rely on others to make 

decisions on their behalf. What we see in this bill is a number of 

amendments being made to this Act to allow I guess a transition 

of The Mentally Disordered Persons Act to this bill, and then 

the repeal of The Mentally Disordered Persons Act. 

 

I think one of the interesting observations that I can make in 

terms of these types of bills protecting vulnerable adults is a 

change in language over the years. And you know, it used to be, 

you remember in the movies, Mr. Speaker, when people are 

making their wills and they’re saying, I being of sound mind 

and body, and somehow the issue of soundness was an 

appropriate term. And in this Act you will see references to the 

word unsound. So obviously the opposite of sound, but that 

language is no longer deemed to be appropriate. 

 

And it even goes further than that and it talks about 

incompetence. Now that, you know, we often talk about that in 

terms of perhaps the government’s management of the grain 

transportation file, but in this case the word incompetence is 

now found by a lot of the people that they consulted with to be 

objectionable. So there is some concern about the use of the 

word incompetence. And what this bill is doing is changing the 

use of that word to the word incapacity or lack of capacity. So 

it’s a semantical change, I think, that’s being asked for by the 

people that were consulted with in terms of this bill. 

 

And so a large portion of the amendments that we find in this 

proposed bill deal with removal of the word incompetence or 

unsound and replacing it with the term capacity or lack of 

capacity. So that makes sense. I don’t know that there’s a whole 

lot of science involved in these technical changes, Mr. Speaker. 

We certainly know that what used to be called mentally 

disordered persons, and that’s the Act that’s being repealed, 

now I guess people that we’re deeming to lack capacity or be 

incapable, again these are the very most vulnerable people in 

our society. And when people are deemed to be incapable or are 

lacking capacity, we’re giving the Public Guardian incredible, 

incredible power over those people. And it’s something that I 

think we must take seriously at the very highest order because 

when people are deemed by law not to have capacity, they are 

probably the most vulnerable folks that we have out there. 



4496 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

So we see things in this bill like a new definition of capacity. 

And in this case it’s the new subsection (a.2) or section 

2(1)(a.2), and it reads: 

 

‘capacity’ means the ability: 

 

(i) to understand information relevant to making a 

decision; and 

 

(ii) to appreciate the reasonably foreseeable 

consequences of making or not making a decision. 

 

So it’s trying to characterize I think the idea of people not 

having capacity, people that would be referred to previously as 

mentally disordered or of unsound mind. So there’s a large shift 

here from the mentally incompetent . . . Sorry, I have to find the 

name of the old bill. The Mentally Disordered Persons Act. And 

a lot of the certificates that are issued by a psychiatrist, in this 

case to declare someone incompetent or incapable, are now 

being moved into this bill, which is The Public Guardian and 

Trustee Act. 

 

So I think this is a review that has been carefully thought out. 

And certainly we can see that the powers of the Public Trustee 

— which are great, as I indicated earlier — are being carefully 

thought through, and hopefully the provisions of this Act will 

ensure the highest possible protection for those people that it’s 

meant to protect. 

 

There’s some technical changes I think that were considered. 

For example in section 31(1), there’s a new clause . . . Sorry, 

I’m going back to actually section 29(3), and it’s a new clause 

(3.1). It took me a bit to figure this out, but it’s a new 

subsection that will allow the Public Guardian and Trustee to 

revoke an acknowledgement to act in the proper circumstances. 

So in this case the Public Guardian and Trustee is acting on 

behalf of an individual, but they know that someone’s going to 

be applying for guardianship under another Act called The 

Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act or there is a 

valid enduring power of attorney. 

 

Anyways you might want to take a look at that, Mr. Speaker, if 

you really want to scratch your head and see what, what . . . It 

took me a while to try and figure it out. I’m not sure I have. But 

they’re deeming, if they revoke this acknowledgement to act, 

then there’s also a deeming for that: it was never signed in the 

first place. And I wasn’t really sure why that was necessary. 

The explanation that we’re provided on page 10 of the 

explanatory notes talks about because you’re deeming it not to 

have been signed, then the acknowledgement to act would have 

also revoked the power of attorney and that couldn’t be 

reinstated. So I’m not exactly sure how that all works, but I 

think the good folks over at Justice have carefully considered it 

and I think it makes sense and certainly there will be, I’m sure, 

opportunities to test the wording to make sure it stands up. But 

again I think the intent is there and it’s correct. 

 

You can see other changes in the Act, in the proposed bill, 

changing of language: if competent to had capacity, for 

example, in section 30. 

 

There’s other situations. Amendments in clause 31(1)(b), 

there’s a new subclause that’s dealing with a gap or a void in 

the Act where, in the situations where there is someone 

available to act without a formal appointment from the court, 

the Public Trustee can act in the interim until the estate of that 

person can be delivered to a personal representative. So this 

deals with some of the gaps I think that have been identified 

over the years and our friends over at Justice are ensuring that, 

while there’s a lull in the more substantive types of legislation 

that are often brought forward by a government, they’re acting 

on some of these bills to make sure that all, all things are looked 

after. 

 

So I think in this case, Mr. Speaker, again we see an attempt or 

an effort to modernize some of the language in relation to 

mentally incompetent which used to be called mentally 

disordered or incompetent and now the new language that’s 

being proposed is that of capacity. Makes sense. I think it’s 

reflecting modernization language and certainly I don’t think 

there’s any concerns and we have not heard an uproar from the 

public on this one. 

 

So in that situation I am going to move that we adjourn the 

debate on Bill 115. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Bill No. 116 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 116 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Always a 

pleasure to be recognized by yourself and to join the debate 

here in this Assembly. Bill No. 116, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2013, it’s an interesting piece of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. Of course The Municipalities Act is one of the 

more fundamental pieces of legislation that we deal with in this 

Chamber, in this province. And it of course provides the “. . . 

legislative framework through which Saskatchewan’s towns, 

villages, resort villages, and rural municipalities exercise their 

powers and provide services to the residents of their respective 

communities,” to quote from the minister’s second reading 

speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again these are fundamental communities, fundamental ways 

of organizing in this province, and so it’s always with a great 

deal of interest seeing a piece of legislation like this come 

forward, seeing how the government is helping — or not — 

local communities to organize themselves, to align resources 

with responsibilities, and to see how the approach to 

government is evolving. 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4497 

Again I guess what I’d like to do tonight, Mr. Speaker, is 

discuss just what we see from the legislation and reflect on that 

a bit, and then we’ll move into the next piece of legislation 

which is the consequential amendments in Bill No. 117. But 

again, the meat in this particular sandwich is certainly Bill No. 

116. 

 

Again referring to the minister’s second reading speech, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister talks about five key areas in the 

legislation, the first being refining the “. . . criteria on which to 

determine whether unincorporated communities and areas have 

sufficient capacity for local governance and municipal status”; 

second, to “. . . provide objective criteria for action when 

municipalities are no longer able to function and meet their 

statutory requirements as local governments”; thirdly, to “. . . 

provide more flexibility and choice for interested urban and 

rural municipalities to voluntarily restructure to form a new 

type of municipality known as a municipal district.” Fourthly, 

providing new means for citizens with concerns about the 

financial or operational management of their municipality to 

have those concerns addressed locally. And fifth and finally, 

Mr. Speaker, to enhance property owners and the minister’s 

ability to ensure municipal compliance with legislation and 

regulations, and to constrain the potential misuse of local 

property tax tools and tax abatements. 

 

Again the minister refers to the difference in consequential 

changes that are made to particular definitions as, you know, 

common usages evolve. And that of course is part and parcel of 

legislative renewal, and this legislation is certainly not exempt 

from that tendency here today. 

 

In terms of the first set of amendments, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister enumerated two goals for those amendments in that 

first grouping, first to introduce a criteria for the establishment 

of an unincorporated community as an organized hamlet, there 

currently being no criteria for the Minister of Government 

Relations to base his or her decision on whether a community 

has sufficient capacity to meet the legislative requirements of an 

organized hamlet. If, again referring to the minister’s secondary 

speech, if I can add to that, Mr. Speaker, again as population 

shifts, as habitation patterns change, Mr. Speaker, this is as it 

needs to be. The legislative framework, the minister responded 

to those changes in habitation. 

 

In terms of what is an organized hamlet, and again this is 

certainly, I think, accurate in terms of the minister’s second 

reading speech where he states: 

 

. . . an organized hamlet can be essentially a training 

ground for an unincorporated community to demonstrate it 

can meet legislative requirements prior to becoming a 

village or resort village. This includes holding meetings, 

preparing annual financial statements and budgets, and 

reporting on its activities to the public and the 

municipality in which it’s situated. Having a minimum 

population will be one criteria and is generally accepted as 

one measure of whether an unincorporated community can 

fulfill the legislative requirements of a municipal 

government. Others include minimum dwellings or 

business premises and minimum taxable assessment to 

ensure the available tax base is sufficient to support 

service delivery. The specific criteria will be set out in 

regulation after further consultation with the municipal 

sector. 

 

Fair enough, Mr. Speaker. This is again a scalable solution to 

the way that different habitation patterns are presented in the 

province and would make sense in terms of not going too far 

right out of the gate, helping these organized hamlets to walk 

before you get into the running involved in becoming a full 

municipality. So I think that, on the face of it, makes some 

sense, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll be watching to see how that plays 

out again with the regulations that will be promulgated after 

further consultation within the municipal sector. 

 

Another thing that the minister refers to in terms of this first 

group of amendments, Mr. Speaker, is to: 

 

. . . provide for the criteria to incorporate new villages and 

resort villages to be set in regulation. This is to ensure 

sufficient capacity for governance and for meeting the 

challenges and opportunities associated with growth. The 

current criteria for villages and resort village 

incorporation: [being] 100 persons, 50 separate dwelling 

or business premises, and a minimum taxable assessment 

of 15 million. It’s been in place for a long time without 

change, at least since 1930. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to keep current with the 

legislation. And certainly in 1930, I believe the time of the 

J.T.M. Anderson Conservative government, perhaps there are 

some improvements that we can arrive at in terms of how these 

habitation patterns are being dealt with. So again, we’ll be 

looking to see how that works out. 

 

And I notice not just from the minister’s second reading speech, 

but certainly talking with municipal elected officials and 

administrators and ministry officials from the Ministry of 

Government Relations, just the diversity of habitation patterns 

in the province of Saskatchewan. And the minister references 

those particularly under 300 population and the: 

 

. . . struggle to operate independently and generate 

sufficient own source revenue to deliver services, fund 

infrastructure, and retain qualified administration. They 

have difficulty meeting financial, reporting, and other 

statutory requirements. Updating this criteria to better 

reflect the capacity and growth occurring in our smaller 

urban communities throughout the province is long 

overdue. 

 

Again, fair enough, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be looking to see 

how this tailoring of the legislative cloth to meet the 

requirements for the way that people are organizing their 

communities, the suit of that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking 

closely to see how it goes. 

 

Again referring the minister’s second reading speech with the 

proposed organized hamlet criteria: 

 

. . . the increased criteria for villages and resort villages 

will be set out in regulation after further consultation with 

the municipal sector . . . They will apply to new municipal 

entities going forward to help ensure their future success 

as local governments in providing the services, facilities, 



4498 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

infrastructure, and administration desired by their residents 

and ratepayers. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, that’s about as fundamental to governance 

as it gets in terms of, again, aligning responsibilities with the 

resources available in the community and making certain that 

those are scaled to the population as it presents in the particular 

circumstance. 

 

In terms of the second area of amendments, what the minister 

describes is the need to deal with uneven growth and the idea 

that some communities may be growing, some communities are 

in decline, and I know in certainly my home community of 

Regina we’re certainly a growing community and a very 

interesting time in my home city of Regina. I also think about 

my dad’s home community where he grew up in the RM [rural 

municipality] of Montmartre and the different communities 

there, some doing better than others and the different challenges 

that that presents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, making sure that the responsibilities and the 

expectations under the legislative framework presented here in 

The Municipalities Act align with the population that is there in 

places like my dad’s old stomping grounds. And again a very 

fundamental challenge of government and governance is to 

make sure that you’ve got those resources aligned with 

responsibilities and that the responsibilities are appropriate to 

the circumstance presenting. 

 

In terms of the minister’s second reading speech he states, 

quote, and this is the second group of amendments: 

 

These amendments propose to require a council to act and 

potentially dissolve its municipality if it’s non-compliant 

with specified statutory requirements for two or more 

consecutive years and if it no longer meets a minimum 

population for two consecutive censuses. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of . . . you need a time frame for 

these legislative measures to have real effect. And this, what is 

outlined here in terms of the two or more consecutive years and 

the minimum population requirement over two consecutive 

censuses, again this would seem to be fairly reasonable. And in 

terms of the condition, both of those conditions needing to be in 

place before the provision comes into effect. Again quoting 

from the minister’s speech: 

 

The municipality must be in non-compliance and be below 

the minimum population that will be set out in regulation 

after more consultation with the municipal sector. 

Municipalities under the minimum population that 

demonstrate compliance with legislative responsibilities 

and requirements would not be affected. Rural 

municipalities that demonstrate compliance with 

legislative responsibilities and requirements would also 

not be affected. Both are clearly still functioning as local 

governments and can continue to meet their residents’ 

needs. 

 

Again, setting out the need for more consultation with the sector 

which is as it should be in terms of that respect and that 

mutuality that needs to be there between different orders of 

government. And again though, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking 

with interest to see how those consultations work out and how 

the regulations usher forth from them. 

 

In terms of the specific statutory requirements, minimum 

populations and applicable census periods, again we’ll see how 

the consultations wind up on those. And again to quote directly 

from the minister’s speech, and I agree with his sentiment, Mr. 

Speaker, “These amendments are intended to place the onus on 

councils as the leaders of their communities to initiate and lead 

change processes if their local governments cannot meet 

legislated requirements.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s one of the . . . another challenge of 

governances properly delineating responsibility, properly 

delineating accountability, and I agree with that statement as it 

stands in the minister’s speech. 

 

In terms of the work that is ongoing between the ministry, 

probably you gain different sort of glimpses of this, Mr. 

Speaker, but certainly one of the most interesting ministries in 

all of government is the Ministry of Government Relations and 

the interplay that exists between that ministry and the different 

sort of expertise that is there and the partnership and the 

ongoing — almost daily I would imagine — consultation that is 

carried out by that ministry with municipalities and local 

governments from one corner of this province to another. So 

again, that ongoing work of the ministry of partnership and 

trying to foster the changes as they come through in the 

legislation, we’ll see how that works out but again we’ll be 

watching to see how that carries forward. 

 

[21:15] 

 

And you know, if you are in a community where there isn’t . . . 

you are not able to discharge those legislative requirements and 

you do need to make that change, certainly those can be very 

stressful times for local government. And I would expect that 

the ministry will be there to work in partnership and 

co-operation, but that’s certainly undertaken by the minister in 

his speech, and also providing that expertise or that 

matchmaking capacity with lining up different situations with 

possible solutions, perhaps partnering with other municipalities 

via existing mechanisms and legislation, perhaps achieving 

economies of scale and administration in the delivery of 

services through joint administration and shared services 

agreements, additional service areas, or voluntary restructuring, 

to reference the minister’s speech. Again those are all worthy of 

consideration, Mr. Speaker, and again presenting possible 

alternatives, possible solutions as the circumstances change on 

the ground. 

 

The third area of proposed amendments are those that provide 

for urban and rural municipalities to voluntarily agree to join to 

form a new type of municipality called the municipal district, 

recognizing that it is both urban and rural in nature. We had the 

good fortune to meet with some municipal elected officials not 

too long ago, Mr. Speaker, and the mayor of Humboldt, 

Malcolm Eaton. Mayor Eaton was talking about the challenges 

presented by rurban areas, Mr. Speaker. And certainly, you 

know, right across the province this is an area of consideration 

for proper governance, for proper approach by all the different 

levels of government, Mr. Speaker, that I think will only 

increase in terms of the sort of complexity and vitality that is 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4499 

presenting out right across this province. And you know, 

certainly I think of the different sort of endeavours that have 

worked around here in my home neighbourhood, home city of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, and the different sort of contretemps that 

have been experienced with the RM of Sherwood, you know, 

representing one set of problems but the way that that is 

hopefully being resolved in a durable and ongoing basis. 

 

I also think about the great work done in terms of White Butte 

and the way the different municipalities came together there to 

say, look, we’ve got common expectations, common services 

that we can provide to our collective citizenry. And I believe it 

was the then mayor of Balgonie at the time that talked about, 

you know, we’ve decided to no longer . . . We’re not going to 

push the elephant anymore; we’re going to ride it. 

 

And that always stood out to me as a great sort of example of 

the way that if you can get around that table and co-operate, 

again all the things that have been enumerated here in the 

minister’s second reading speech in terms of economies of scale 

and in terms of deeper collective pockets, but at the same time 

aligning them to a common experience and common sort of 

expectations on the part of citizens, it is indeed possible to ride 

that elephant and to good effect. 

 

So again we’ll see how this set of legislative amendments aid or 

facilitate the further sort of experience in terms of 

municipalities working together, and the way that we see 

municipal districts moving forward. And again the minister’s 

undertaking in the second reading speech stating that: 

 

These provisions will better enable councils to agree on 

how representation, elections, administration, and services 

will be undertaken in the new municipality, drawing on 

both urban and rural municipal approaches. 

 

And ensuring: 

 

. . . that in instances where the legislation may apply 

differently to the areas of the former municipalities, such 

as the application of The Municipal Hail Insurance Act, 

the legislation will continue to apply in the same manner 

in the same areas as it did before. The amendments 

proposed do not give municipal districts any new or 

additional powers than any other type of municipality in 

The Municipalities Act. The municipal districts will have 

the same bylaw-making and corporate powers, the same 

accountability requirements, and no new taxing powers or 

authority. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see how this works out. We’ll see 

how it either facilitates or not the work that is already going on 

out there in the countryside or out through the province, and 

we’ll be interested to see how this plays out in the days and 

weeks and months ahead. 

 

In terms of the fourth area of amendments, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

an attempt to: 

 

. . . provide citizens with the ability to petition their 

council to conduct and make public the results of a 

financial or management audit. This will provide a means 

for citizens to address their concerns locally. Currently the 

legislation provides for annual audits of a municipality’s 

financial statements, the main objective being to confirm 

whether these are prepared in accordance with generally 

accepted accounting principles. 

 

Again, in terms of the sort of brass tacks work of local 

governance, Mr. Speaker, the citizens wanting to know not just 

how their money is being spent but to have that verified through 

something as an audit, it’s pretty fundamental to the importance 

of the work of government. And again making sure that that 

information is available to citizens in a fairly straightforward 

process is an important provision, and we’ll be interested to see 

how that works in the days ahead. 

 

The fifth and final area of amendments contemplated in this 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, concerns “. . . municipal 

compliance with legislation and regulations and to constrain the 

potential misuse of local property tax tools and tax abatements 

if it . . . [should so occur].” Again referencing the minister’s 

second reading speech: 

 

Specifically these amendments will do the following: they 

will provide the authority to prescribe limits if necessary 

on minimum taxes and base taxes, and restrict by 

ministerial order the use of tax tools by an individual 

municipality. This is to give the government more ability 

to constrain misuse and misapplication of local tax tools if 

it occurs. 

 

One thing I know that talking to our municipal affairs, urban 

municipal affairs critic, the member from Rosemont, I know 

that that is something that he will be asking about in committee. 

So should there be any Government Relations officials out there 

in Government Relations officialdom, make sure you’ve got a 

good answer ready for the minister. I’m sure that he’s got one 

already, but always good to flag these things in advance, but . . . 

And the minister references the relatively limited occurrence of 

these types of misuses and abuses entertained in this, these 

round of amendments, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll be interested to 

know with as much detail as possible the specific occurrence, 

what the patterns of occurrence are, and how the proposed 

legislation relates to remedying those problems out there in the 

municipalities. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the sort of a roundup of the 

remarks from the minister in terms of the . . . Again there’s 

some other minor changes that will come with . . . they’re sort 

of consequential in nature, more housekeeping than anything 

else. And then as well the minister states: 

 

In terms of consultations, the ministry has consulted 

extensively on these amendments with both the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, and 

through them also with municipal administrator 

associations. These consultations began in April 2013 and 

concluded this past September. They involved meetings, 

presentations, and sharing drafts side-by-sides of the 

amendments for review and comment. 

 

Glad to hear that from the minister. And certainly in terms of 

the way that the province for the most part interacts with the 

municipal sector and that respect that should be there between 



4500 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

different levels of government, we’d expect no less. So we’re 

glad to hear that referenced as well. This is not to say that we 

don’t have further reflection to engage in upon this legislation 

and further consultation to engage in ourselves in terms of 

doing that due diligence. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 116, interesting piece of 

legislation, goes to some of the very fundamental questions that 

present in terms of local governance and the way that the 

province interacts with the municipal sector and making sure 

that you’re trying to align resources with responsibilities 

appropriately, Mr. Speaker. A very interesting piece of 

legislation, from my perspective in any event. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I know I’ve got other colleagues that 

are very interested in the debate and I certainly want to facilitate 

that. So without any further ado, I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 117 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 117 — The 

Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 

2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. I was just waiting 

for the lights to be on so I could tell everybody I’m home, but 

there we go. Anyway again good to join the continued debate 

on Bill No. 117, The Municipalities Consequential Amendment 

Act . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . . Okay. It’s of great 

consequence and eliciting no end of interest from across the 

way, so that’s also encouraging. 

 

And I should say at this point, Mr. Speaker, from time to time 

the member from Cypress Hills likes to tease me about never 

having seen a water-powered windmill. But I don’t know if he’s 

been into the solar power investigations over there or what the 

case is, but anyway he’s all charged back up and bright-eyed 

and bushy-tailed and apparently been seeing the sun and 

interested in the debates of this place as is often the case, but 

not water powered. 

 

And now we get the member from Moose Jaw North into the 

bargain, Mr. Speaker, and you know, as often as that member 

might ask, you know, what are you talking about, I don’t know 

if anyone can ever really answer him because that might be 

beyond the abilities of, you know, anyone in this place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

But anyway, good to join the debate again on Bill No. 117. This 

is the consequential amendment Act, certain provisions arising 

from Bill No. 116 in terms of the again consequential 

amendments that need to take place. As well, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of one thing that’s interesting to see, a resultant 

amendment to one bilingual Act, The Non-profit Corporations 

Act, 1995. 

 

But again the change, and I’ll quote from the minister’s second 

reading speech. And it’s of consequence, not terribly long, Mr. 

Speaker, but I quote: 

 

The change to The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995 is 

required to add a reference to municipal district to the 

definition of municipality. This will ensure that the statute 

applies to municipal districts in the same way as it did to 

the former municipalities that merge to become a 

municipal district. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not, as is often the case with the 

consequential amendments, this one, the meat in the sandwich I 

think, was with us in Bill No. 116. And this Bill No. 117 is just 

sort of dotting the i’s and crossing the t’s that are made 

necessary from Bill No. 116. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would 

move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 117. 

 

[21:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 117, The Municipalities Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 118 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 118 — The 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

tonight to enter into the debate on Bill No. 118, An Act 

respecting the Saskatchewan Polytechnic and making 

consequential amendments to other Acts and Regulations. And 

as we look through it, it seems that the most striking part of this 

is related to the name change of this pretty important 

educational institution here in Saskatchewan. And there are 

some parts to go along with that: the ability to raise funds for 

property, the changing of the CEO [chief executive officer] now 

as a president, but essentially it is the Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic. 

 

And it is one that we have some curiosity about in terms of 

why. We appreciate the fact the nature of technical training has 

evolved and will continue to evolve. And that’s an important 

thing. It’s important that we keep abreast of those changes to 

make sure our youth are enabled to do, to enter into the 

workforce and be able to get those good jobs and create those 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4501 

great opportunities for themselves and to start a young family if 

they’re so inclined or whatever they wish to do to pursue their 

potential into adulthood. 

 

And I know we often reflect on SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology] has that ability to do that. 

And I think it’s important. And we’ve seen changes; you know, 

it sort of ebbs and flows between the university. Is it a liberal 

art education or a technical education? And clearly with so 

many things happening in our province now, we do need to 

have that technical education. 

 

But I am, you know, interested in this in terms of what this all 

means in terms of a changing mandate and is it the right thing to 

be doing. And as this government is loath to do, to get out and 

talk to the people about what do you see as an important role for 

post-secondary education, I think it’s important to ask that 

question of what drives this change. 

 

And to go through this new name change . . . And it’s quite 

significant. You know, I know that, as my colleagues have 

remarked, or even when I think about when I was growing up 

near Moose Jaw, we thought of the Saskatchewan Technical 

Institute, STI, thought of Kelsey in Saskatoon, Wascana here, 

Palliser in Prince Albert. And they seemed to be able to identify 

with their local communities, and they were a key part of their 

local communities. Those names really reflected that. And there 

was a certain community pride, and there was a certain pride in 

the institute that you attended too. 

 

And I’m not sure, now that we’ve gotten rid of the word 

SIAST, SIAST from what I understand will no longer be used, 

it will be Saskatchewan Polytechnic or it will be Sask 

Polytechnic, Sask Poly. What will be the short name for . . . 

What will the kids get to know their school as? It will be Sask 

Poly, Poly Sask? I don’t know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes, yes. You know, this may not be a . . . I’m curious about 

this because, you know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, you 

spend and then maybe, maybe, maybe they haven’t thought this 

through. Maybe they haven’t thought that through, but you do 

have branding exercises. And a lot of major institutions spend a 

lot of time thinking about the name of their organizations. 

Maybe it’ll be in the regulations. Maybe they have a name in 

the regulations. 

 

But I think what’s interesting is the minister, the minister points 

out there’s . . . And I’ll quote. I’ll quote this. And this is from 

page 4181 from November 25th, and this is what the minister 

says. And I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, SIAST is the newest member of Polytechnics 

Canada and joins other prestigious organizations, 

including the British Columbia Institute of Technology, 

the Southern Alberta Institute of Technology Polytechnic, 

and the Northern Alberta Institute of Technology, as well 

as Red River College. 

 

Now it seemed only one of those had the interest to add 

polytechnic to their name. British Columbia Institute of 

Technology kept their name even though they became a 

polytechnic, which really meant that you could do more applied 

research, and you could do work to help with the local 

economic development. Northern Alberta Institute of 

Technology did not change their name. Now maybe they just 

. . . I don’t know why they wouldn’t change their name. That 

would be a good question to know. And the Red River College 

in Manitoba, even though it became a polytechnic, did not 

change its name. 

 

So why are we in Saskatchewan throwing out SIAST? A lot of 

people have come to know what SIAST means. Will they know 

what polytechnic means? They didn’t change the name in 

Manitoba. And maybe the folks from Moose Jaw, maybe the 

member from Moose Jaw didn’t know that when he voted for 

this bill in caucus. But in Manitoba . . . Well, this is what this 

bill is all about, a name change. This bill is all about a name 

change . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It sure is. It sure is. 

That’s essentially . . . They become a polytechnic and they’ve 

added things to it, but it’s a post-secondary institution that 

focuses on technical knowledge.  

 

You know, I see these other institutes like the British Columbia 

Institute of Technology, now I would think they have some 

credibility in BC [British Columbia], decided not to change 

their name even though they became a polytechnic. So what’s 

the big deal? 

 

But in Saskatchewan we’re throwing out a pretty 

well-established and institutional name that has a lot of merit 

and credibility. And people look to it and say, SIAST, we know 

what that’s about. It’s a great institution and it has numerous 

campuses throughout the province. People know SIAST. They 

know Palliser. They know Wascana. They know the Moose Jaw 

— I think of it as STI — Palliser. Palliser is what it is. 

 

So what’s the deal? This will be the discussion. And then they 

change the CEO to the president. So I am really curious. In 

Manitoba, Red River College so, you know, the name change, 

we have some questions about this. We have some questions 

about this. And you know, we support and we think it makes a 

lot of sense that technical training evolves. And the idea that, 

you know, the concept of the polytechnic that represents 

evolution, it’s not a bad . . . It is a good one. It’s a good one. We 

think that’s a good idea. But it’s the name change and this is 

what we see largely in this bill. That’ll be the significant piece 

that the public will see, is now we have SIAST become Sask 

Polytechnic. And maybe they feel that’s what has to happen. 

 

So clearly this means an awful lot to the government. We see 

that they get quite animated over the name and they must like it. 

So that’s a good read of what’s happening over on the 

government side.  

 

I’m not sure, again though, it would be interesting and maybe in 

estimates we’ll have a question about how much did this name 

change cost? Is it going to cost anything? Did they put anything 

aside? They will say probably it didn’t cost anything. And then 

next November we’ll come back and we’ll have supplementary 

estimates. We’ve heard this before where it’s not going to cost 

anything — not a thing, not a thing. And then we see them 

come back and say, you know, it did. It’s like the employment 

Act where they said it was not going to cost a penny to do it. 

And all of a sudden here it comes back and it cost hundreds of 

thousands of dollars. 

 

So this is not good planning. This is not good planning, and we 



4502 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

know the other side is known for that. So I’m interested to see 

how this goes, and we will have questions in the committee 

about had they thought through the identification of this and 

what that will mean. And maybe it doesn’t mean anything. 

Maybe it doesn’t mean a thing. But we’ve seen the evolution, 

the changes of technical education in Saskatchewan with a 

proud history, a very strong history. And while we support the 

increased capacity and building capacity of those institutions to 

deliver the programming, that’s hugely important. 

 

But I have to say, BC, if it’s good enough to keep their old 

names of the British Columbia Institute of Technology, so 

much the same in Alberta and the same in Manitoba, why in 

Saskatchewan we’ve gone to such an extreme, I don’t know. It 

doesn’t seem to make a lot of sense to me. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know we’ll have lots of comments, 

and many of my colleagues still would like to speak on this. We 

will have questions in committee on that. But I think that at this 

point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of Bill 

No. 118, An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Polytechnic and 

consequential amendments to other Acts and Regulations. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 119 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 119 — The 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to introduce . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, not 

introducing but speaking to Bill No. 119, An Act to make 

consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. 

 

And they’re talking about striking out the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology and then 

substituting Saskatchewan Polytechnic, and it goes through the 

places where that will have to happen in terms of The Education 

Act, 1995 and talking about The Teacher Certification and 

Classification Regulations, 2002. They will be amended in a 

similar way, where you strike out SIAST, a well-known 

acronym here in Saskatchewan, and substituting Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic, which may be more vague for people and not 

really knowing what that really means. And of course it will be 

done in French, that the name changes will take place. And 

there you have it. That’s what this is all about: the name 

change. 

 

And as I’ve said earlier, that we do support the evolution and 

the increased capacity for post-secondary education, 

particularly when it comes to technical training, and whether 

that means degrees or capacity building and applied research, 

we know that’s an important part of that. And this is in many 

ways a natural growth that’s happening right across Canada. 

We’re glad to see that it’s happening here in Saskatchewan. 

 

But I have raised earlier the name change and what that will 

mean about Sask-a-Poly or Saskatchewan Polytechnic or the 

abbreviations or what that all will be. We’ll listen to see what 

that will mean and we’ll have those questions in committee. 

 

[21:45] 

 

We’ll be interested in knowing how they consulted about this. 

They do have a strong board and I know several people on the 

board and it’s a very active and constructive board. And so it 

will be interesting to hear from the folks in committee about the 

kind of consultation they did about this, what they’ve learned 

from the British Columbia Institute of Technology which . . . if 

they have consulted with them and what their plans are for 

future growth and what organizations did they consult with? 

The individuals, the students, the post-secondary community? 

 

It is good to see that they are maintaining their relationships at 

the regional colleges and recognizing the work that they do. 

That’s very important. But we’re curious about the kind of 

consultation they got, the information they got, and the advice 

they got, and did they listen to their advice — yes or no? What 

did they leave on the table? 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve said this many times that we’re 

willing to work with this government when it makes sense and 

when they’re open, transparent, and accountable. But this seems 

like one we’ll have a lot of questions about and we need to have 

more information. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker . . . I know that this ties very much 

into the earlier one and, as I said, we have questions about the 

costs. What is the impact of such a name change when you see 

across Western Canada other institutions have decided not to 

change the name but to embrace the idea, the concept of 

polytechnic? But they didn’t see a need to change their name. 

Here we’re going to have something that’s going to be . . . And 

I’m going to be curious about whether they’re going to keep the 

names of their campuses or will they be changing them? What 

will the branding be looking like? 

 

Now the other side may say it’s not going to cost anything. 

There may not need to be any research. They’re just going to do 

it. And I just don’t know if that’s actually in the spirit of good 

applied research. The people at the polytechnic may not say, 

this is how you do branding, this is not how you get yourself 

known in the committee by not doing the kind of work that 

needs to be done. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that we have much more 

work to be done tonight and we want to get as much of that 

done as possible. And so with that, I will be moving 

adjournment of Bill No. 119, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4503 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 119, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 120 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 120 — The 

Lobbyists Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 

120, The Lobbyist Act. I just want to give some comments 

opening and start out by . . . I know that there was a committee 

that came together to make some recommendations and for the 

work that they’ve done. That doesn’t limit what the work that 

the committee did making recommendations when it goes to 

committee or to improve legislation. And we’ll have different, I 

guess, comments from whether it’s media, whether it’s the 

public out there, who was consulted. And sometimes 

organizations will come out. Does this lobbyist Act have 

enough teeth in it? 

 

There’s many things that we’re going to be considering. Who 

do they report to? And I mean there’s provisions in here that 

they’re bringing forward that someone would monitor whether 

it’s a registrar or someone from the House, however that’s 

going to come into play. And I know there’s going to be lots of 

questions in committee and we can get that clarification. But 

overall I realize we had a member on this committee as well 

that worked with members opposite to come up with, you 

know, probably a lobbyist Act that was required and Canada, 

maybe many of the provinces have that, and Saskatchewan for 

some reason did not. Now it’s just coming into effect. Once it 

goes through the process, goes through committee, and 

becomes law in the province, then there’ll be provisions. 

 

Now I know some are going to say, and whether it’s media or 

the public and already comments, will it have the teeth? Will it 

have the penalties that are required in this legislation to make 

sure it has the teeth and making sure people report in a timely 

manner if they’re going to be lobbying government, whether 

it’s a government agency department? And I know there’s lots 

of questions and we’ll have more questions about this. 

 

But let’s just go over some of the areas that they’re going to be 

going into when it talks about The Lobbyist Act and just about 

. . . I’m not sure who they would have consulted at the time and 

maybe the committee did talk to a large group. Maybe they 

went out. I don’t have all the details. I wasn’t a part of the 

committee but I know at the end of the day it’s about . . . And 

they talk about the code of conduct and different things. Will 

there be a provision in that? 

 

And they outline some of the . . . And I think the minister’s 

comments, if I can go into that a little bit, I just want to, you 

know, talk about the standing committee and what it’s 

accomplished and what it tried to accomplish. And overall, it 

having a registry that will register organizations, individuals, 

and it talks about exemptions. It talks about who will have 

waiting periods before they can approach, whether the minister, 

deputy minister . . . There is provisions in there, and those 

provisions give times — some are a year, six months — before 

they can actually, I believe, come forward and I guess lobby 

with government departments. But it’s unclear, and I know 

we’ll get the clarification in committee and the regulations that 

will come into effect. And I guess, once the Act comes in, 

they’ll develop the regulations that these lobbyist organizations, 

whether they’re individuals, groups, will have to comply with. 

 

There will be a registrar who, from my understanding, will 

ensure that these individuals, in a timely manner, follow the 

regulations and the provisions that have been passed in the 

legislation once this becomes law and if it becomes law. And 

that’s always the case we have to talk about, if it does. I mean, 

yes it’s one thing to enact a bill and go through the debates and 

make it law and come up with the regulations. 

 

So at this point, I know Saskatchewan has waited a long time, 

some will say, for those that have required this. And think it 

needs to have a lobby so we know who’s pressuring and who’s 

asking of certain things by government, and I think sometimes 

the public wants to know that. And I think it’s important that we 

have a . . . whether it’s a registrar or someone at the legislature 

here who’d be in charge of that, whether it’s somebody 

designated by the rules, the regulations, however. 

 

At the end of the day, these lobby groups would have to register 

in a timely manner. There’ll be provisions so that the public 

gets to know, so everyone gets to see who’s lobbying 

government for certain, I guess, amendments to law, whether I 

guess it would be finances, whether it’d be programs. It could 

be all kinds of different things that they would be pressured on 

— changes to legislation, amendments to legislation, new 

legislation, new provisions — that would give them, whether 

it’s regulations, whether it’s . . . And sometimes it is that. And 

sometimes the minister and the ministry has the power to 

change. And sometimes some of the changes in here that we 

have introduced may be, for whatever the reason, at the end of 

the day government feels it needs to bring legislation forward. 

 

But having said that, we’ll go through the process. And I know, 

you know, additional . . . They’re going to exempt local 

authorities from this, including SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities], universities, SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], and 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association. There are different 

groups that will not have to go through the compliance, from 

what I’m understanding, as registering with The Lobbyists Act, 

and those provisions that say they have to. There are some 

provisions for those organizations to be exempt, which I think is 

good. Those organizations, you know, try to work with 

governments, whether truly to benefit Saskatchewan people, our 

students, so in that case I think it’s for the public. They serve 

the public. Most of these are elected officials that actually serve 

the residents of the province that we all represent from different 

ridings and constituencies. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know there’ll be lots of 

questions and I know we’ll be looking for details in committee, 



4504 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

and at the end whether it needs to be strengthened, the 

regulations. I guess there are provisions for that and we can 

bring forward concerns that we’re hearing out from the public, 

from organizations, and hopefully at the end of the day just 

have some teeth to it to making sure that those groups, you 

know, do come forward in a timely manner and register so that 

the public and all of us know who is lobbying our governments 

and the ministries for certain things. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on 

Bill 120, The Lobbyists Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 122 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 122 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 

réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 

122, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 

2002. There are some provisions in here, and looking at it I 

think the minister talks about four primary areas where they’re 

going to make some changes in the regulations. And the first, 

providing the authority for First Nations gaming, licensing 

authority to register on-reserve charitable gaming employees 

and suppliers. So it would give First Nations the ability, from 

what it’s saying, the authority to license and authorize, to 

register on-reserve gaming employees and suppliers to make 

sure that compliance happens. So they would give them the 

regulation. This is a good a thing. Obviously, I’m hoping this is 

what they’ve asked for in partnership. We talk about that. It’s 

important. So that’s a provision that obviously gaming, to 

provide the licensing to make sure employees are registered that 

work on First Nations reserves, and that’s where a lot of the 

casinos are in our province. Having said that, this provision 

gives them the opportunity and the authority to provide those 

changes to on-reserve charitable gaming employees and 

suppliers. 

 

Second, allowing Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming to 

establish subsidiary corporation through an order in council. 

Now we talk about the mother company. Saskatchewan Liquor 

and Gaming is the mother company. It may have a wing of it or 

a subsidiary that actually provides advice, whether it’s looking 

at the finance, there’s different things. You’ll look at different 

organizations and I think some of the bigger companies have 

different departments that report again to the mother company. 

And at the end of the day, this is just one tool that they would 

have. 

 

Some might say . . . I’ve heard different things, whether you’re 

watching TV or you’re hearing people talk about this. You 

sometimes wonder about if these are a good way of using the 

mother company to use, I guess, wings or organizations, 

departments, to do certain things. We hope that in this case this 

is something that would be used very positive and would not be 

used in any way to take away from the public the access to 

information to make sure that the government and the ministry 

is doing, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming is doing all they 

can. So you know, looking at that point. 

 

So having said that, the third thing that they’re looking at, and 

the minister refers to, is ensuring effective regulations, making 

sure that the regulations are there. And that’s a good thing at the 

end of the day. We want to make sure. We have a lot of 

questions about that sometimes, the regulations that are put in 

place, whether they’re strong enough, whether they need to be 

improved. And Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming right now — 

from my understanding — in those provisions, they provide the 

regulations that are given by the legislation and the powers once 

the Act is passed here. The ministry or their officials will come 

up in regulations, and we see that. But once you pass an Act and 

it comes here, my understanding they will develop the 

regulations. 

 

And those regulations can be dealt with consulting whether . . . 

in any capacity that they need to go out and consult. And that’s 

always the thing. The public wants to make sure. 

 

[22:00] 

 

And we’ve seen the past practice of this government has not 

been to consult, very poor when it comes to consulting the 

people that will be impacted. And we’ve seen that time and 

time. For seven years we have talked about that. And that’s the 

one thing, area, we’ve criticized the current administration and 

the ministries and the government for not consulting, whether 

it’s First Nations, Métis, doesn’t matter. 

 

Who’s being impacted? Our seniors when it comes to housing. 

When we see their housing, you know, when you look 30 per 

cent of their gross income being levied against them to pay their 

rent. And we see the challenges that our seniors . . . And I met 

with about 40 seniors in Creighton, and they were very 

concerned, and they’re very angry. And they say this 

government did not consult us. They just moved us up to 30 per 

cent of our gross income. Well if that’s the case they say, Doyle 

. . . And you know, the frustration I’ve seen with many of these 

seniors. 

 

And I want to show the comparisons because I say this. It’s 

about consulting. It’s about talking to our seniors, 

Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan residents who have done 

the good work, who have worked hard, paid their dues, and 

should be taken care of. 

 

When a government . . . And they hear this. They hear the 

government talk about the record revenue, and they hear the 

government talk about the economy, and everything’s booming 

and everything’s so great. And they’re saying, why are we as 

seniors suffering? Why do we have to pay for the mistakes that 

this government’s making? Why should our seniors have to pay 

on the back a second . . . We’re going after them a second time. 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4505 

And they’re very frustrated. Some of them are hurt. Some of 

them are wondering how they’re going to make it. How are they 

going to pay to go to their medical appointments when they 

have to leave their communities? How are they going to pay the 

utilities, food? They’re cutting back on everything, 

prescriptions. 

 

And I listened for the whole afternoon, and the frustration. And 

I say this government did not consult us. And you know what? 

They have the Minister of Sask Housing has the nerve to tell 

them in a letter, oh well, we didn’t tell you to live in that area. 

You should move, you don’t like it. I mean they were insulted. 

They could not believe that that’s the response they got to their 

concerns. 

 

So just goes to show you sometimes how a government, a 

government who has such a majority as this Sask Party 

government has, just doesn’t, doesn’t hear what the community 

members . . . doesn’t care, bullies, is not in tune with the rest of 

the province. 

 

And you know what? They may talk about, yes, there’s a large 

group that this government says are doing well. There’s a very 

large group that is not doing well that is suffering. And they can 

talk, and I talk to different people. So there’s the concerns that 

are being raised out there about affordability. 

 

And I was just trying to show some comparisons, some 

comparisons about consulting. And it’s so important that you 

have legislation every time we introduce something. You make 

changes that impact individuals whether it’s their finances, 

whether it’s to increase their utility rates, whether it’s SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] insurance, driver’s 

licence. I don’t care what it is. Power, phone, it doesn’t matter 

what it is. You’re charging them as a government. When you’re 

raising rates on them and they’re supposed to do with less, 

they’re starting to wonder why this government is not . . . You 

had such wealth. You had so much opportunity that you could 

have helped so many, and you have left so many behind. And 

you will pay a price for that. 

 

I know that because I’ve heard these seniors. They’re angry. 

They have said, we’ll wait and see. Judgment day, they talk 

about. The day will come. And that’s amazing to see that. They 

talk about that. There’ll come a time, re-election. They said 

they’ll want our support. We’ll show them. And I hope they are. 

I hope throughout this province they do send the message. 

There’s so many groups who are not happy with this 

government, the way the ministry are dealing with them, 

ministers are doing. You’re the government. You’re supposed 

to be responsible. Do your job that you’ve been handed. You’ve 

been asked to do this. You were honoured to provide services to 

our seniors. So at the end of the day . . . 

 

I want to go back to the last thing. The other thing that it talks 

about, the fourth area in the last point she talks about there are 

other housekeeping amendments that need to be done. And they 

will provide those as they go through committee, as we question 

them more, as more of my colleagues talk about, as people tell 

us here are the areas where we have concern when it comes to 

the alcohol and gaming regulations and the amendments that are 

being proposed here. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate on 

Bill 122. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 122, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 123 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 123 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

although it’s getting late in the evening, I am thrilled to rise to 

speak to this bill. We always like the miscellaneous, obsolete, 

public and private statutes Act. And there seems to be one in 

every session. And this one deals with a number of 

organizations that used to provide health services here in the 

province. And the minister in his introductory comments, when 

the bill was introduced back in December described there’s two 

parts to this Act. One is the private statutes that are being 

repealed, and then there’s three or four public statutes that are 

also being appealed . . . or repealed, not appealed. 

 

So first of all I think I’ll speak to the public Acts. There’s four 

that are being repealed here: The Dental Care Act, The Medical 

and Hospitalization Tax Repeal Act, The Mutual Medical and 

Hospital Benefit Associations Act, and The Senior Citizens’ 

Heritage Program Act. 

 

So he didn’t give us a lot of comments about what the history of 

these Acts were and I think there’s certainly stories to be told. 

The Dental Care Act, I’m not sure if this is true, but I think 

when I was a youngster in school, that’s when we started 

getting fluoridation in schools and certain dental treatments in 

school, and that may have come from that time. 

 

The one that’s somewhat interesting to me is The Mutual 

Medical and Hospital Benefit Associations Act. And I started 

thinking about Mutual of Omaha for some reason, Mr. Speaker. 

When you hear the word mutual in this kind of context, what 

exactly does that refer to? And it’s certainly not something you 

would see these days at all. But I went to Wikipedia and I was 

looking at how the word mutual is used in this context. And it’s 

actually a word that’s similar to the word co-operative. And 

what the Wikipedia says is: 

 

A mutual, or a mutual organization, or mutual society is an 

organization . . . based on the principle of [yes, you 

guessed it] mutuality. Unlike a true cooperative, members 

usually do not contribute to the capital of the company by 

direct investment, but derive their right to profits and votes 

through their customer relationship. 



4506 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

So it sounds like, in this case, we have The Mutual Medical and 

Hospital Benefit Associations Act. I’m curious to know more 

about the history of that Act. I think it tells a story about the 

times where these types of organizations were established. But 

obviously the people that were members of this association 

were able to take advantage of some of the offerings of the 

organization. And I would assume it would be some sort of 

health insurance or medical insurance coverage, Mr. Speaker. 

But it just goes to show you how our evolution in the health 

care system has gone. 

 

And certain ideas like mutuals, we hear . . . I just remember the 

TV show, Mutual of Omaha’s wildlife kingdom or something 

like that. And I always wondered what a mutual was. But it 

sounds like it’s a type of co-operative where members derive 

benefits from purchasing from them rather than having an 

ownership share. So it’s an interesting little thought. 

 

The Medical and Hospitalization Tax Repeal Act, so it was an 

Act to repeal a tax is now being repealed. So we have a repeal 

of a repeal Act. That’s kind of interesting. 

 

And there are other bills in part II that I referred to a moment 

ago that are private Acts. And I think if you read through the 

names of these Acts, you hear a story of what was the delivery 

of health care in this province before we had our public health 

care system established. And you will know this from studying 

history in Canada, Mr. Speaker, but quite often health care back 

in the days was done by charities and certainly through 

religious orders. 

 

And so I’m just going to read some of these Acts because I 

think it tells part of our history, Mr. Speaker, about the 

provision of health care prior to the medicare system. So here’s 

the list of the names of the private Acts that are going to be 

repealed: An Act to validate a Certain Agreement with regard to 

the Lady Minto Union Hospital at Edam; An Act to incorporate 

Les Soeurs de la Charite de Notre Dame d’Evron; An Act to 

provide for Tax Exemption of Certain Property of Sisters of 

Charity, Providence Hospital, Moose Jaw; An Act to 

Incorporate Regina Grey Nuns’ Hospital; An Act to incorporate 

St. Joseph’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Gravelbourg; An Act to 

confirm a Certain Agreement between The City of Yorkton and 

Yorkton Union Hospital Board; An Act to incorporate St. 

Elizabeth’s Hospital of Humboldt; An Act to incorporate St. 

Joseph’s Hospital of Macklin; An Act to incorporate St. 

Michael’s Hospital of Cudworth; An Act to incorporate Holy 

Family Hospital, Prince Albert; An Act to incorporate Swift 

Current Nursing Home; An Act to incorporate St. Therese 

Hospital, Tisdale; and The Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

So I think that tells a real story, Mr. Speaker, of the charitable 

involvement of a lot of . . . particularly the Grey Nuns. We see I 

think four Acts here that refer to the activity of the Grey Nuns 

in providing hospital care. And I think it was Sister Margaret 

d’Youville, if I recall from my history books, that started the 

Grey Nuns in Montreal. And certainly the influence of the work 

of these sisters and these amazing women dedicated to health 

care has been told throughout our country since hospitals were 

being established. 

 

And it just reminds me also of some of the efforts of the nuns in 

the field of education. And not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, I was 

down in your area in a small community called Forget. And 

there, there was actually a convent established by the Sisters of 

the Cross and they taught many years. And when I read about 

these nuns, they came from the Alps in France, beautiful part of 

France in the Pyrenees or in the Alps. And they were persecuted 

somewhere in that area, but they were being persecuted for their 

efforts to educate. So they actually came all the way to Canada. 

And I just often wonder what these sisters thought when they 

arrived in Forget and experienced the weather that we’re 

experiencing now and wondering why they ever left France 

maybe, but they did that work. 

 

And where I grew up, Mr. Speaker, in the town of Lafleche 

there was also a convent then, the Sisters of the Cross were 

there as well. And I not too long ago was asked to do a little 

thought about an impact a teacher had on me. And the one 

teacher that came to mind was Sister Juliette Marie who was a 

sister of that order and taught me grade one. And I’m currently 

doing some research to try and find her because those women 

were amazing. Sister Jean St. Paul taught me piano for 10 years. 

And I got to my grade 10 piano from Sister Jean St. Paul, and 

she actually taught my mother her grade 10 piano as well. 

 

So I was very fortunate to have access to that kind of education 

and certainly my mom was. And I know in terms of health care, 

these nuns filled a role that is now being occupied by 

government. And it’s one of the things that worries me, Mr. 

Speaker, is what we see happening in health care and sort of the 

gradual erosion, I think, of services that are being provided, 

particularly in the area of seniors’ care where we see standards 

being removed and care standards really being questioned by a 

lot of people who are watching their loved ones in these senior 

care homes struggling and suffering maybe because of the lack 

of staff. 

 

We know that many of the calls upon this government when 

they established the urgent fund last year were simply the 

government couldn’t meet that need. And we have to question 

why, Mr. Speaker. Why is it in a time when we have record 

resource revenues, we have record numbers of people in the 

province paying income tax into the coffers, why is it that this 

government cannot keep up the standard of care that was so, so 

carefully guarded by these people like the Grey Nuns, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

So as always, these miscellaneous statute repeal Acts provide us 

an opportunity to look back over the history of these types of, 

these types of bills. And there is a history of Saskatchewan 

being told here. Again, I commend the folks over at Justice for, 

you know, doing the necessary work. And I think it’s probably, 

we’re fortunate these days to have the search functions in 

computers because I think what they’re doing is they’re finding 

a number of things that may have been covered up with the dust 

of time. And they’re blowing the dust off that through the use of 

computer search functions and able to ensure that all of these 

bills are properly put to their rest as it is. 

 

[22:15] 

 

So at that point, Mr. Speaker, I think other of my colleagues 

may want to comment on this bill as well, so I’d like to move 



March 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4507 

that we adjourn the debate on Bill No. 123. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 123, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 124 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 124 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) 

Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la 

loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 

(No. 2) be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as always, you know, 

there’s the consequential amendment Act that gets tagged along 

with some of these other Acts. So we have the consequential 

amendment Act of The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act. So 

it’s a very technical term, but I think this one too tells a bit of a 

story, and there’s only one clause. 

 

And what’s happening here is that because of the previous bill 

where we had to repeal all these, well in this case, The Mutual 

Medical and Hospital Benefit Associations Act, whatever that 

was. Mr. Speaker, we know it told a story of a time, but also it 

was referred to in another Act. And so now, we need this 

consequential amendment Act to deal with that Act. 

 

What Act was it, Mr. Speaker? I’m sure you’re dying to know. 

It was actually The Co-operatives Act of 1996. And in that case, 

there was a prohibition on who could use the words community 

clinic. And right there we have a whole chapter in the history of 

the medical care in this province, that I had the good fortune, 

actually on Sunday, of talking to one of the doctors who came 

over here from England to assist in the establishment of the 

community clinic in Saskatoon, Dr. Bury, John Bury. And he’s 

a real character, Mr. Speaker, and is actually writing his 

memoirs about those times because he has some amazing 

stories to tell. 

 

But you know, the establishment of community clinics was one 

that his wife Betsy often talks about in terms of the struggle for 

establishing medicare in this province. And I mean, we take it 

so much for granted now, but the actual establishment of 

medicare was a real battle. And Betsy tells stories of young 

mothers phoning her and feeling like the establishment of 

medicare and that these clinics was going to damage their 

children somehow. Like it was life and death for people in those 

days.  

 

And I think the misinformation that was being spread about 

Premier Douglas’s efforts to establish a universal health care 

system, really the rhetoric was quite amazing. And you know, 

the whole doctor situation, the doctors’ strike certainly added 

fuel to the fire. So when we see these words showing up in 

these bills, these technical, very dry sort of repeal Acts, it really 

does bring out some of the history of our province that too often 

I think we don’t talk about it and we don’t remember. 

 

At any rate in The Co-operatives Act there is a clause that says 

who is allowed to use the words community clinic because that 

was seen as a form of a co-operative. Section 198 (2) is being 

changed now because the previous Act I just spoke to is 

repealing The Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit 

Associations Act, and this Act was referring to it in the present 

tense. So there’s really only one word being changed here 

where it says you can’t use the word community clinic unless it 

was incorporated pursuant to that Act. 

 

So there may be more stories in The Mutual Medical and 

Hospital Benefit Associations Act about the community clinics 

because it looks like that was the legislative authority for the 

establishment of community clinics, at least at one point in our 

history. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, having had this review 

of the legislation, I’m certainly going to go back and talk to Dr. 

Bury about some of his recollections of the time. 

 

And another prominent historian in Saskatchewan who tells the 

story of the community clinics and the doctors’ strike and the 

whole establishment of medicare is Dr. Stuart Houston who is 

also one of my constituents. And he’s written a number of 

books on the area and about some of the decisions that were 

made at the time and some of the leaders in Saskatchewan, 

including people from Swift Current who established the first 

sort of medicare-type style of health care delivery. And all 

across the province it was being established. And Dr. Houston 

has written some very, very good historical reviews of some of 

those people who made medicare a possibility, and for that 

we’re very thankful. 

 

So I think my curiosity is piqued by just the simple change of a 

word from is to was on The Mutual Medical and Hospital 

Benefit Associations Act, and I hope that the listeners out there 

in TV land are also reminded to think about this, to realize 

there’s a lot of history that goes on and sometimes, you know, 

we just take health care for granted, much like we take 

education services for granted. And I think a part of that is, you 

know, a result of the success I guess of what’s taken place 

today, but I think we can become complacent as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And certainly as a member of the loyal opposition of 

Her Majesty here, I feel it’s our obligation to continue to shine 

light on these issues and to ensure that we’re never complacent, 

that we always take it very seriously and protect those things 

that people worked so hard for. 

 

So I think I’ll step down from my soapbox now, Mr. Speaker . 

And at this point, I would just like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

124. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 124, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 

(Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



4508 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2014 

Bill No. 125 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 125 — The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Pretty 

interested to rise tonight to join in the debate on The Traffic 

Safety Amendment Act, 2013, Bill No. 125. 

 

Tonight, I guess to state right off the top, Mr. Speaker, this 

particular piece of legislation has a definite context from which 

it arises, and in many ways deals with the work that was done 

by the Traffic Safety Committee. That’s not all this legislation 

is, Mr. Speaker, but the context and the work of the committee 

have an awful lot to do with the bill that we have here before us, 

a fairly substantial bill, a fairly complex bill, and obviously 

fairly, in the main a fairly serious bill. Because, Mr. Speaker, as 

we know too well here in Saskatchewan, we have arguably 

some very unsafe roads. And the loss of health and the loss of 

life that occurs in traffic safety incidents throughout the years 

here in our province is something that should give everyone 

pause for concern. Obviously everyone’s got a need to pay 

attention in this debate and certainly something as essential to 

the legislation or essential to the whole issue as The Traffic 

Safety Amendment Act. 

 

You know, it’s sometimes said that one thing we have no 

shortage of here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is geography. 

And certainly it doesn’t take very long living in Saskatchewan 

to find out the importance of the roads to us, and again roads 

through all kinds of different weather as we’ve had particular 

opportunity to reflect on this year, in this winter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think it’s safe to say that traffic safety is something that 

has reached into many of the families in this very Assembly. I 

know that there are things that have happened to my family in 

terms of unsafe or accidents on the roads and the way that that 

has impacted health and well-being. And I know there are 

others here who have been definitely impacted by situations that 

have happened on our roads, by accidents that have happened 

on our roads. 

 

And I guess I wanted to say that, Mr. Speaker, because I 

acknowledge here tonight that I’ve got some disagreements 

with where the government is going in terms of this piece of 

legislation. But I also want to say right off the top, Mr. Speaker, 

that for me that doesn’t take away from the good work that was 

done by people like the member from Prince Albert Northcote 

and the Traffic Safety Committee. You know, I think there are 

some definite improvements that have been made to the rules of 

the road here and how that will hopefully translate into 

preventing accidents, preventing that impact on lives and on 

health and on well-being for individuals and families and 

communities. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, with respect, and I say that as 

again to acknowledge that I don’t think that there are . . . I don’t 

want to get into overly personalizing this legislation, and I don’t 

want to get beyond the policy. But I think, you know, there’s 

that balance that we always try to strike, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of, you know, this legislation is brought forward by a 

government. The government is made up of people, and people 

voted for this government. And you know, we as Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition have a duty to hold the measures brought 

forward by this government up to scrutiny, to shine that light as 

my colleague from Nutana had talked about. So I’ve got 

remarks that will go longer than my time remaining to me 

tonight, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll certainly resume and get into 

some of the detailed critique that I have of what’s been brought 

forward. 

 

But I do know this. Again, there are good intentions on the part 

of members opposite when they worked on the Traffic Safety 

Committee. And I know that is certainly the case of the 

involvement we’ve had from our side with that Traffic Safety 

Committee on the part of the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale and the member from Cumberland, again two 

individuals that in terms of, you know, diligence and legislative 

work trying to improve the lives of constituents and of citizens 

here in the province of Saskatchewan, two individuals that very 

conscientiously brought that forward. And while I may disagree 

with some of the aspects of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

doubt the good motivation on the part of members opposite in 

terms of the work of that Traffic Safety Committee and the 

legislation that was ultimately brought forward. 

 

All right. I don’t want to get into name-calling or any of that, 

but on the policy that this piece of legislation represents, Mr. 

Speaker, there are improvements, to be certain. Will this make 

this . . . Will the items contained in this legislation make for 

safer roads in Saskatchewan? We certainly hope so, and we 

certainly think that it has the possibility to do that. But in terms 

of the evidence that was presented to the Traffic Safety 

Committee, and again the Traffic Safety Committee being 

appointed itself in the teeth of some pretty dismal statistics in 

the province of Saskatchewan of how unsafe our roads are, and 

again, behind each and every one of those statistics, Mr. 

Speaker, some very real lives and very real people that have 

been impacted. 

 

There are some good items in this legislation. But is this 

legislation in keeping with the evidence that was brought 

forward? Did it live up to the challenge brought forward in 

other jurisdictions in terms of best practices and what has 

shown real promise in terms of making our roads safer and 

saving in lives and health? I would argue that this legislation 

does not meet that mark, and I’ll have more to say about that. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 10:30, this 

House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4479 

 Bill No. 130 — The Executive Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4479 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4480 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 126 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4481 

 Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4482 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4483 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4486 

 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4486 

 Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4487 

 Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4488 

 Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4490 

 Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4491 

 Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4493 

 Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4494 

 Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4495 

 Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4496 

 Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4500 

 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4500 

 Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4502 

 Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4503 

 Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4504 

 Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4505 

 Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4507 

 Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4508 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


