




















































Hansard: May 15, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 65A  THURSDAY, MAY 15, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5423 

 May 15, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure this morning to introduce a school group from my 

constituency, the Hillmond Central School. The grade 7’s, 8’s, 

and 9’s made the long trek up from the Northwest, and I would 

like all members to join with me and with you, Mr. Speaker, 

and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I would like to introduce my Saskatchewan legislative 

intern, Kaytlyn Criddle from Balgonie. She is my fourth intern 

and she plans on spending some time in beautiful Saskatchewan 

Rivers next week. Please welcome her to her Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I would also like to, Mr. Speaker, introduce 

my legislative intern to the Legislative Assembly, and that’s 

Ms. Taylor Yee, sitting up beside Kaytlyn. And I’ve only been 

working with Taylor for a couple of weeks now and I’m already 

overwhelmed and impressed by the quality and the quantity of 

the work she can produce. So I’m looking forward to working 

with her for the next few weeks. And I would like everyone to 

welcome Taylor Yee to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce 

the people who work in visitor services. They have joined us 

today and are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. On Saturday, May 

17th, extended hours for the summer will go into effect at the 

Legislative Building. Tours of the building will be offered 

every half hour, 8 a.m. to 9 p.m., seven days a week. 

 

And these are the people who will welcome visitors to the 

Legislative Building and show them around. Working the front 

line with the visitors is an important, interesting, and rewarding 

experience. Our bilingual information officers for the summer 

are, and if they would give a wave when I say their name: Marie 

Digney, Rita Gareau, François Hawkins, Alan Chan, Jean-René 

Robillard, and Brittany Love. 

 

Our casual information officers are: Ted Forrest, Penny Forrest, 

Edith Seiferling, Gabe Seiferling. And our permanent staff: 

Arnold McKenzie, senior information officer; Kelly Liberet, 

bilingual senior information officer; Marianne Morgan, 

assistant director of visitor services; and Lorraine deMontigny, 

director of visitor services. I’d ask all members to welcome 

them to the Legislative Assembly. 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Norwegian Constitution Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the national anthem for Norway, and on 

Saturday it’s going to be sung over the whole world because 

Norwegians and Norwegians’ descendants are celebrating the 

200th anniversary of the Norwegian constitution. The 

Norwegian constitution’s main points are power to the people, 

equality, a declaration of independence, freedom and human 

rights, and the rule of law. And, Mr. Speaker, Norwegians are 

proud of 200 years of that perspective on how one governs 

oneself. 

 

So in Saskatoon on Saturday, there’s going to be a major parade 

and gathering to celebrate this. There’ll be other celebrations 

across the province. So on Saturday, I ask all members to join 

with the member from Saskatoon Massey Place, the member 

from Melville-Saltcoats, member from Regina Wascana Plains, 

member from Regina Northeast, the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers, and the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook as we all celebrate Norwegian 

Constitution Day, the 200th anniversary of the Norwegian 

constitution. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Reopening of Big River Saw Mill 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

rise in the House today to announce that the Big River saw mill 

had its grand reopening last Tuesday. The Premier, the Minister 

of Economy, and myself all had the pleasure of attending this 

milestone event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Big River saw mill is the largest in the 

province and will account for more than 40 per cent of 

Saskatchewan’s lumber production capacity. The saw mill 

produces dimensional lumber and has an annual production 

capacity of 250 million board feet. It uses scanning and 

optimization equipment that is among the most advanced 

technology of any saw mill in North America. Once the mill is 

running at full capacity, it will directly employ up to 100 

workers, and more than 250 additional jobs are expected to be 

created through contacts in timber harvesting, road 

construction, and reforestation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was an extremely difficult time for the people of 

Big River and surrounding area when the mill closed in 2006. 

But thanks to Carrier Forest Products, the mill has reopened and 

will soon be running at full capacity. This is a wonderful 

occasion for Big River and surrounding area and all of 

Saskatchewan. I’d like to congratulate Carrier Forest Products 

on the reopening of the Big River saw mill and thank them for 

investing in my community. 



5424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize the International Day Against Homophobia and 

Transphobia, recognized on May 17th of each year. The theme 

for 2014 is Freedom of Expression, aiming to remind us that the 

right to freedom of expression of members of sexual and gender 

minorities should be respected as part of the most fundamental 

human rights. 

 

Here in Canada, despite protections under the charter of human 

rights, LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender] citizens 

and their families continue to experience oppression and 

discrimination on the basis of their sexual orientation and 

gender expression. Navi Pillay, the UN’s [United Nations] High 

Commissioner for Human Rights, argues, and I quote, “The fact 

that so many continue to deny that these abuses are taking place 

or that there are human right violations makes it all the more 

important to speak out at every opportunity.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, today I’m taking the opportunity to speak out, 

encouraging all members of the Assembly to reach out to those 

who are particularly vulnerable to homophobic and transphobic 

bullying. I call on all members to take the opportunity to do so 

this summer by participating at the upcoming Pride events held 

throughout Saskatchewan, including this Saturday in Moose 

Jaw or several Pride parades including Prince Albert on June 

8th, Regina on June 14th, or in Saskatoon on June 21st. 

 

The lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender communities have 

as much right as anyone to feel safe and free, and we should do 

whatever we can to secure that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

McArthur River Mine Receives Safety Award 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

share in the Assembly that Cameco was recently recognized for 

its outstanding safety performance in 2013 by the Canadian 

Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum. 

 

The McArthur River mine was awarded the CIM’s [Canadian 

Institute for Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum] prestigious 

John T. Ryan National Safety Trophy for the best safety 

performance in the metal mine category in 2013. Mr. Speaker, 

last year the McArthur mine recorded zero reportable injuries 

for 860,818 working hours. This is the third time the mine has 

won the national John T. Ryan Award, with previous victories 

in 2000 and 2009. 

 

In addition to the award, Cameco delivered strong safety 

performance company-wide in 2013. Several operations 

celebrated key safety milestones, including Blind River 

Refinery having seven years without a lost-time injury, Cameco 

Fuel Manufacturing Inc. having two years without a lost-time 

injury, and Port Hope conversion facility having one year 

without a lost-time injury. The Key Lake and Rabbit Lake and 

Cigar Lake mining operations in northern Saskatchewan also 

delivered strong safety performance with injury rates on the 

downward trend on each site. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Cameco for the commitment to safety in our province. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Teachers of English as a Second Language Conference 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend I had 

the pleasure of bringing greetings to the 24th annual Teachers 

of English as a Second Language Conference held here in 

Regina. As we know, immigration to our province in recent 

years has changed the need for supports in our schools, and this 

conference did an outstanding job of helping to understand 

those needs. 

 

Over 600 delegates gathered in Regina for presentations on 

supporting English acquisition for second language learners. 

Delegates were also treated to three phenomenal keynote 

addresses, one of the key topics being the promotion of multiple 

literacies in our very diverse classrooms. The mission and focus 

for the entire conference was to promote excellence in the 

teaching and learning of English as a second or additional 

language in partnership with provincial and territorial 

associations and the world community as a whole. 

 

Saskatchewan welcomed delegates from nearly all the 

provinces, as well as delegates from Thailand, Colombia, 

Iceland, United States, Germany, Mexico, Japan, and France. 

Delegates were also treated to an introduction of First Nations 

culture with an amazing performance by world-renowned hoop 

dancer, Terrence Littletent from Kawacatoose First Nation. 

 

The organizing committee did a fantastic job of planning this 

conference and of showcasing Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 

ask all members to join me in congratulating TESL [Teachers 

of English as a Second Language] Canada and the organizing 

committee on a very successful conference. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Saskatchewan Distinguished Realtor Award 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with 

great pleasure that I rise today to share with my colleagues that 

a resident of The Battlefords has just received the Saskatchewan 

Distinguished Realtor Award. Alexander “Al” White is a very 

worthy recipient of this honour, which is co-sponsored by the 

Association of Saskatchewan Realtors and Canada Mortgage 

and Housing Corporation. 

 

This award was presented to him by Bill Madder, the 

Association of Saskatchewan Realtors CEO [chief executive 

officer], at the annual Life Legacy Gala held April 8th in 

Saskatoon. 

 

The purpose of this award is to recognize an active member of 

the association who has demonstrated outstanding leadership 

and dedication to the real estate industry, both provincially and 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5425 

locally. Al has been president of the Council of Battlefords 

Realtors three times, director of the Association of 

Saskatchewan Realtors for eight years, and was president of the 

provincial association in 2012. As well he has served on a host 

of committees and has been very involved in his community. 

 

In making the presentation, CEO Bill Madder had this to say: 

“It is with great pride that we congratulate Al on being selected 

to receive this honour.” 

 

The Life Legacy Gala truly turned into the Al White night, as 

he was also awarded an honorary life membership in the 

association, and later that evening he raised a significant sum 

for charity by allowing himself to be auctioned off in the dream 

date package. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Al was a competitor of mine for many years, but 

also a good friend who always conducted his business ethically 

and honestly, and for that reason, has a great respect from his 

colleagues. 

 

I would ask all members to join with me in congratulating Al 

White on receiving the Distinguished Realtor Award. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Report Card 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, we’re approaching the end of 

the school year, and that means the preparation of report cards 

for students. There was another report card released recently 

however. The Conference Board of Canada released a report 

card on the provincial economies, and Saskatchewan’s at the 

top of the class with an A plus. GDP [gross domestic product] 

growth got an A plus; employment growth, another A plus; 

inflation, A; unemployment rate, A. Despite the doom and 

gloom of the members opposite, people in Saskatchewan are 

better off today than they ever were under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is our government’s report card. All of 

the credit for this remarkable turnaround in our province goes to 

the people of Saskatchewan, the entrepreneurs and the 

employees who have built an A-plus economy after years of 

enduring an F-minus NDP government. Even today the NDP 

have nothing new to offer, nothing positive to say. But here’s 

the good news, Mr. Speaker: the NDP is no longer positioned to 

hold Saskatchewan back. 

 

Today there are more jobs for our young people. The population 

is growing. Incomes are rising. Unemployment is lower than 

it’s ever been, and Saskatchewan is moving forward. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re never going back to the way it was under the 

NDP. This is an A-plus province with A-plus people. It 

deserves an A-plus economy, and that’s exactly what we have 

today. 

 

[10:15] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Academic Freedom and University of Saskatchewan 

Faculty Member 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I came to 

question period with a lot of concern and a lot of outrage over 

what is happening at the University of Saskatchewan. And the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, came to question period ill-informed and 

unprepared to answer the questions about what was going on 

about the fired professor. He didn’t even know what 

administrative leave means, suggesting somehow that it’s a bad 

thing. It was absolutely bizarre. 

 

Well here’s what Janice MacKinnon has to say about what’s 

happening at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]: “I think 

it’s a huge issue for academic freedom and it’s actually 

stunning . . . a very, very serious situation at the university.” 

And Janice MacKinnon goes on to say, “I would say that we are 

mainly stunned on campus, but there’s a lot of anger as well.”  

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: has he finally been 

briefed on this issue properly, and is he now concerned with 

what is happening at the University of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what’s been going on at the 

University of Saskatchewan has had the attention of the 

government for some several weeks, months since the 

TransformUS issue started to unfold in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell the House that since yesterday, and in 

fact before yesterday but since yesterday, I’ve also had the 

chance to talk to board members at the University of 

Saskatchewan, including the Chair. I would point out as well 

for the House that the minister has since spoken to the president 

of the university and also to the Chair of the board again this 

morning. Mr. Speaker, I believe the University of Saskatchewan 

may indeed be issuing a statement today, perhaps very shortly, 

with respect to actions on this particular matter of Dr. 

Buckingham. We’ll watch for that statement. We’ll watch for 

developments carefully. 

 

And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, I have asked the minister 

to convene an urgent meeting of the board. He’s already 

indicated that request to the chairman of the board. We expect 

that to happen very shortly, to explore not just this particular 

issue but, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, the broader issues 

around the importance of maintaining the reputation, the 

stability, and, Mr. Speaker, the excellence at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, after months and months of 

concerns, it seems like this government finally realizes that 

there’s something they should be paying attention to at the 

University of Saskatchewan. Here’s what Janice MacKinnon 

also says: 

 

What’s happening here is really, really concerning. It 

should be a concern to academics right across Canada. Not 

only did they fire him from his administrative position, 

they’re also trying to strip him of his academic position as 



5426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

a tenured professor and they’re doing it because they 

didn’t like what he wrote. 

 

Janice MacKinnon goes on to say, “If you can fire him as a 

tenured professor for what he said that they didn’t like, what 

about the rest of us?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: what’s the answer to 

that? Has this government sought assurances from the 

University of Saskatchewan that academic freedom is 

sacrosanct at the U of S? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my friend across the way 

confuses loud questions in this Assembly for action. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s very important when the issue of the reputation of 

the university is at stake, or any post-secondary institution, that 

the government act in a methodical and deliberate way, that the 

government maintain contact with the board, contact with the 

leadership of that university or any other institution that is 

undergoing some changes, as they are, and where there are 

obviously public issues. 

 

I also find it interesting to note that the Leader of the 

Opposition is now quoting Janice MacKinnon, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

been a long time since members of the NDP would quote Janice 

MacKinnon. I think it’s appropriate it happened here. It would 

also be appropriate if he quoted her when she has been 

commenting on the economic wisdom or lack thereof of the 

NDP plans for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I just want to say to the member in terms of his question, I will 

repeat what I said. I’ll repeat what I said in the first answer. Mr. 

Speaker, I have chatted with the chairman of the board 

yesterday, other board members as well, Mr. Speaker. The 

president was . . . There was a discussion and contact with the 

president yesterday with the minister responsible for the file, 

and the minister today has been in contact with the chairman of 

the board. I have asked the minister to request an urgent 

meeting with the board, not just to deal with this matter but 

again to ensure some of the bigger issues are being taken care of 

with respect to the University of Saskatchewan. In my 

understanding, arrangements for that meeting are under way. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s puzzling. Just yesterday we 

have the Minister of Advanced Education saying he finds out 

about the firing of a tenured professor because of speaking out 

through Twitter. This is the level of engagement, a level of 

communication that has been non-existent between this 

government and the University of Saskatchewan, and it 

represents, Mr. Speaker, how this government has had its head 

in the sand as concerns have been raised at the University of 

Saskatchewan over the past months. 

 

This issue is receiving national attention, and unfortunately it’s 

receiving international attention at the same time. It’s 

embarrassing to our province and it’s embarrassing to the 

U of S. The executive director of the Canadian Association of 

University Teachers says: 

 

I’m a little lost for words to describe how outrageous this 

is . . . It’s not acceptable for a university president to 

behave this way. It’s an insult to what universities are. It’s 

an insult to University of Saskatchewan. 

 

He goes on: 

 

What the president of the University of Saskatchewan has 

done is an embarrassment to the traditions and history of 

the University of Saskatchewan, and it’s an 

embarrassment to post-secondary education across 

Canada. It’s inexcusable. 

 

My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: does he share these 

concerns and is he worried about sanctions put on the 

University of Saskatchewan by this association or the 

Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, let’s be clear about what happened yesterday with 

respect to minister’s comments. The minister did find out about 

this through social media. That’s why he stated his concern 

yesterday. That’s why we were concerned as well. That isn’t the 

level of communication that we would expect, Mr. Speaker, and 

so we’ve taken the intervening hours to gather more 

information, to talk directly with the leadership at the board 

level and with the president herself through the minister. That is 

exactly what we’ve done. 

 

With respect to the comments and the quotes that the hon. 

member has read, this should be a concern to all of us. I expect 

there will be in a statement from the University of 

Saskatchewan soon with respect to the issue, with the potential 

of a change in direction. I guess we’ll wait and see what they 

have to say, but it would be important for that to occur. 

 

It is also important, I think, for the minister to meet with the 

board urgently, ASAP [as soon as possible] to talk about this 

issue and others as we are now all interested. I hope we are 

motivated by, first and foremost and exclusively, protection of 

the reputation and the stability of the University of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I expect that’s the case on the part 

of the hon. members opposite and, Mr. Speaker, we’re hopeful, 

we’re expecting that that meeting will occur very quickly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks about the tone 

of the discussion around what’s going on at the University of 

Saskatchewan. This is the Premier yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that 

came into the Assembly prepared to slag the fired professor and 

using that somehow as a deflection; a deflection from this 

government’s lack of concern, lack of attention, and lack of 

action when it comes to the best interests of the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The grad students’ association, Mr. Speaker, the president says, 

“I’m truly shocked. To not have freedom to express concern 

over a process that affects the university in such a big way is 

very shocking.” President of the USSU [University of 

Saskatchewan Students’ Union], the students’ union says, 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5427 

“Students are finding this deplorable. This is sort of 

unprecedented action that’s getting national coverage, and I 

think as a result is weakening the reputation of the university.” 

 

I share those concerns, Mr. Speaker. But what we haven’t heard 

from the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is whether or not he thinks the 

firing of the professor is appropriate or not appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker. The university president thinks it does, but academics 

on campus, national media, student leaders, Janice MacKinnon, 

many people throughout the province, the majority of people 

think this is outrageous and ridiculous. Does this Premier think, 

Mr. Speaker, that it was appropriate to fire Dr. Buckingham? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is with a sense of gravity and deepening concern that 

I have made a request to the board Chair this morning, as the 

Premier has already indicated, to meet with the board of 

governors forthwith. I anticipate that that will take place, if not 

tomorrow, then in the coming days. 

 

I want to offer a great reassurance to individuals on that campus 

and right across the province, and in fact well beyond, that we 

take the issue of the freedom of expression very seriously. 

That’s reflected in investments that we’ve made on that 

campus, and it’s reflected in our continued commitment to 

excellence for our scholars and for our students, and that is 

consistent with the legacy and traditions of the University of 

Saskatchewan.  

 

Very specifically, I have a concern today regarding the actions 

of the senior administration and whether they may be in 

compliance with The University of Saskatchewan Act, 

specifically on processes relating to faculty. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, we take this issue very, very seriously, and I look 

forward to that board meeting. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when the Premier was 

answering questions about this or giving responses about this, 

he did not take freedom, academic freedom seriously one little 

bit, Mr. Speaker. And today, today he continues to sit in his seat 

and not be willing to stand up and speak out about what is going 

on at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, did not hesitate to condemn and 

to stand up and to speak out when things were going on at First 

Nations University of Canada. So it’s beyond baffling, Mr. 

Speaker, why the Premier would pass the baton over to the 

Advanced Education minister and sit in his chair and be 

unwilling to stand up and say what is happening at the 

university is not correct. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will he stand in this 

Assembly and say the firing of Dr. Buckingham was 

inappropriate — yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we have been crystal clear 

about our commitment to academic freedom on this campus and 

others right across this province. 

 

We are also increasingly concerned, as the Premier has stated, 

about the reputation, the national and global reputation of the 

University of Saskatchewan. As we know, it’s our only medical 

doctoral university in this province. We know how important 

the University of Saskatchewan is, as related to all of the 

post-secondary institutions across the country. It is among the 

best when it comes to food security. It offers leading-edge 

research in health sciences. We take these concerns very, very 

seriously. 

 

What we want to ensure is that through due diligence that we 

have accumulated the facts. And these have not just come in a 

number of hours; we have been in dialogue with the University 

of Saskatchewan over TransformUS for months. And we will 

be seeking that meeting with the board forthwith. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it was just I think two days ago in 

a scrum that the Minister of Advanced Education said he wasn’t 

even sure if academic freedom applied to the fired professor in 

this situation. The next day, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Buckingham is 

fired. That’s how seriously they’ve taken this issue throughout. 

That’s how seriously they’ve listened to the concerns coming 

from campus. 

 

And now we have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where the vast 

majority of Saskatchewan public, the vast majority I think of 

academics across the country recognize that it’s inappropriate to 

fire a tenured professor as they have done, bring him into an 

office with police, fire him, and give a lifetime ban from the 

university campus. 

 

Now they claim they’re taking this seriously, even though the 

Minister of Advanced Education said two days ago, not even 

sure if academic expression applies in this situation. Next day 

he’s fired. And now we have the situation where the Premier of 

the province won’t stand up with the concerned people in 

Saskatchewan and say whether or not it was appropriate for Dr. 

Buckingham to be fired. I’ll give the Premier another 

opportunity: will he stand up and condemn what has happened 

at the University of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of the member 

opposite is simply just not accurate. In fact we have here from 

the Canadian Press, a report entitled: Professor says University 

of Saskatchewan intimidating faculty over cuts, where I am 

clearly quoted as saying, and it is very, very clear, Mr. Speaker, 

that “. . . professors should not be told to keep quiet.” Mr. 

Speaker, we have been defenders all the way along of academic 

freedom and that freedom of expression. Not simply in rhetoric, 

but in fact investments, record investments on that campus and 

elsewhere. We will continue to defend that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will also, also with great urgency seek to meet with the 

board to ensure that there has been compliance and, if not, there 



5428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

is an accounting for why there has not been, regarding The 

University of Saskatchewan Act. And we will seek to ensure 

that the reputation, that is profile and prestige of one of the best 

institutions, post-secondary institutions in the country will be 

taken very seriously by the board members and the senior 

administration. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Independent Investigation 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the government took 

notice of a question on Tuesday about whether or not it believes 

an independent investigation is warranted into the actions of the 

member for Saskatoon Sutherland who asked the food bank to 

pay him to campaign for the Sask Party. To the Premier: what’s 

the answer? 

 

The Speaker: — That question is out of order as it deals with a 

party matter, not a legislative matter under the competence of 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Next question. I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Membership of Social Services Appeal Board 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — In recent weeks we’ve raised significant 

concerns about how the poor judgment of the Social Services 

minister is compromising the independence of the Social 

Services Appeal Board. The Premier’s refused to act. In fact 

he’s doubled down on this. 

 

To the Premier: will he finally do the right thing, restore the 

confidence and the true independence of the Social Services 

Appeal Board? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I think the 

members opposite are well aware that the people that are on our 

Social Services Appeal Board are there because they’re 

professional people, because they understand the issues, and 

because they care about the issues. Mr. Speaker, the work that 

we are doing as government to ensure the people who are 

vulnerable have their thoughts brought forward to our 

government are very important to us, that we have a 

professional relationship with the people, and we have an 

opportunity to gain insight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I have had the chance to talk to not only the 

Chair of the appeal board but other members of the board, we 

talk about what else we can do to ensure that taxpayers’ money 

is used well and that we can support vulnerable people in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, that is the goal of the ministry. That is 

the goal of the government to ensure that people that we put on 

boards are competent, professional, and give us the information 

. . . [inaudible] . . . so that we can protect vulnerable people in 

this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Travel Expenses 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the 

Premier is a bit tired today or exactly what’s going on, but the 

question was to the Premier. The government has refused to 

release the expenses for the Premier’s right-hand adviser. We 

know of at least two inappropriate expenses claimed on behalf 

of the ministers by that individual, the cabinet secretary. So we 

need to see the other expense claims. 

 

My question to the Premier: why won’t he simply put that 

information on the table today? What’s he afraid of? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

asked this very question in estimates. The answer was given 

with respect to the number of requests that the Executive 

Council freedom of information officer has, by the way, the 

same individual that was doing the work under the New 

Democratic government. So when the information’s compiled 

and available, we’ll present it. 

 

And while the member is asking questions of travel and 

expenses, I wonder if he has yet to report to the Assembly, if 

the NDP have managed to get back the car service money spent 

by the former premier, or the family travel money spent by the 

former NDP Health minister when he attended American 

attorneys general meeting and brought the whole family — 

thousands of dollars. So if they’re going to go down this road, 

will he turn around and ask the member for Lakeview if he’s 

going to reimburse the taxpayers for those dollars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve said, we’ll go all 

the way back to 1982 if that Premier wants us to. It’s not just 

the expenses of the Premier’s right-hand adviser that this 

government’s refused to release. It’s also refused to release all 

staff travel expense claims. And that’s a problem because we 

know the inappropriate expenses from the ministers were buried 

in staff expense claims. 

 

The Premier says that travel expenses have been reviewed and 

that there’s no other problems, but he’s refused to release the 

information. So to the Premier: why won’t he simply do the 

right thing here today, release that information? Simply what is 

he afraid of? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that information will be 

released. But the truth of the matter is, when we look back we 

did find some other problems, especially when measured 

against the standards set by the Leader of the Opposition in his 

attacks of the Social Services minister this session. 

 

Not very long ago when the NDP were in office, the current 

member for Regina Lakeview decided he needed to attend I 

think all of the American attorneys general western conference 

meetings. And he went to meetings in Juno; in Sun Valley, 

Idaho; and Monterey, California; and the family came. I’m not 

sure that’s even a problem, but just so you know. This is the 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5429 

leader’s standards, not ours. The family came with him. Twelve 
thousand dollars over three years for these trips when he wasn’t 
even the Attorney General for the province of Saskatchewan. 
He was the Health minister. 
 
So again to the Deputy Leader, will he turn around in his chair 
and ask for that by his own standards — not ours, his leader’s 
standards. Will he turn around in his chair and ask the member 
for Regina Lakeview to pay the taxpayers back? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, throughout the session this 
government has also refused to release a lot of information as it 
relates to its lean pet project, including the breakdown of costs 
throughout government, the total cost of on-site Japan kanban 
seminars, the total cost paid to Japanese seminars and to 
interpreters and so on. 
 
And while we know a fair amount about the lean initiative 
clawback now that’s being foisted onto school divisions, this 
government’s been very quiet about the lean pay bump it’s 
giving to senior health care administrators. I understand this 
lean pay bump is given to health care administrators simply for 
holding more lean events, I suspect like the paper airplane 
folding seminars that front-line health care workers have been 
forced to attend. 
 
To the Premier: how much are taxpayers paying in total to give 
this lean pay bump to health care administrators simply to hold 
more lean events? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we have a compensation package for senior officials, 
senior CEOs within the health regions, that is based upon a 
salary that we do provide to them as well as a paid performance 
based on a number of measurements that we do have within the 
system. 
 
My understanding is that the salary is at 90 per cent of what is 
being agreed to and that they can earn over and above that to a 
maximum of 110 per cent. This is a long-standing tradition 
within the management of health care system here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well in this case, Mr. Speaker, Sask Party 
innovation is giving a pay bump to health administrators for 
simply holding lean events, lean events, Mr. Speaker, where 
they watch a video where the Premier is on it praising the 
benefits of lean that the health care workers have to sit through, 
where they learn how to fold paper airplanes, Mr. Speaker, and 
where they learn important words like muda, chaku-chaku, 
kaikaku, heijunka, and so on, Mr. Speaker. All the senior health 
care administrators have to do to get their lean pay bump is to 
hold more lean training events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: how on earth does it 

make sense to give performance bonuses to senior health 
administrators simply for holding lean events and giving them 
this lean pay bump? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There are certain criteria that senior leaders within the health 
regions have to achieve in order to achieve any over-and-above 
payments through their bonus structures. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think that it is very clear that lean is 
providing a benefit for the entire health care system far and 
above what we have already invested into the system. For 
example, this is just from two weeks ago. Sunrise Health 
Region, they have eliminated the need for clients to wait for 
callback for mental health follow-up appointments by using a 
shared appointment calendar, allowing clinicians to book 
appointments with other clinicians right at the time of the 
client’s appointment. It seems pretty straightforward and a good 
thing for patients. 
 
They’ve reduced transcription time, thereby increasing medical 
record transcription capacity by 46 per cent. They’ve reduced 
quality defects by 58 per cent in the transcription notes that 
arrive between providers. And I think most importantly, they’ve 
reduced patient treatment appointment wait-lists from over 100 
in the months prior to the RPIW [rapid process improvement 
workshop] down to 18 and now down to zero. That’s just 
one . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, throughout this sitting we have 
seen this government continually neglect the basics, all at the 
same time, Mr. Speaker, as they have been obsessively focused 
on their pet projects, and lean is the best example. 
 
Now we have the lean pay bump, Mr. Speaker, where senior 
administrators receive additional dollars simply for holding 
training events, where participants learn Japanese words and 
learn how to fold paper airplanes. It’s absolutely ridiculous, all 
at the same time as the government’s very own data through the 
Health Quality Council shows that adverse events are up, 
mortality rates for major surgery are up, the infection rates are 
up, and overall patient satisfaction is down. It’s clear, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government and this Premier are not briefed 
up when it comes to the lean pay bump, and they’re just 
neglecting the basics. 
 
My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how much is the 
province paying for the lean pay bump? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend just repeats the 
same question that the Minister of Health has already answered 
twice. 
 
You know, it’s the end of the session, Mr. Speaker. And the end 
of a session I think is an important opportunity for 
Saskatchewan people to do a comparison, to decide between 
two opposing groups on either side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
what side would they like to continue to move the province 



5430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

forward, admitting that either side, Mr. Speaker, when they 
have a chance to be in government, aren’t going to be perfect. 
There’s going to be mistakes, but they would ask the question 
after session, who would be better, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well on the morning the Conference Board of Canada has given 
this province’s economy its highest grade, Mr. Speaker, second 
highest of all the provinces in the country, and all of the 
international peers for the province of Saskatchewan; on the 
morning, I think the day after manufacturing numbers are up in 
the province, Mr. Speaker; at the end of a session where we 
have brought down another balanced budget, where we moved 
the summary financial statements, Mr. Speaker; where we have, 
Mr. Speaker, announced the largest infrastructure project in the 
history of the province, of the bypass; our third of a bridge for 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker; twinning in the southeast part of the 
province, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Well, they’re getting excited over there, and I don’t blame 
them. They’re excited because they know as long as this is a 
fact in Saskatchewan, they will stay over there, and we’ll 
continue to move the province forward from this side of the 
House. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 407. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to question 407. 
 
Why is the Minister of Social Services on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has requested 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to all my 
colleagues, thank you. I have the honour of introducing today 
the summer student in my office. Graham Carver is in the west 
gallery today. I know that he enjoys his job. He knows it’s 
serious and challenging, but I think he’s also kind of glad he’s 
in an office with all women. I know he’s delighted about that. 
 
Sitting beside Carver is a lady that used to work in my office 
that’s now in Environment, Amanda Plummer. I’m very 
delighted you’re here today, and please ask all my colleagues to 
help me welcome them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 
leave to make a statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave to make statements. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Expression of Thanks 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. With this being the last day of session, I wanted to 
extend a number of thank yous, as is tradition in this Assembly. 
Firstly I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the often 
challenging job that you hold sitting in the Chair. There’s 
obviously some passionate debate that occurs in this Chamber, 
as we’ve just seen during question period. And I want to thank 
you very sincerely for the job that you do in leading this 
Assembly. 
 
I wish to thank the Clerks, Greg and the Table officers, for the 
work that you do as well in navigating us through some of the 
more arcane rules of procedure. So thank you for that. I also 
want to thank the building staff for the work that they do, 
broadcast services, library services, journals, Hansard who are 
often here till late into the evening when we’re sitting late. 
Thank you to them for their work. 
 
I wish to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms for the work that he does 
and his staff, the commissionaires, for the great job that they do. 
I also want to thank the cafeteria staff, the Pages for their 
diligence, the interns, the tour guides, visitor services for all that 
they do as well. 
 
I’d like to extend a special thank you to our staff in House 
business, Graham Stewart, Jarret Coels, and Tom Richards, 
who do an excellent job down there. I thank the media for the 
work that they do in making sure that the public are informed 
about what happens in this Assembly and happens in this 
building. 
 
[10:45] 
 
I also want to thank the Opposition House Leader, my friend 
who I’ve developed a very good relationship with. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, I think people watching the Assembly on 
television think it’s all question period, and it really isn’t. There 
is a great deal of co-operation and discussion that has to occur 
between the government and opposition in order to make this 
Assembly function properly. And I want to thank the 
Opposition House Leader for that. 
 
Also, and I think most importantly, I want to thank our families 
for the support that they give all of us and allow us to do this 
job. We’re often away for extended periods, there’s a lot of 
travel, and you’re always pretty much on duty, Mr. Speaker. So 
I want to extend our thank you to the families of all the 
members for their support. 
 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5431 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a motion later on 

in terms of the adjournment of the Assembly but I just wanted 

to extend those thank yous to all those folks named. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the Government House Leader in terms of the many 

thanks, the debt of gratitude that we in this Assembly owe so 

many. 

 

I’d start with yourself first, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

demonstrating that leadership from the Chair and the way that 

you continue to protect the rights and privileges of members in 

this Assembly to make sure that we might conduct the people’s 

business in a way that we owe such a debt to the democracy that 

we hold so dear. 

 

I’d like to thank very much the Table officers, the Clerk and the 

Table. I’ll miss not being able to go for daily prayers when the 

House is not in session, but certainly I guess we’ll do that . . . 

They’ll have to feel the disturbance in the force or something 

like that, Mr. Speaker. But certainly there’s a great deal of 

guidance and wisdom that the Table tries to impart, certainly to 

myself. I appreciate that very much in terms of trying to do my 

job, and we try to live up to the good counsel on offer. 

 

And as well to the Clerk and all the folks in the Clerk’s office 

and the great work that they do in supporting this Chamber, 

everyone in member services, the Legislative Assembly Service 

of course. There are a lot of people making this Chamber run as 

well as it does, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The folks in Hansard, journals, audiovisual, for all the great 

work that they do and particularly when it comes to deciphering 

some of my speeches, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that’s no end of 

challenge. 

 

I want to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms, the security, and the 

commissionaires. At this moment, Mr. Speaker, I’d wish a 

happy belated 90th birthday to Joe Deck who served many 

years in this Chamber, and well, Mr. Speaker. And I think of 

Joe when I think of the people that, the many people we come 

into contact and the work that they do, but happy 90th to Joe. 

 

I’d also like to say, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the Usher of the 

Black Rod work that was done by Ben Walsh yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to go on record saying that that’s some of the 

finest Usher of the Black Rod work I think we’ve ever seen in 

this Chamber. And I know it’s a present, not a permanent 

appointment, but he did a heck of a job, Mr. Speaker, and it 

would be great to see him continue on in that role. 

 

In terms of the folks in the library, again information is so 

critical to what we do and the work that they do. The cafeteria 

folks, obviously I benefit greatly from the work that they do, 

Mr. Speaker, and the fuel for the fire. 

 

I’d like to thank the folks in the press gallery for the work that 

they do in terms of communicating what happens here and on 

out into the countryside, Mr. Speaker, through the many 

different channels. It’s again that the media provides the oxygen 

that is vital to the fire of the democracy burning brightly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’d like to thank the caucus members on both sides. You know, 

I’ve even got the running commentary going right now from the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone. I’d like to thank him in 

particular for all the help he provides as we do this work in this 

House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in very serious earnestness, Mr. Speaker, thanks to 

everyone in this Chamber for the work that they do and the 

hours that they put on behalf of the people. The caucus staffs 

that work very hard, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much to 

them. To the constituency assistants who are out there holding 

the fort for all of us as we attend to the people’s business right 

here, thank you very much to them. And in terms of the folks in 

House business on our side, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank very 

much Linsay Martens and Katherine Norton for the great work 

that they’ve done in terms of House business. But being the 

relatively small shop that we are, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of 

other folks that pitch in, but particularly thank you, Linsay and 

Kat. 

 

And I’d also like to thank Graham and the folks in the 

government House business office for working in concert with 

us. And I’d like to thank my colleague, the Government House 

Leader, for all the work that we get to do together. Again one of 

the main tasks that we have is to try and make sure that the 

process runs as straightforward as it can to make sure that the 

issues are what take centre stage as opposed to the procedural 

wrangling. And again in terms of the level of communication 

and trust that we’ve built up, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that 

relationship very much and look forward to the work to be 

continued there. Second to last, Mr. Speaker, the Pages have 

done a heck of a job this session. We’ll see who comes back. 

But you know, putting up with us is no easy feat but they’ve 

done it in fine style. 

 

And very last, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank our friends and 

family. You know, they do such a . . . They put up with a lot in 

terms of being involved in the lives of elected officials, but 

that’s what makes this all worthwhile and keeps us going in the 

work that we do, and we thank them for it. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d say thank you very much, wish everybody a safe 

changing of the venue. 

 

The Speaker: — In joining with the House leaders I would like 

to take this opportunity to thank everyone for their hard work 

this session. Thank you to the members for their many hours of 

service to Saskatchewan and for the long hours and days away 

from their families. It is time to return to our homes and spend 

some quality time with our families. Thank you to the families 

who stayed at home and support us. 

 

While the Assembly is not likely to sit until the fall, I know the 

work does not end. Committees continue to work through the 

recess period. Ministers will continue their duties and meetings 

in Regina and Saskatoon or across the province. Private 

members will continue their work on constituency issues and in 

their roles as committee members, legislative secretaries, and 

critics. And I’m already trying to organize meetings for those. 

 

I would like to thank the LAS [Legislative Assembly Service] 

staff, the Clerks and officers, the Pages, Hansard, 



5432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff, the library staff, the interns, 

caucus staff, cafeteria staff, central service building staff. Their 

hours are often as long, or in the case of Hansard, even longer 

than those of the members. Thank you to our constituency staff 

for their diligence and hard work. 

 

Thank you to my staff, Sheila and Connie, for their support, 

especially in dealing with the programs and initiatives such as 

SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 

Parliamentary Democracy] and the educational outreach 

program, which is run out of the Speaker’s office. These 

programs take a lot of extra time but are well worth the effort. 

 

Everyone, have a safe and fulfilling summer. Thank you. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave to make an 

introduction of some special guests that have just joined us. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the most successful, the most 

dynamic international bilateral relationship, I think it’s fair to 

say, in modern history is that of the relationship between 

Canada and the United States. It’s a relationship, Mr. Speaker, 

that we ought never to take for granted on either side, but 

certainly from the perspective of Saskatchewan, we ought never 

to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year alone, if the measure is only economic, 

and it’s not, last year alone $21 billion worth of goods from 

Saskatchewan to the United States, 65 per cent of our exports, 

and for that we need to say to our guests, the ambassador, and 

I’ll introduce them formally in a moment, we need to say thank 

you through him to the people of the United States for the 

relationship. 

 

We are joined in your gallery by the new US [United States] 

ambassador to Canada, His Excellency Bruce Heyman. He’s 

joined by his wife, Vicki, is with us here this morning, as well 

as Peter Kujawinski, the American Consul General based out of 

Calgary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ambassador hails from the great city of 

Chicago. It’s very important to us from another perspective, 

including the trade relationship we have, as an important hub 

for that relationship. And I’m sure His Excellency is a Chicago 

Blackhawks fan, and so we’ve been happy to share some 

important exports there as well, including the brother of the 

current Environment minister who spent some time in the front 

office, Kevin Cheveldayoff, with the Blackhawks. And I think 

Sheldon Brookbank’s from Lanigan, Saskatchewan as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So there are many things that connect us as two countries. Mr. 

Speaker, I think Adlai Stevenson, a US politician who I think 

ran for the presidency at one point, he said that Saskatchewan, 

he thought, was a lot like Texas, except friendlier to the United 

States. 

 

This is something that we welcome, Mr. Speaker. We are very, 

very grateful for the relationship. I’m going to be meeting with 

His Excellency here in just a few moments . . . a few hours, I 

guess. We look forward to raising some issues. In this good 

friendship, we from time to time have issues to overcome, and 

we look forward to discussing those. 

 

And I’ll leave us all with what John F. Kennedy said about the 

relationship when he said, “Geography has made us neighbours. 

History has made us friends.” Mr. Speaker, this was true when 

Kennedy said these words. It’s most assuredly true today. We 

welcome His Excellency and his wife, Vicki, and the consul 

general to the Legislative Assembly here in our capital city. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Request leave, Mr. Speaker, to join in the 

welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

colleagues. I simply want to join with the Premier in expressing 

a welcome to His Excellency Mr. Heyman and his wife, Vicki, 

and the consul general from Calgary. 

 

We absolutely, as the Premier states, value the relationship 

between Canada, but specifically Saskatchewan and the United 

States. It’s important on an economic front and a social front. 

And we thank you for the work that you’ve done already and 

the work that you’ll most certainly do in the years ahead. So on 

behalf of the official opposition, welcome to the legislature 

today. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Social Impact Bond 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very honoured to be entering into this very exciting time in the 

new Saskatchewan, talking about social impact bonds. And I’ll 

be reading the motion at the end of my speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this is something that is extremely exciting certainly for 

Saskatoon, certainly for Saskatchewan, and for all of Canada 

because this is the first social impact bond that is going on in 

Canada. There have been some other ones previously in the 

United States as well as the United Kingdom, but this is a new 

and innovative way of dealing with certain issues within the 

social community that government and the community faces, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s one of those new and innovative things, as 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5433 

I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, that this side of the House certainly 

looks at, trying to use different mechanisms and use different 

tools to be able to start addressing some of the core needs. 

 

We’re trying to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that we get to exactly 

who is going to need this program. And I’ll talk a little bit about 

the specifics of the Sweet Dreams program, but it’s a, I don’t 

use this word often, Mr. Speaker, but it is a game changer. It 

certainly is. We’ve had, since we’ve made this announcement 

on Monday, the Minister of Social Services up in Saskatoon, 

we’ve had counterparts from all across Canada, including the 

federal government, calling and asking, how did we do this? 

And I think it comes down to very simple terms, Mr. Speaker, 

on how we were able to achieve this and how the minister was 

able to work with this, and I think it’s straight-up 

communication. 

 

And I want it on the record for the House that this isn’t 

something that government is driving. This is something that 

the business community and the service providers approached 

us on, Mr. Speaker. They were the ones that came and said, 

how can we help out with what’s going on? I think they realized 

that not all of the responsibility of everything that goes on in the 

community is the government’s responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

They feel that they have a vested interest in exactly what is 

going on within their communities, and they want to be able to 

help out in any way they can. 

 

Now I want to talk a little bit about local businesses and how 

they do this on a smaller level. Certainly when I was working at 

the Saskatoon Food Bank and several other charities in 

Saskatoon, the local businesses always were there to help out. 

They were there to help out with an auction, to buy a table at an 

event, to supply food. Whatever it was, they were there. Now 

this is taking that idea of just a little bit, but taking it to the next 

level, Mr. Speaker. The social impact bond is something that is 

certainly in our future. We are very, very excited about this. 

And you know what? It just makes sense. And I’ll get into some 

of the quotes from the people involved, but I guess I’ll describe 

a little bit what a social impact bond is. 

 

[11:00] 

 

What a social impact bond is, Mr. Speaker, is when you have an 

investment from the private sector to help out with a 

government initiative. They were investing the capital in this 

project, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll get into who the investors are 

right away. They’re investing in this because they want to 

invest. They don’t feel that this is something that the 

government is driving. They want to make sure that they are 

able to help out whenever they can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the social impact bond has some parameters 

around it, and it has to be very clear on this. We are putting 

through 23 people through the Sweet Dreams program. Now in 

order for the social impact bond to actually be paid out for by 

government — it’s on a five-year-plan — we actually will only 

pay if there is a success rate of 75 per cent.  

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s an extremely important point 

on the 75 per cent. We want measurable, attainable outcomes. 

And we’re very excited that people like Egadz are 

administering or helping us with this program because they are 

at the ground level. Egadz has been around for over 20 years, 

Mr. Speaker, and they are very involved in what is going on in 

the core within Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I’ve worked with Don 

and Barry, several different charities, as well as I was with the 

food bank. When I was with SaskEnergy, on the United Way 

Day of Caring we chose to go over and help out with them on 

their deck. We rebuilt their deck. We had a bunch of guys there 

and rebuilt their deck because that was something that they 

needed. 

 

So again it was government working with the community to be 

able to address some of their needs. Now it’s been flipped 

around, Mr. Speaker. Now we have these agencies approaching 

businesses and to partner with the government to be able to help 

out. 

 

Now this project, specifically about Sweet Dreams, is about 

helping single mothers. And I don’t want that to get lost 

because I’m pretty sure that the opposition is going to disagree 

with this, Mr. Speaker, because they seem to disagree with 

absolutely anything and everything that we do on this side of 

the House. But the program is designed to be able to bring 

single mothers into a safe home.  

 

And one of my first questions when I had this debriefing with 

the people that put together the social impact bond is to make 

sure that the mother and children are safe, that there are no men 

allowed in the house. And even though one of the key investors 

is a husband and wife combo, the gentleman isn’t allowed in the 

house because of the safety of the mothers and the children is 

the first priority certainly for this government, certainly for 

Egadz, as well as certainly for the investors. 

 

Now I’m going to talk a little bit about who the investors are, 

and I think we have an absolute perfect combination here. We 

have Colleen and Wally Mah of North Ridge Developments. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Colleen and Wally are very familiar 

throughout Saskatchewan. They’ve been involved with North 

Ridge Developments. They’re involved in Regina, Saskatoon, 

Martensville, Swift Current. They are trying to build 

Saskatchewan one home at a time. 

 

But they’re not just building homes, Mr. Speaker. They are 

investing in their community by doing things like Sweet 

Dreams, Mr. Speaker. They are out there on the front line and 

want to know what they can do. They’ve been very successful 

business people, very successful business partners, Julius 

Calyniuk also with that. These are the people that just get out 

and do it. 

 

And I want to talk about a personal example, when I was at the 

food bank, on how Colleen and Wally actually came out to help 

us build our garden on 2nd Avenue in Saskatoon, a community 

garden. This was something that, not just did they help out with 

some financial money to be able to provide some seed and 

provide some infrastructure around that, but Wally Mah and 

Julius Calyniuk were actually out there. Julius was on the 

tractor plowing it himself. 

 

Now this is an owner of a multi-million dollar business that’s 

not just cutting a cheque to see how he can help out. He’s in the 

dirt on 2nd Avenue in Saskatoon, picking rocks out there with 

myself and actually some people that were from Urban Camp, 



5434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

the prison system. Some offenders were out there. So there you 

have a multi-million dollar businessman, people from the food 

bank, and you have offenders, all working side by side to help 

out St. Mary’s School. 

 

And that’s the kind of people that Wally Mah and his business 

associates are . . . certainly doing within our community. 

They’re very, very exciting, very energetic people. And 

whoever has spoken to Wally and had the chance to talk to him 

and Colleen, they’re very much great, salt of the earth people, 

and they want to be able to help out within the community, Mr. 

Speaker. So that’s a little bit of background about the Mahs, but 

I want to talk a little bit about the other investor. Colleen and 

Wally in North Ridge Developments have invested a half 

million dollars, which is a substantial amount of money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We also have an investment from the credit union and Eric 

Dillon at the credit union. This is an extremely important 

investment from their perspective because they have been out 

with the Minister of Social Services at Habitat for Humanity. 

They see the value of being able to invest in permanent resident 

homes for people with Habitat for Humanity, and now they’re 

taking that one step further in being able to work on what is 

going on with the Sweet Dreams home. 

 

I just want to read you a little quote from Eric Dillon. It says, 

“Sweet Dreams empowers families to enhance their quality of 

life and improve their social situations.” That’s a very good 

statement, Mr. Speaker, because it sums it up very quick. We’re 

just trying to improve their social situations. We’re making sure 

that they have the access to all the facilities, that they’re close to 

schools. 

 

And I want to talk just for a brief second about the location that 

they picked because this just wasn’t a random location. It’s in 

the 600 block of Queen Street in Saskatoon, which happens to 

be about four blocks from an elementary school, and it also 

happens to be just located right across the street from Saskatoon 

City Hospital. Again a perfect place that if there was a mother, 

if there was a situation where they needed to take, they don’t 

have to jump in the car. They can literally walk across the street 

to the City Hospital and be able to get services for their 

children. 

 

They have that safety and security of what’s going on in their 

community. And that is a beautiful area. They are three blocks 

from the river, from Spadina Crescent where they can go see the 

weir. And those mothers and those children are going to 

experience a different life. This is absolutely a life-changing 

event for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to touch a little bit about Egadz. Again, it’s been 

around since 1990, and again this is a community-based 

organization. This is one of those community-based 

organizations that’s well respected in the community. I know 

my colleague from Coronation Park has dealt with Egadz when 

he was running programs in Regina. And in his words, other 

than maybe the programs that he set up, “There’s nobody better 

than Egadz.” They are as solid as they come in the community 

and I think everybody in Saskatoon certainly has a respect for 

them. 

 

Obviously Wally and Colleen have that respect for them, the 

credit union because they are prepared to make that investment 

into their organization. I want to give you a little quote from 

Don from Egadz. 

 

Don Meikle, executive director of Egadz, says that this 

house is an extension of the programs that give young 

women a helping hand: 

 

“Their children will not see what they have endured,” 

Meikle explained. “They’re going to be able to provide the 

things their babies deserve. We all want to provide the best 

for our kids. These moms are no different.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the commitment that Egadz has, not just to 

be able to help out the community with a downtown centre, but 

taking a step further — making sure that they have security in 

their home, making sure that they are able to provide the best. 

Because as a parent, and as all parents know, this is the most 

important thing, is what we, the legacy that we leave for our 

kids. 

 

That’s why again, speaking of legacy, I am so proud of the 

Minister of Social Services for stepping up and making sure 

that we were the first to do this. And we didn’t rush this, Mr. 

Speaker. We made sure we had everything done. And I think it 

was an absolute perfect alignment when you have the right 

people with the right organization and the right government 

support in that. 

 

Now that support isn’t a financial support up front, Mr. 

Speaker. We want to make sure that we have our support all 

throughout this, and the only time that the government will be 

paying out on this is after the five-year program when we have 

a 75 per cent return or success rate with the people going 

through, Mr. Speaker. That’s the key, Mr. Speaker. If they do 

not attain that, the government has no investment in this 

whatsoever. And it’s very, very important that the people 

understand that this is the government working with the private 

sector and a community-based organization, and we’re doing it 

for the right reasons. 

 

The government is not doing this to be able to put off debt, as 

the opposition members will say. The government is doing this 

for the 23 moms and their kids. That’s the most important thing 

that we’re going to do here, Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to 

make a change in their lives. And with the people involved and 

the credit union and Egadz involved, I would be very surprised, 

Mr. Speaker, if they don’t come in well above 75 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve only got a couple of minutes left, but I just 

want to go through some very positive quotes here, Mr. 

Speaker. One is from Murray Mandryk in The StarPhoenix: 

 

It does seem rather difficult to criticize the concept of 

finding ways to provide single . . . [moms] at risk of 

requiring services from Child and Family Services with 

affordable housing while helping them complete their 

education, secure employment and participate in life skills 

training and parenting classes. 

 

Murray Mandryk from The StarPhoenix, May 13th. Another 

quick quote is, also from Murray Mandryk: 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5435 

So what’s wrong with business quite literally investing in 

those at risk? If anything, it might actually help bridge the 

class divide in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it needs to be said just one more time about 

what the impact of having a social bond is. The social impact 

bond is a partnership. We are involved with this. We want to 

make sure that the outcomes . . . Because a lot of the times we 

invest in programs, but we don’t find out what the outcome is. 

What happens when they leave the program? 

 

We want to make sure that we track the individuals because 

ultimately, Mr. Speaker, we want them to be successful. 

Because when they’re successful, Saskatchewan is successful. 

And we can look after the most vulnerable people in 

Saskatchewan, then I would consider this government 

extremely successful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will go through the motion. The motion is: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government and its 

partners for implementing Canada’s first social impact 

bond, a funding model that will enhance the lives of our 

most vulnerable citizens. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government and its 

partners for implementing Canada’s first social impact 

bond, (SIB), a funding model that will enhance the lives of 

our most vulnerable citizens. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

pleased to rise today to enter into the last 75-minute debate of 

this part of the session and am looking forward to the discussion 

today. 

 

I want to speak to the motion itself, but before I do, I noted that 

the member opposite took considerable amount of time 

speaking about the parties involved in Sweet Dreams. And right 

off the top, I want to commend all the people that got involved 

in this very important project. Sweet Dreams is a very important 

project. These are the most vulnerable women and children in 

our society. And these kinds of projects are incredibly 

important to move these people along and have the social 

investment indeed in their success which is a success for 

everyone. 

 

I know that Wally and Colleen Mah are philanthropists in the 

city of Saskatoon. They’ve supported countless projects. And 

I’ve been at a number of events in Saskatoon where they were 

represented at supporting the arts and sports and social 

enterprise. And it’s really wonderful to see individuals like 

Wally and Colleen participate in the community in the way that 

they can as philanthropists. 

 

Also Conexus Credit Union and certainly that’s not the only 

credit union in Saskatoon that supports these kinds of activities. 

I know I’m aware of Affinity Credit Union also taking care to 

ensure that community-based organizations get the support they 

need from the private sector to do the very, very important work 

that they do. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, Egadz is one of the 

most important, I think, social enterprises in Saskatoon. It’s 

received all kinds of support over the years from 

philanthropists, from government, from all levels, because we 

know that the work that they do is incredibly important. So 

congratulations to all those partners, and certainly we wish all 

the best of success to Sweet Dreams because it is a very 

important enterprise. 

 

Now the motion itself though is talking about a concept. It’s a 

political or a social policy that has received favour in the last 

few years. And I wanted to take the rest of the time available to 

me to discuss some of the concerns about social impact bonds, 

because it’s easy to be a cheerleader for it, particularly when 

you’re in a government that’s pressed for cash. And we see that 

this government certainly is pressed for cash. 

 

And typically these types of social enterprises are ones that are 

supported and funded by governments. But when governments 

see their public dollars squeezed and not so available, and 

there’s some information here I want to share along that line, 

then this is kind of a popular alternative for a number of 

governments today. So rather than subject our members 

opposite to my opinion on this, I certainly want to share some 

of the comments that some of the observers and social writers 

have been talking about. 

 

[11:15] 

 

I guess the first thing I want to talk about is somewhat of a typo 

error in the motion itself. Because in a report from The 

StarPhoenix . . . And I have to find this, Mr. Speaker. I 

understand that this isn’t exactly the first . . . It says it’s 

Canada’s first social impact bond, but there was an article in 

The StarPhoenix that says that actually it is not the first, that the 

Government of Canada has actually implemented two already 

in the area of literacy I believe. And I know I had a tag here but 

it’s not coming to me. Literacy and another area. So it’s actually 

the third in Canada. But that’s just one small error in the motion 

itself. 

 

I want to share with you some comments first of all from The 

Edmonton Journal, and this is from May 5th of 2014. And this 

is, the Alberta government actually introduced a law last year, 

Bill 1, which was called the Social Innovation Endowment 

Account. And this was their version of funding the promotion 

and development of social impact bonds in Alberta. And the 

critique here, and the concerns that are raised when 

governments jump on this kind of bandwagon, is that . . . and 

I’m just going to quote from this article which says: 

 

The truth is that the private money will only flow to those 

projects which can guarantee success, and leave any 

innovative or creative projects out in the cold. If one of 

these projects was to fail, and the investors lose their 

money, they would certainly pursue any means necessary 

to get that money back, including suing the implementing 

agency for mismanagement and failed implementation. 

How many non-profit agencies have the resources to fight 



5436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

the likes of RBC or Goldman Sachs in court? Realistically, 

in Alberta, all it would take is for one high-profile project 

to fail before money managers flagged them as poor 

investments. 

 

And the article goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

In the end, these bonds [will] accomplish none of their 

promises: There is no risk transfer, because investors will 

not fund projects that might fail; they accomplish no 

government savings, because governments remain the only 

ones willing to fund the truly creative and innovative 

programs; and they ultimately cost the government more 

money in the long run because government will still need 

to pay out a rate of return to investors. What they will 

accomplish is a change in the delivery of public and 

human services — to a desire to meet the needs of wealthy 

investors, rather than a desire to serve the needs of the 

public, the community, or the province. 

 

So that’s some of the concerns that have been identified about 

social impact bonds. 

 

I’m going to move on now to . . . This is an article from a 

website called MuniLand, and it’s a quote from an article from 

May 5th, 2014, and it’s a blog. The title of the blog is “Social 

impact bonds are well-intended, but they bloat bureaucracies.” 

And the author is a woman named Cate Long. 

 

And what Cate Long did is outlined . . . This is something that’s 

very popular in the United States right now, and there’s some 

information from the American department of legislative 

services. And here’s the quote: 

 

In January of 2013, the Department of Legislative Services 

advised against SIBs for the following reasons: 

 

SIBs cause an increase in budgetary pressure compared to 

direct program financing due to the necessity of funding 

contingent liabilities and the added expense of features 

unique to SIBs. 

 

[Inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social 

Services is hollering over at me right now, what do I think. 

What I think is that a government should do a careful analysis 

of the risks and a detraction from these types of enterprises 

rather than just jumping on a bandwagon because the 

government has no money to do these types of programs. 

 

I’ll continue on with the quote: “SIBs do not produce cost 

savings when outcomes are achieved, even under highly 

optimistic assumptions.” And the minister should be concerned 

about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

She should also be concerned about this: “SIBs could 

effectively exclude new providers . . .” She doesn’t even want 

to listen to the concerns about these, Mr. Speaker, and I find 

that rather disappointing.  

 

“SIBs could effectively exclude new providers and program 

types that do not have a well-established record of success with 

investors seeking to minimize risk.” She obviously isn’t 

concerned about the problems with SIBs. She’s still heckling 

from across the floor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Fourthly, “SIBs potentially distort evidence used in policy 

decisions.”  

 

And so these are very important concerns from the legal 

services, the legislative services of the United States of 

America. And the quote goes on to say, or the article goes on to 

say, this is from the legislative services, they understand that 

SIBs could leverage public dollars, but the concern is that 

alternative models already exist. And the conclusion of this 

article says: 

 

In conclusion, SIBs are well-intended, but they 

unnecessarily bloat bureaucracies. Moreover, they have 

the potential of leading to Crony Capitalism, and as the 

Maryland Department of Legislative Services concluded, 

they do not save money. 

 

So I would think the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and certainly 

this government, should be concerned about those kinds of 

comments, and maybe just take a little time. Obviously they’re 

jumping into this as sort of a justification of maybe some trips 

to London to find out what goes on there. We know that the 

minister could have simply gone to Edmonton, Alberta or even 

to the Government of Canada if she wanted to find out more 

about these things. 

 

There’s also an article, it’s called Nonprofit Quarterly, and this 

is an article from their website. And I want to quote that as well 

in the time remaining to me: 

 

The concrete experience that advocates in the U.S. have 

drawn on to justify their SIB enthusiasm is from the UK, 

which saw a number of SIBs get underway with the active 

involvement and promotion of the Tory/Liberal 

government of David Cameron. 

 

This past week, SIB enthusiasts encountered some reason 

for nervousness. The Guardian published an article titled 

“Social Impact Bonds: Is the Dream Over?,” following up 

on the news that the UK government’s first SIB, the 

recidivism project of the prison in Peterborough, would be 

replaced by an “alternate arrangement.” 

 

So before the SIB has even got off the ground in London, 

maybe the minister should have found out that they’re actually 

already replacing it with a different policy arrangement. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I have much more that I’d like to say, 

but as always there’s only 10 minutes available to us for this 

conversation. I look forward to hearing what other members 

have to say in the debate, and not just cheerleading for this 

particular project. This is important social policy that needs to 

be well debated. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. I’m very 

honoured to be involved in this debate, this funding model that 

will enhance the lives of our most vulnerable citizens. And our 

government is honoured to lead the charge of a new direction, 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5437 

Sweet Dreams, right here in Saskatchewan for the good of our 

children. This opportunity, provided by Wally and Colleen 

Mah, will lay the groundwork for lasting and significant 

change. 

 

The children and families in Saskatchewan will have better 

outcomes and quality of life with this particular project. Our 

hope is that the change is achievable. Families every day 

experience challenges and often are against great odds, Mr. 

Speaker. Our government recognizes these challenges and, in 

conducting Sweet Dreams’ project, our wish for Saskatchewan 

families is a future filled with greater promise, a future life with 

stability, learning, and fulfillment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having a safe and secure place to live will help 

families reach their full potential. This particular project, a new 

formula, allows government and private investors to work 

together to find ways to make a better quality of life a reality 

and a possibility. Youth and children here in Saskatchewan are 

at a high priority in our government, and all children should get 

a good start in life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a cutting-edge formula, a cutting-edge 

funding model, the first time in Canada. This model acquires 

money to achieve that approval, and single mothers and their 

children will achieve support to secure employment. The goal is 

to have mothers and children to achieve a desired social 

income. Services will be measured by independent assessors, 

and our government will work with the community and the 

parents and the children. 

 

The social impact for the children will help with foster family 

involvement, and Sweet Dreams will ensure safety while giving 

support that the family needs. There will be a better quality of 

life through the mothers and children, through safe housing, and 

employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as our government develops a benchmark with 

more efficiencies than the current system in place, the quality of 

life for these children and families will improve. Mr. Speaker, a 

real priority is helping those vulnerable and challenged, and I’m 

encouraged with the direction our government is taking in 

addressing the families in need. Developing the Sweet Dreams 

project and other services for families is something that is 

sorely needed in this province for a number of years, and we are 

committed to programs that will develop results and success in 

keeping families together and working in a new direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we know, Sweet Dreams in Saskatoon is a safe 

haven for at-risk mothers, giving them support for them and 

their children together. Aligning with the objectives of the 

Saskatchewan child and family agenda, it assists some of our 

most vulnerable members of society and gives them a better 

chance at life while keeping the family together. We also know 

that this wonderful program was made possible by co-operating 

with private investors to produce a positive benefit for our 

society and a lasting impact for years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sweet Dreams is based on a multi-ministry, 

long-term strategy where Social Services, Health, Education, 

and Egadz will work together to support single mothers and 

their children from entering the foster care system, thus 

hopefully they will reach their full potential. Child and family 

services will have active involvement with the children to 

ensure their safety through an open child protection file and 

regular visits to the home. 

 

I was listening to the member from Saskatoon Nutana’s 

comments regarding financing, but there is a lot more to this 

than just financing at stake. It’s the lives of children and our 

future in Saskatchewan. This new funding model has helped to 

open a new supported living home for at-risk single mothers 

right here in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. The first social impact 

bond in Canada has partnered the Saskatchewan government, 

private investors, and the Saskatoon downtown youth centre, 

Egadz, to open the Sweet Dreams house. 

 

The government’s required outcome is to provide single 

mothers with children under the age of eight with housing and 

support while they work to complete education or acquire 

employment skills. They are able to stay in the Sweet Dreams 

house anywhere from six months to two years, and for this to be 

a successful investment the government requires that the 

children in the home stay out of foster care for six months after 

they leave the house. 

 

This social impact bond is a very innovative funding model that 

leverages private capital to deliver social and client outcomes. It 

will provide mothers and children with a safe, secure place to 

live. It will provide a continuum of care to keep families 

together. Sweet Dreams living project will enable mothers to 

achieve an education and employment and increase connections 

of mothers with the job market and contribute back to society. 

 

The impact on the children is what we’re talking about, Mr. 

Speaker. The value provides stability for our future, and we are 

hoping to leave a legacy of stability and productivity for the 

families involved. 

 

The Sweet Dreams project is expected to result in a savings to 

government of 1.5 million over five years. Now these savings 

are based on the cost of children in the care of the ministry. The 

member from Saskatoon Nutana was talking about the 

anticipated cost savings, so I was just wanting to give you these 

figures. Now this figure does not take any other potential cost 

savings related to health, criminal justice, and any other future 

social assistance into account beyond the five years of this 

program. 

 

Now I would like to put on record from The StarPhoenix of 

May 13, 2014: “Terry Scaddan, chair of the EGADZ board of 

directors, described the model as a ‘win-win situation.’” 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have a quote by a single mother, Chantal 

McLaren, from The StarPhoenix, May 13, 2014. She said: 

 

Sweet Dreams will give other young mothers the same 

opportunity. 

 

“They’ll be able to keep their children and excel in life, 

have a way better future.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the social impact bond is an innovative 

funding arrangement between government, private investors, 



5438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

and a service delivery organization. In these arrangements, 

government sets out a specific social outcome it wants achieved 

and promises to pay the private investors a pre-arranged sum, if 

and only if the service delivery organization accomplishes the 

desired social outcome. 

 

This new formula to fund . . . Sweet Dreams is a home for 

women in crisis, and it combines government and private 

investor cash. It’s meant to be a safe landing for families with 

no place to go. The Sweet Dreams project is a home for women 

and their children at risk of being separated. The goal is to give 

them parenting and life skill classes and keep them out of the 

foster care system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The money behind Sweet Dreams is very groundbreaking, an 

agreement between the province and private investors that is 

based on results. It’s a very new supportive living facility, but 

again it will provide at-risk single mothers with a safe place to 

call home. Through the social impact bond, Egadz will get $1 

million from private investors that include the Conexus Credit 

Union and Wally and Colleen Mah. At-risk single mothers have 

a new supported living home in Saskatoon, again due to its 

first-of-its-kind funding model in Canada. So therefore I do 

support this very important strategy. 

 

The Speaker: — The time has expired. Next member. I 

recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into this debate on this topic. It’s an important 

topic that we have before us, and it’s one that’s being debated 

around Canada, around North America, and Europe for sure. 

 

And I find it ironic that in our dying moments of this session, 

the final moments, that we’ve not had the opportunity other 

than today to really talk about this. This wasn’t in the Throne 

Speech. It wasn’t in the budget. It wasn’t raised in estimates. So 

we’ve really not had the opportunity to really fully discuss this, 

and here we are at the end. 

 

And I do want to say as well right off the bat that I agree with 

my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana who said that we fully 

support the idea of Sweet Dreams. It’s a wonderful idea. It’s a 

great, great program. Egadz, and I’m very familiar with Egadz 

in Saskatoon. Of course they are actually in my riding, and I 

know the folks involved with Egadz quite well. Great work, 

great work they do for vulnerable families, parents, young 

teens, and children And they do deserve so much support from 

us as a province in terms of thinking upstream and thinking 

about, how do we prevent the kind of tragic circumstances 

where children become vulnerable and we have to intervene. 

 

Clearly with the Children’s Advocate special report yesterday, 

we saw the kind of circumstances we’re seeing too often in this 

province, too often because this government has not made it a 

priority in the number of years that it’s been in government to 

actually fully fund, to fully fund the kind of work that needs to 

be done. So why isn’t this happening? Why isn’t this 

happening? And so here we are today debating the merits of this 

kind of project. 

 

Now it would be interesting if it would have been highlighted 

earlier on, and we could have had that full debate and that full 

discussion about what the processes are going to be. What are 

the processes of applying? What are the processes around the 

benchmarks? That type of thing. But instead we see this in the 

last week of session. 

 

And in fact we didn’t get notice of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

don’t know if you know this, but we didn’t get notice until 

Friday night at 7:30 that something was going to happen 

Monday morning at 8 o’clock. Can you believe that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that we would get notice Friday night, not 

before 5 o’clock, not during regular working hours, but actually 

at 7:30 in the evening that there was an embargoed session 

Monday morning on this? And I think this seems like a kind of 

a rushed job. Why is it that we are doing this at such a late, late 

time? And we’ve never had the opportunity to fully discuss this. 

It wasn’t profiled in a way that would allow for good public 

debate on this. And I think that we have a lot of questions. 

 

We only have to look next door to our neighbours in Alberta 

about what’s happened there around this. And of course we 

look at the news stories, and this one’s dated actually January 

30th, 2013 — well over a year ago, well over a year ago — 

when Premier Alison . . . And I’ll quote this into the record so 

people have this. 

 

Premier Alison Redford’s suggestion Monday that Alberta 

will introduce “social infrastructure bonds” has ignited a 

heated debated among politicians, investment experts and 

social service workers. 

 

Supporters of social bonds say they are an innovative and 

progressive way to fund money-saving social programs 

that wouldn’t otherwise exist, while detractors call them a 

“slippery slope” toward privatization of public [social] 

services. 

 

And we know the article goes on to talk about “Canada’s 

federal Human Resources Minister Diane Finley announced in 

November [of 2012] the Harper government will start issuing 

social impact bonds this year.” And in fact I understand that 

they have actually entered into two contracts. 

 

So this is something that’s happening across Canada, and 

maybe we should have had time to properly, properly take a 

look at what was happening. In fact it actually did stir quite a 

bit of opinion in Alberta. And I’m just going to quote from an 

article from Ricardo Acuña, who is executive director of the 

Parkland Institute, a non-partisan public policy research 

institute in the Faculty of Arts at the University of Alberta. So 

it’s a well-respected institute. It’s placed within an academic 

setting. 

 

And so he has some real, real concerns about this, and I don’t 

necessarily go through the whole article, but clearly he talks 

about how this has a lot of questions and we should really be 

talking about this. So we’re missing an opportunity that we 

should’ve had during session to have the full conversation 

because we know, we know there are many, many important 

jobs that we should be doing out there, and if the government is 

not making those things a priority and fully funding them, then 

we have an issue with that. 

 

So I’d like to just quote from The Edmonton Journal, and this is 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5439 

actually from March 4th, 2014, and I quote: 

 

The Alberta government’s Bill 1, introduced Monday in 

the provincial legislature, carves out $1 billion from the 

Alberta Heritage Trust Fund to create something called the 

Social Innovation Endowment Account. This account is 

designed, among other things, to fund the promotion and 

development of social impact bonds in Alberta. 

 

If you’ve never heard of social impact bonds, you are 

likely not alone. Although Alison Redford has been 

talking about them since the 2011 PC leadership race, 

nobody has been paying much attention [to them] until 

now. 

 

And of course here we are in Saskatchewan, and it’s coming to 

our attention. At least in Alberta they had the wherewithal to 

introduce a bill so we could have proper debate and there would 

be some profile of this. Because we don’t want to mix two 

important issues here together: one, Sweet Dreams, which I 

think we can all support; and the other about social impact 

bonds, which we need to know much more about, we need to 

know much more about. 

 

And we need to know what is it exactly the government’s 

willing to invest. Is this a pilot project that had no funding from 

the budget, or some? We hear maybe it did, but it wasn’t 

profiled in the budget. And we have some real concerns because 

as we see and we heard yesterday and a week ago the 

Children’s Advocate calling for a poverty reduction strategy, 

and government saying, no, everything’s good; we’ve got a 

good plan happening. But then we see these things here where 

we have some real questions. 

 

I have some questions about what kind of impact this has on 

philanthropy in the province. What does this mean for 

foundations, whether they be hospital foundations or the 

Saskatoon foundation that depends on the goodwill of people 

who are in a fortunate position that they can make donations? 

Now I know this is an investment but still, money is limited, 

and whether you invest it or you donate it is the question. And 

those people do very, very good . . . Those foundations do very, 

very important work. 

 

I have questions about situations like Station 20 West, where 

this government callously shut down the funding that we had 

provided for them and they had to go out and had to raise 

between 4 and $5 million. Maybe that would have been an 

opportunity for this kind of bond. But the question then 

becomes, that’s a little riskier because you’re investing in a 

grocery store and a community centre. So then it becomes, what 

are the processes here? Are these things going to be used for 

things where there’s not as much risk, or should they be used 

for things that are outside the normal bounds of what 

government usually funds? 

 

This kind of thing, Sweet Dreams, would be I think something 

that government should typically fund, particularly when we see 

them funding to the extent of some $51 million — $51 million 

— for their Linkin system. That was at first, four years ago, was 

scheduled to cost $15 million, $15 million. At Christmas it was 

37 million. Now it’s 51 million. 

 

So they seem to have money for some of their pet projects, and 

we could talk about lean as well. And today we talked about 

bump-up pay for executives who participate, and here we have 

a situation where we have money for that. But apparently the 

government does not have money for Sweet Dreams, does not 

have money for Sweet Dreams, which I would argue they 

should have. 

 

So we have a lot of questions. We have a lot of questions about 

this. And we think the government should be thinking 

innovatively. We should all be thinking in an innovative way, 

but we should make sure we have our priorities straight, what 

are priorities. And our priorities are looking after vulnerable 

children, and they should be a number one priority, not after our 

Irish computer systems like Linkin. I think we really need to 

make sure that Social Services has their priorities straight. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of questions about this. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I’m happy and honoured to enter into this debate. And 

I’ve been listening carefully to what the members opposite have 

had to say, and it’s interesting. 

 

But I’m going to start with a couple of quotes. They seem to be 

using quotes, so I’ll use a couple too. And this one comes from 

an author, Steve Jobs, and you guys may have heard of him. I 

see some of you guys have used some of his equipment over 

there. And this is what Steve Jobs had to say: 

 

We know that governments can’t afford to do everything 

these days, but fortunately there’s a revolution in how we 

tackle social needs. Citizens and businesses are creating a 

‘solution economy’ that blends market forces and altruism 

to get good things done. 

 

So you know, we hear from them across the way that it’s not 

that Sweet Dreams is a bad idea, not that Egadz is a bad NGO 

[non-governmental organization] to work with or CBO 

[community-based organization] to work with; it’s just the way 

that we’ve chosen to work them. 

 

And the reason we chose to work with them, as one of our other 

members stated, was because they came to us. They had an 

innovative idea. How can we do this? How can we work 

together? How can we take this idea and move it forward? 

 

Their argument against this is that government should just write 

the cheque, pay for it. Not a priority. Government should fund. 

Money is limited. Well here’s what it comes down to: if that’s 

really what they feel, I’m not sure . . . The first member that 

stood up, well she did a bunch of quotes, but she didn’t really 

say anything other than we need to take a look at it. And they’re 

really good at that. They’re really good at that. They step back 

and they take a look. And that’s all they do. They look and they 

go, oh that’s bad. 

 

[11:45] 

 



5440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

So we go, what’s your plan? We go to their website and go, 
what’s your plan? We take a look. Where’s the orange book that 
used to be on their plan? Where’s the Regina Manifesto that 
used to be on their website? That’s not there. 
 
We talk about a new innovative way to fund a social program. 
I’ve personally worked with foster kids. I’ve had them live in 
my house. So if there’s some way that we can keep them in 
their homes with their moms, working with a group outside of 
what we do as government, that’s not a bad thing. You agree 
with that, that that’s not a bad thing. You just think we need to 
write the cheque up front. 
 
So we actually want to do something that’s based on results. 
We set goals. If we don’t attain those goals . . . Okay, if 75 per 
cent isn’t attainable, if 90 per cent . . . If we change the life of 
one of those children, is it good enough? Is 10 good enough? Is 
15 good enough? Is 25 good enough? 
 
The thing that it comes down to is, what’s your plan? We have 
a plan. We’re going forward with it. We ask what your plan is 
and it’s like, well silence, the sound of silence. What’s your 
plan? Well we don’t have a plan. Your plan is just bad. 
 
So I’m going to quote a single mom that will be acting as a 
mentor in the new home because this is people that have been 
affected by these lifestyles and we’re trying to help out. So this 
is from CJME: 
 

Chantal McLaren said she had to work twice as hard 
because she is a single mom. The 23-year-old will be 
moving into the Sweet Dreams home to be a mentor for 
other women living there. “I’ve been at the bottom and 
I’ve worked my way up and they can too.” 

 
So again that’s not a bad thing. Again it comes down to, the 
government needs to write the cheque first. Really? That’s your 
argument against this is the government needs to write the 
cheque first? That just doesn’t make any sense. 
 
Another quote by Ms. McLaren. She said Sweet Dreams will 
give other mothers the same opportunity. And the quote is, 
“They’ll be able to keep their children and excel in life, have a 
way better future.” That’s not a good thing; that’s a great thing. 
That’s what the new Saskatchewan is all about. It’s having a 
way better future. It’s having a plan. 
 
What’s your plan? Silence. Silence. That’s the sound of silence. 
Wow. I think that’s a Simon and Garfunkel song — isn’t it? — 
sound of silence. That’s got to be your new theme song when 
you have your next convention. 
 
They talk about jumping on a bandwagon. Well we’re not 
necessarily jumping on a bandwagon. We’re not taking and 
throwing $1 billion at a project. We’re moving forward on one 
small project because if we can affect the lives of 11 to 13 
moms and 22, 23 kids, that is amazing. 
 
But it’s the funding model that’s wrong. That’s your argument. 
The funding model’s the wrong way to do it. 
 
So we as government want to ensure the best possible use of tax 
dollars and provide a new degree of financial stability to 

community-based organizations. I’ve worked with a few 
community-based organizations in the past, and the funding 
model of year to year sometimes becomes onerous. So they 
actually have a funding model for five years. Do you think that 
gives them the ability to create a stable environment for these 
moms, these moms and these kids? 
 
You guys want us to stop moving forward. Just stop. Take a 
look at it. Let’s debate it for three, six months, a year and then 
maybe move forward. Well you know, three months, six 
months, a year down the road will make a huge difference in the 
lives of these moms and these kids. That’s what’s important. 
You’re missing the point. The point is about those moms and 
those kids, not about how we fund that, the fact that somebody 
wants to step up and take a shot at investing in moms and kids. 
 
And I’ve seen enough studies out there. If we can get help to 
these folks upfront — and you know this — if we can get help 
to them upfront right away, the long-term cost that it’s going to 
save the taxpayers . . . not the government. The government 
doesn’t save money. The taxpayers of Saskatchewan are the 
ones that provide us with money to spend on the infrastructure 
and the things that we need to spend money on, including the 
people here in Saskatchewan, our most vulnerable citizens. 
 
And you want them to wait. You want them to wait. Point your 
finger at me, shake your head, do what you’ve got to do. I’ve 
been there. I’ve been there. I’ve been a foster parent. I’ve 
worked with these moms. I’ve worked with these kids. I know 
what they do. So the fact that you want to wait some more . . . 
 
That’s your mantra — hurry up and wait. There’s a reason 
there’s nine of you guys over there and 48 over here. Because 
you’re really good at stepping back, taking a look at a situation 
going, that’s a bad situation, and doing absolutely nothing about 
it. 
 
We take action. So we take action, and you don’t like the way 
we take action because we expect results. What’s wrong with 
expecting results? If it keeps one kid out of foster care, it’s 
worth it. 
 
So I will be supporting this motion 100 per cent and those guys, 
well we’ll hear the sound of silence. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this debate this morning is about 
the fundamental question of how one uses the public money to 
provide services to important issues. And there’s no question 
that the Sweet Dreams project is an important issue; it’s an 
important way of providing these services. 
 
The question revolves not around that particular project, which 
we all support, Conexus Credit Union, many of us. It’s our 
money that’s going there. We support Lamaze and the work that 
they do. We support Egadz. But, Mr. Speaker, the question is 
about how government uses the money that they have, what 
choices do they make around how that money is spent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this particular project around a social impact 
bond is effectively another way of borrowing money. And, Mr. 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5441 

Speaker, the reason that Goldman Sachs, which is one of the 

largest lenders in the world, if I can put it that way, the largest 

deal makers, has been so involved in all of the social impact 

bonds that exist so far — they’re not involved in our little one 

in Saskatchewan but they’ve involved in the ones in England; 

they’re involved in the ones in New York; they’re involved in 

ones that are in a number of other states in the United States — 

it’s because they see it as a way to make money on lending 

money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the factors involved in all of these 

particular social impact bonds is some kind of a guarantee or 

some kind of a payment from government for use of money. 

And I think the common factor, both with social impact bonds 

and the P3s, the public-private partnerships, is that there’s a 

guarantee of payment to the lenders in the project, or the 

investors. And so, Mr. Speaker, really the question becomes, 

how much are we paying? What kind of guarantees are there? 

 

Now what we do know is that when you end up with a social 

impact bond, they’re really no different than a P3. And so you 

have to look at, how do you figure out how much risk transfer 

there is? What is that risk transfer? What are the service cost 

reductions that are going to be the back end of this that will 

justify the kind of payment that’s made? And Mr. Speaker, 

what we have here is another way of borrowing money. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, earlier this week I asked the Minister of 

Finance what his policy was on dealing with these social impact 

bonds. And they scrambled a bit, but basically the answer was, 

well we don’t know yet because we haven’t really seen them. 

And I think that’s one of the fundamental questions about social 

impact bonds is, how much are they going to cost to use? What 

kind of examples are there? When we look at the information 

from around the world, there haven’t been social impact bonds 

that have actually gone through the full cycle of their lending to 

tell you whether they’re actually going to work. 

 

Now earlier, like I think last week — and I’m specifically 

speaking here to the Minister of Finance — last week the 

British government ended up changing some of the parameters 

around the Peterborough project in a way that has scared a lot 

of financiers around how this particular issue and how the 

lending goes. And so all of a sudden you have a broad 

discussion right across North America, England, other places, 

Australia, where these kind of bonds are being used. Well if that 

flagship lending process around the Peterborough project is 

being changed in some fundamental ways, what does this mean 

for other projects that we’re trying to design across the world? 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what we have is an innovative idea that is 

in the same ilk as a P3. P3s, at least we have a longer history at 

knowing what they’re there. Now actually if you look at 

legislation which this party introduced in the House just last 

fall, and in fact the government voted against it, we had a bill 

brought forward that’s An Act respecting the Transparency and 

Accountability of Public-Private Partnerships. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we could just add the words “and social 

impact bonds” and you can actually use every part of this bill to 

get at the issue that’s really the issue here: how much is this 

costing the public to borrow money? Why wouldn’t we set out 

how much it costs to borrow the money directly, how much it 

costs to use it through a public-private partnership, how much it 

costs to use a social impact bond to assess the back end of it? 

Because all of those things go right to the heart of this bill 

which we introduced and which was defeated by the 

government. 

 

You look at the purpose of the bill. The purpose of this Act is to 

ensure that an independent evaluation and public reporting of 

value for taxpayers in public-private partnership projects — 

then we add, and social impact bonds — and to introduce 

transparency and accountability to the public-private 

partnership method and the social impact bond method of 

building capital projects. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the questions that I had for the Minister 

of Finance the other day, which he didn’t have an answer for — 

he says, oh this is innovative; we’re just trying to figure out 

how to do it — is that people in the Department of Finance 

haven’t figured out yet how this is going to work. What I know 

when I asked some questions in some other areas, and some my 

colleagues asked some questions, is that there are some people 

hired to work on developing some of these kinds of projects. 

But once again they’re working in an area where they don’t 

have all of the examples. And when we review the literature 

worldwide, there isn’t a single social impact bond which has 

actually gone through a full cycle to actually see how people are 

being paid out. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, why are we debating this particular issue? 

Because it relates to the fundamental question of governance. It 

relates to the responsibility of the Minister of Finance to be 

accountable to the people of Saskatchewan of how money is 

being spent. But practically, when I asked him the question of 

how, what he’s going to do to deal with this particular issue, he 

said he doesn’t have the information. He doesn’t know. He 

doesn’t know what the Ministry of Finance is going to do. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that raises another question, which is when 

the auditor steps in to take a look at how this money is being 

borrowed, they are going to have to give a report to the people 

of Saskatchewan about how this whole system works. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the auditors are always very careful when 

governments borrow money, and especially when they borrow 

money in ways where they don’t know how much it’s going to 

cost them to borrow that money. 

 

And that becomes the fundamental question when we talk about 

social impact bonds. Nobody knows here how much it’s going 

to cost to do this particular project. So we don’t have a 

comparison with just a straight donation by different groups 

working and building a project and then government putting 

money in as a part of that. We don’t have a comparison of how 

much that’s going to cost versus this new innovative thing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the literature also points out that 

the United Kingdom got really interested in this kind of a bond 

about four years ago when they came, the new government 

came into place, and basically they said, we have to live on an 

austerity diet. We don’t have enough money to do a lot of 

things. Let’s figure out some other ways to borrow creatively 

where we can’t really tell how much it’s going to cost us in the 



5442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

long run. And, Mr. Speaker, every one of these projects that you 

look at around the world have that aspect to it, that nobody can 

say at the front end how much it’s going to cost government. 

They know how much Goldman Sachs is going to make on a 

base because they have a backstop. They also know that there’s 

going to be a whole number of issues that are not resolved, and 

they’re not resolved in Saskatchewan either. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, the Minister of Finance shouts out about track record on 

innovation, and I was listening to the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow talking about results-based funding, that type of 

thing. And I just have a question about, here we have a 

computer system, the Linkin computer system costing $51 

million. It started out with 15, now 37 at Christmas, now $51 

million. The question I have is, only 2 per cent, $1 million from 

that computer program could be real, a real priority for this 

government. Does the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

think that it would be better spent spending on foster children 

than on a computer system, that $51 million? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — I’m pretty sure that the members opposite 

have read some of these reports by the Children’s Advocate, 

and one of the things that was recommended by him was that 

we do better tracking of our kids. So this is one of the things 

that this program can do. However the real question is why 

you’re afraid to have a plan, why you’re afraid to have 

results-based outcomes. You know, they talk about that they 

don’t know what it’s going to cost. Well it’s a bond. It’s a 

five-year investment, a five-year agreement with $1 million 

investment. Success is determined by an independent assessor 

— independent, so that’s outside of government — and 

payment is the initial investment plus the 5 per cent annual rate 

of return. So I’m sure . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This social impact 

bond is about using innovative ideas to improve the lives of 

at-risk children and mothers. The Sweet Dreams program is 

saving children from having to be separated from their mothers 

and living in foster care. And our government’s committed to 

effective initiatives that reduce the number of children in care 

and end the cycle of poverty for more children in the future, 

unlike the NDP who let the number of children in welfare cases 

grow by 53 per cent from 2000 to 2007. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Centre who was a former 

Social Services minister that saw this rise under his reign: how 

can he not support a program that will improve the lives of 

children in child welfare? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. Just for the record, I 

was never the minister of Social Services. I was Labour, 

Environment, and proud ministers of that. So fact checking 

there. But that’s okay, that’s okay. And also for the record, for 

the record, and I think I know two of us have said that we 

support the Sweet Dreams initiative, Egadz does great work and 

we think this is an important thing. 

 

Our question really is about priorities for this government. Why 

wasn’t this mentioned in the Throne Speech, the budget speech, 

estimates, where we could have a much fuller discussion about 

this? We think it’s important to have innovative thinking but the 

problem is, here we are, in the last moments, the last moments 

of the session, and this is the time we’re talking about it. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the government needs to make a real 

priority out of vulnerable children and that should be something 

that they plan for. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In terms 

of picking up where my colleague from Saskatoon Centre left 

off, if this was such a vital initiative on the part of this 

government — and, you know, there’s some pros and cons to 

social impact bonds — but if this was such a vital initiative on 

the part of this government, where was it in the Throne Speech? 

Where was it in the budget? And where was it in terms of the 

Minister of Social Services’ estimates? 

 

And I guess my question to the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland, or the Premier who’s like shouting out 

encouragement from his seat, my question to the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland: if this was such a great idea, how come it 

didn’t show up on the landscape until after the Minister for 

Social Services needed to justify a trip to Europe? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why the 

NDP are so concerned with the process. What we’re concerned 

with over on this side of the House is the 23 women and their 

kids that are going to be helped by this program. They always 

want to know, what was the process? What happened? When 

did you know this? 

 

Social Services has been working with the stakeholders. This 

again is driven by the stakeholders, Colleen and Wally Mah. 

This is on their timelines. We are a partner with them. We 

aren’t dictating things like the NDP used to do and just throw 

cash out. We’re actually putting money out on a five-year 

program to be able to get results, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they 

don’t understand is, we are doing . . . We’re result-based on 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the NDP are so stuck in their own ways. They just want to 

keep doing things the same old way. They don’t want to try 

anything different. They completely fear change, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, our government isn’t afraid of 

setting targets and implementing policy and programs to help 

achieve these goals. That’s why one of our government’s goals 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5443 

is to build a better quality of life for Saskatchewan people, 

especially our more vulnerable. 

 

The recent introduction of the social impact bond is just one 

example of how our government strives to help out these 

troubled demographics and end the cycle, but yet we continue 

to hear negative rhetoric from the members opposite. To the 

member from Regina Lakeview, who has been around for a 

long time: your caucus continues to disregard and criticize our 

actions and make our province a better place, but has yet to 

produce any solutions of your own. What is your policy or plan 

to help these disadvantaged groups in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the issue here today is about 

choices by government, by that Premier and by that Finance 

minister around how they provide services to the public of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, when they seem to run out of 

money, then they come up with these schemes that actually cost 

more money for the public. 

 

And when I hear a member opposite saying process is not 

important, checking out how you borrow money to do things is 

not important, that gets me very concerned. So my answer is, 

we really want all of these services provided for people in this 

province, but we want to do it in a way that we can account to 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think we 

heard the speakers opposite say that there was no federal or 

provincial money going into this, but according to The 

StarPhoenix, there will be a reimbursement by interest by the 

provincial government if this project is successful. So there is 

public funds involved. And certainly there’s a lack of public 

funds from this government for supporting single mothers. 

 

We know that SIBs imply a cost of borrowing to the public 

sector which is well above the cost it would incur if it’s 

borrowed directly. In this respect, SIBs are no different from 

P3s. This is nothing but privatization, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question I have for the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow is this: first of all, will they be booked, these SIBs 

be booked as future contingent liabilities on the books? And 

how will they affect debt and credit ratings? And where is the 

government going to put aside money they save when the 

services become funded by outsiders? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — I thank the members opposite for the 

question. And you know, I’m not an accountant. I’m an old 

SaskTel guy, so I would have to ask the Finance minister how, 

in five years time if they meet the target, how that’s accounted 

in the budget five years from now. 

 

But I also heard the members complain that 7:30 on a Friday 

evening they found out. Well since I’ve been an MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly], I’ve got contacted way later than 

7:30 in the evening. So I don’t have a nine-to-five job anymore. 

I’ve got pretty much a 24-7 job. So if I’ve got to work on a 

weekend, I work on a weekend, and I don’t complain about it. I 

do as much as I can from 9 to 5, try and spend as much time 

with my family, but I don’t complain about when the 

government contacts me and says we’ve got some work to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m a little bit lost 

for words here, trying to figure out how the members opposite 

could possibly be against this. I for one have probably been 

involved in creating an awful lot of resources and facilities and 

programs around this province for vulnerable youth, their 

parents, their families, their communities, and I have absolutely 

zero problem with this initiative. I have no idea, since this is my 

life’s work, I have no idea how you could possibly be against 

this. 

 

But regardless, I mean . . . Here, I’ll make up a word: 

disirregardlessly, which is an adverb for the purposes of this, as 

we’re making things up. Sweet Dreams, I’m wondering here, so 

you’re against P3s. So you’ve got no plan. You’ve got no 

policy. You’ve got no platform. 

 

The Speaker: — Time. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 606 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Ms. Chartier that Bill No. 606 — The 

Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — It is my duty pursuant to rule 56(3) to warn 

the Assembly that the hon. member is about to exercise her 

right to close the debate, and afterwards all members will be 

precluded from speaking to this question. Therefore if any 

member wishes to speak, let him do so now. I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today here to speak to Bill 606, The Residents-in-care Bill of 

Rights Act, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to 

talk a little bit about what this bill means. 

 

I think personally for me, I think about my parents. This is the 

context through which I see this bill. My parents are in their 

early 80s, Mr. Speaker, and still live in their own home, and in 

fact provide more care to me than the opposite direction, Mr. 

Speaker. But I think about them, and I think about their cohorts 

and some of the friends and the stories that they say. And I 

think about what I’d want for my own parents if they were 

living in long-term care or in a private care home. And I think 

that I would want that for all citizens, Mr. Speaker, and that is 



5444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2014 

dignity, respect, and safety. 

 

So I think it’s important to provide a little bit of context to this 

bill. The reality is this government just a few short years ago 

quietly cut the minimum quality of care standards in regulations 

and removed any reference to appropriate levels of staffing. The 

minister’s justification has been that those levels had been set, I 

believe he said in the ’50s, and they were not adequate. Well 

instead of removing them, you’d think that you would in fact 

assess and enhance them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What has this cutting of the minimum quality of care standard 

meant to seniors’ care in this province? The reality is seniors’ 

care in this province has declined in recent years. And how do 

we know this, Mr. Speaker? Frankly we’ve heard shocking 

stories from residents, from families, from front-line staff over 

the past year, stories of woefully inadequate care for our 

seniors, those who helped make the province what it is today. 

 

When the minister finally admitted last spring that there was 

perhaps a problem, he sent health region CEOs on tours of their 

facilities to learn the state of care here in Saskatchewan. The 

fact of the matter is some of the things that this tour discovered, 

I think it’s important to read into the record just a few of the 

things that this tour discovered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the Central Parkland Lodge in Lanigan, it was identified that 

staff members commented that they sometimes struggle with 

priorities. For example when feeding one resident and another 

rings to be toileted, they don’t know if they should interrupt the 

meal, which in turn gets cold for that resident, or if they should 

go to toilet the person who may soil themselves. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Stensrud Lodge in Saskatoon, they can hear people crying for 

help in the evening because of staffing shortages — 1 to 25 care 

aid ratio on evenings. Another issue, Mr. Speaker, at the Spruce 

Manor Special Care Home, staffing levels are inadequate to 

meet the needs of residents due to the increased level of acuity. 

 

And one more here, Mr. Speaker, at the Goodwill Manor in 

Duck Lake, residents noticed staff shortages and often have to 

wait up to 30 minutes after they ring their call bell. Continent 

residents have soiled themselves because of it. So those are 

some of just a few of the snippets, Mr. Speaker, that the 

minister’s own CEO tour discovered. 

 

Maura Davies, the CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region, last 

fall identified publicly that one of the core issues with the 

inability to deliver high-quality seniors’ care is in fact a lack of 

staff, Mr. Speaker. In fact, one of the business . . . In the 

Saskatoon Health Region business plan that they put forward to 

receive urgent action money, they identified that in the 

Saskatoon Health Region alone they need 450 care aides. They 

asked for 38, I believe, and only received 19, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Four hundred and fifty care aides to ensure that our seniors get 

the proper level of care, and this government has chosen not to 

acknowledge that short-staffing is at the core of our seniors’ 

care crisis, Mr. Speaker. How can you fix a problem if you 

refuse to acknowledge that there is a problem and that that 

problem is understaffing? You can’t fix a problem if you don’t 

acknowledge that that problem exists, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what does Bill 606 set out? This private member’s bill sets 

out that residents in care in fact have the right to dignity, respect 

and safety; that residents in care deserve basic guarantees of 

quality of care they ought to receive; that residents in care have 

the right to individualized care that meets or exceeds minimum 

quality of care standards; that it is the responsibility of the 

provincial government to ensure consistent standards of care in 

facilities throughout Saskatchewan; and finally, that requiring 

each care home to post a residents-in-care bill of rights will 

guarantee that senior residents have individualized care plans 

and minimum quality of care standards. 

 

It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in a response to a question 

last week about this particular bill and if the government would 

support it, the minister actually said, well in fact your bill is 

deficient and it doesn’t lay out quality of care standards. And all 

of the seals on the back benches said, yes Danielle, it doesn’t 

lay out the quality of care standards. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if they read in the bill: 

 

What a Bill of Rights Must Contain 

 

Each Residents in care Bill of Rights must, at a 

minimum, reflect the following principles. 

 

If you look to number (iii): 

 

comply with the minimum quality of care standards 

established by the provincial government through 

regulations.  

 

Mr. Speaker, so in fact this bill does compel the government to 

lay out minimum quality of care standards in regulation. This 

own government ignored its Law Reform Commission that said 

that Saskatchewan would benefit from a legislated bill of rights. 

The Law Reform Commission, this government’s own Law 

Reform Commission says, “A legislated bill of rights has 

“official status” that emphasizes the importance of the 

document and encourages compliance,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

This minister has also gotten to his feet on many occasions and 

says that the government has program guidelines for special 

care homes already and has regulations, personal care home 

regulations. But clearly, Mr. Speaker, what this government is 

doing now is not working. We continue to hear story after story 

of woefully inadequate care in our seniors’ care homes, Mr. 

Speaker, which is completely unacceptable, and it is rooted in a 

lack of staffing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This bill will help address that. So I trust that, again, adopting 

Bill 606, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, would 

provide seniors with the right — the right, Mr. Speaker — to 

quality, high-level standards of care in seniors’ care homes. 

 

I know the minister has had ample time to review it, and clearly 

missed a few things when he reviewed it because it in fact 

compels the government to lay out minimum quality of care 

standards. I hope that this government will co-operate with the 

NDP on this bill. This is about the care of our seniors, Mr. 

Speaker, in long-term and personal care homes and ensuring 



May 15, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5445 

that they have the high-quality level of care that they deserve, 

and I look forward to the vote. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved Bill No. 606, The 

Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 be now read the 

second time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:21 until 12:22.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 9] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed, please rise. 

 

[Nays — 37] 

 

Wall Morgan Draude 

Duncan Krawetz Eagles 

McMorris Toth Huyghebaert 

Doherty Reiter Heppner 

Harrison Tell Weekes 

Hart Bradshaw Bjornerud 

Hutchinson Makowsky Ottenbreit 

Wilson Marchuk Ross 

Kirsch Doke Cox 

Merriman Jurgens Steinley 

Hickie Lawrence Tochor 

Moe Parent Phillips 

Docherty   

 

Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 

9; those opposed, 37. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion fails. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I 

would move: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day, in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, it shall 

stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 22nd, 2014, 

unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of 

the government, and if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give 

each member seven clear days notice, if possible, of such 

date and time. 

 

The Speaker: — By leave, the Government House Leader has 

moved: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day, in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, it shall 

stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 22nd, 2014, 

unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of 

the government; and if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give 

each member seven clear days notice, if possible, of such 

date and time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands adjourned to 

the call of the Speaker. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:26.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5423 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5423 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5423 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5423 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5430 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5432 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5432 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Norwegian Constitution Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5423 

 Reopening of Big River Saw Mill 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5423 

 International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5424 

 McArthur River Mine Receives Safety Award 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5424 

 Teachers of English as a Second Language Conference 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5424 

 Saskatchewan Distinguished Realtor Award 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5424 

 Report Card 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5425 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Academic Freedom and University of Saskatchewan Faculty Member 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5425 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5425 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5427 

 Independent Investigation 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5428 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5428 

 Membership of Social Services Appeal Board 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5428 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5428 

 Travel Expenses 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5428 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5428 

 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5429 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5429 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5429 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5429 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5430 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Expression of Thanks 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5430 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5431 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5431 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Social Impact Bond 

  Merriman ...................................................................................................................................................................... 5432, 5442 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5435, 5443 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5436 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5438, 5442 

  Lawrence ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5439, 5442 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5440, 5443 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5442 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5442 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5442 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5443 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 606 — The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5443 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 5445 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5445 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


