
























































Hansard: December 08, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 25A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 8, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6281 
 December 8, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
seated in your gallery are two representatives from the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission: with us today, Chief 
Commissioner David Arnot and executive director Norma 
Gunningham-Kapphahn, both from Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commission is doing terrific work and is 
recognized across Canada as the model for successful human 
rights mediation and resolution. Since the commission’s 
transformed its operations in 2011, the number of files closed 
annually has risen by 85 per cent. Last year a complaint was 
resolved by mediation on average every second day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also joining us, the commission, and the 
legislature today in your gallery are representatives from the 
Avenue Community Centre in Saskatoon. With us, Rachel 
Loewen Walker, Jai Richards, Chelle Matthews, Joe 
Wickenhauser, Amanda Guthrie, and Nicole White. These 
guests, Mr. Speaker, along with a number of community 
members have joined us today to see Bill 171 considered by this 
legislature. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of the 
legislature to welcome all our guests to the legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the guests up in your 
gallery, the Chief Commissioner of the Human Rights 
Commission of Saskatchewan and executive director, Ms. 
Kapphahn, and also the folks from Avenue Community Centre. 
And there’s actually so many folks up there, I can’t go through 
the whole list or I’d be here for quite a while, but I do want to 
single out a couple of people. Mikayla Schultz is here with us as 
well, and Nicole White and Jai Richards are here. Fran Forsberg 
and Chandra McIvor’s here, and so many others. I want to 
thank them all and welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce three special guests in the west gallery. I had a fine 
meeting with them early this morning, and I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce them. Up in the west gallery is Anne 
Babineau, the Rx&D provincial director for affairs for the 
Prairies, as well as Bill Gowen and Lorne Koscielnuk who are 
co-leads of the Rx&D prairies working group. 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, Rx&D is the national association representing 
over 50 of Canada’s research-based pharmaceutical companies 
and, as I said, we had a great meeting this morning. I’d ask all 
members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join with members in welcoming guests who are with us here in 
the Assembly today. 
 
To Commissioner Arnot, thank you for being here. And to the 
many representatives, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatchewan who on 
a daily basis stand up for human rights and stand up for the 
protection and promotion of individual’s rights, it’s great to see 
you all here today. And thank you for what you do in making 
Saskatchewan a better place. It’s wonderful to have you here 
today. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
individuals again. 
 
And while on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say a 
welcome or a hello to Mr. Wayne Byers. As members will 
know, Wayne is from the Lloydminster constituency. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I can attest that Wayne is a great guy, an individual of 
strong character, and just an all around good person, Mr. 
Speaker. So I ask all members to join me in welcoming Mr. 
Wayne Byers to the Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to take 
this opportunity to say hello to a couple of folks in the gallery 
and welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. First is Norma 
Gunningham-Kapphahn. We worked together many years with 
the Department of Justice, and she was instrumental in the 
Aboriginal residential schools file and did some really great 
work for the Government of Canada in that area. And then since 
we’ve gone separate ways, she’s now working with the Human 
Rights Commission and doing great work there. So I want to 
welcome Norma. 
 
I also want to welcome Nicole White and Jai Richards, leaders 
in their community, and certainly people that I admire. And I’m 
very pleased to see them here today. So if everyone could help 
me welcome these folks to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, in your gallery I have a young member of my 
community that’s here, Blaine Bird. He decided to come down 
and visit his sister. She’s here furthering her education. And 
she’s feeling a little homesick, so Blaine came down to give her 
some support to let her know she’s doing a good thing and give 
her that support. 
 
So I just want to welcome Blaine to his Legislative Assembly 
and let him know that this is your Legislative Assembly, Blaine. 
I hope you enjoy the proceedings today, and welcome to your 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. I ask all members to join me. 
 



6282 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. And 
we know that in September this year, this government walked 
away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable housing 
project in Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take 
control of and then rent the units at full market price. 
 
And when asked to explain how this government could allow 
the private developer to back out of a fixed-price contract 
without any penalties, the Minister of Social Services said, and 
I quote, “You’re assuming that there’s these desperate homeless 
people,” showing how disconnected this government is from the 
realities within our communities. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our province 
and to immediately reverse its policy of now allowing 
private developers with whom the government has close 
relationships to default on fixed-price contracts for 
affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 
relates to the unsafe conditions created by that government on 
Dewdney Avenue. Certainly they call for the timely completion 
of the west bypass, but they call for immediate and urgent 
actions to address the unsafe conditions and get the heavy-haul 
trucks off of Dewdney Avenue. They simply shouldn’t be there. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Saskatoon and Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North. It’s getting worse. Shelter is a basic 
need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting harder 
and harder for people to find adequate housing, especially 
families, seniors, women, and children who face abusive 
situations. The problem is getting worse because of the rising 
level of poverty and skyrocketing home ownership costs. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
build a homeless shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet 
the needs of and addressing homelessness in the Lac la 
Ronge area. 
 

This petition is signed by many good people of La Ronge and 
Air Ronge. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Christmas is a Time for Giving 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Christmas is a special 
time of the year. It is a season filled with joy and giving, a time 
when families look forward to the sharing of gifts and enjoying 
Christmas dinner. 
 
As we look forward to the many opportunities we have in this 
great country and province to enjoy this special season, let us 
also remember that there are many among us who will not have 
the same opportunities. Please take the time to do unto others as 
you would have them do unto you. 
 
The season is a time for giving, and the people of Saskatchewan 
know how to give. Recently Breanna Glasser from Moosomin, 
currently a first-year student at the University of Regina, invited 
friends on her 19th birthday to donate warm clothing to help 
those less fortunate. The response was overwhelming, and she 
recently delivered 100 bags of warm clothing to Soul’s Harbour 
Rescue Mission to help those in need. 
 
As we celebrate this Christmas season, may we not forget the 
angelic message: “for unto you is born this day in the city of 
David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I close with a poem written by my mom: 
 

Come Celebrate the Child 
Born in a manger, 
The Son of God, crucified 
May he be no stranger. 
He’s coming once again 
The very Lord of Glory. 
Come celebrate in verse, in song, 
We’ll tell again his story. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Merry Christmas and a Happy New 
Year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6283 

Christmas Greetings 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take the opportunity to 
wish all members and our guests in the galleries a Merry 
Christmas. December is a special time for people of many 
faiths. For Jews the festival of Hanukkah is one of the most 
important celebrations of the year. And in many other faiths, the 
winter solstice is an important marker which signifies the return 
of the light. 
 
The holiday season in Saskatchewan has become especially 
vibrant in recent years. For centuries our province has been 
strengthened by a diverse mix of cultures and traditions, and we 
are all made stronger by the addition of more threads in our 
province’s multicultural tapestry. As we look back on this year 
and celebrate with our families, I hope that we will remember 
and reach out to the people in our communities who have lost 
loved ones. For those who are still grieving for a parent or a 
spouse or a child, Christmas can be a lonely and isolating 
experience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my family and the New Democratic 
Party caucus, I wish you and everyone in Saskatchewan all the 
best over the holiday season and into the new year. So thank 
you, Mr. Speaker, and Merry Christmas. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 

Trafalgar Day Gala 2014 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Along with the members from Wood River and Moose Jaw, I 
recently had the privilege of attending the second annual 
Trafalgar Day Gala held at Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship 
Queen, the Royal Canadian Navy’s establishment here in 
Regina. 
 
Led by Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor, the dinner 
celebrated the decisive victory of Great Britain’s Admiral 
Horatio Nelson over a larger combined force of French and 
Spanish warships during the Napoleonic Wars 200 years ago. 
But more importantly this event focuses on the present-day 
contributions of Canada’s Navy, whose regular force and 
reserve members work to keep our nation free and safe. 
Proceeds from the dinner will be given to the Military Family 
Resource Centre based at 15 Wing in Moose Jaw. All funds 
raised will stay right here in Saskatchewan to help our local 
heroes and their families do very successful social and 
recreational programs. 
 
I want to close by thanking and congratulating Lieutenant 
Commander Linda Mushanski, commanding officer of HMCS 
Queen, the team of naval reservists along with Friends of the 
Navy members and community partners whose exemplary work 
made the Trafalgar Day Gala a truly great community event. 
 
Hats off to Steve Smedley, Lynn Hamilton, Jeanette Tonita, 
Carolynne Kobelsky, Scott Dyson, Wrahnda Eichorn, Alaura 
Campbell, Don Lindsay, Rebecca Miller, Gordon Chan, 
Katherine Pitka, Regan Gorski, and Christina Finn. You 
continue to do an outstanding job, and I am very proud that 
events such as this support our troops around the world and 
their families here at home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 

La Ronge Family Members 
Honoured by Lieutenant Governor 

 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor’s 
Military Service Pin was launched in November of 2013, and 
on October 30th, three family members from La Ronge 
received the distinguished award. 
 
Brothers Corporal Jack Hennie of the Royal Canadian Electrical 
and Mechanical Engineers and Sergeant Eric Hennie of the 
Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry 3rd Battalion were 
joined by their father, Irwin Hennie, a veteran of the Canadian 
Signal Corps, in La Ronge to receive their pin from the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Irwin is also an elected councillor of the Lac La Ronge Indian 
Band. Irwin comes from a military background as his father was 
also a member of the Canadian military and served in the 
Second World War. Eric and Jack have served tours in 
Afghanistan and Jack also served in Bosnia in 1992 and ’93. 
Irwin was in the Middle East for a year and the United Nations 
emergency force in 1963 and 1964. He also spent two years in 
Germany with NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] 
forces. 
 
Eric and Jack continue to serve today and I know that the 
people back home in northern Saskatchewan are very proud of 
this family for all they have done to help serve our country. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking these 
northerners for their many years of military service, and we’ll 
also congratulate them on their well-deserved award. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

North Battleford Resident Receives Hero of Play Award 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives me 
great pleasure to rise today to salute a North Battleford resident 
who has just received the Canadian Tire Hero of Play Award. 
John Jangula was presented with this award at a ceremony on 
November 25th as part of the Hockey Canada caravan which is 
touring the nation as part of the 100th anniversary of Hockey 
Canada, which is also a tremendous milestone. 
 
This Hero of Play Award is given to recognize true dedication, 
passion, and countless hours of behind the scenes support for 
the sport of hockey. Mr. Speaker, John Jangula is a most worthy 
recipient of this recognition. 
 
He was born and raised in Canora and played minor hockey in 
the 495 league. After his playing days, he volunteered as a 
scorekeeper for the Canora Sterlings. 
 
John’s sons also played hockey in a number of centres, 
including Redvers, Kindersley, and the Battlefords, as the 
family moved to different centres in the province. In 
Kindersley, John was on the Kindersley Klippers board of 
directors and volunteered in many ways. In 2005, after moving 



6284 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

to the Battlefords, he was elected to the Battlefords minor 
hockey association board of directors, a position he still holds 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, John was very appreciative of this recognition 
and, in thanking Canadian Tire, he said he’s always enjoyed 
being involved in hockey and views participation as a great way 
to meet people when moving to a new community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
with me in congratulating John Jangula on receiving this much 
deserved recognition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Long Gun Registry 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well the tax-and-spend NDP [New Democratic 
Party] are up to their old tricks again, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
federal NDP leader, Thomas Mulcair, announced a New 
Democratic government would bring back the long gun registry. 
But get this, Mr. Speaker. They would remove the flaws that 
make the original registry so controversial. Like we haven’t 
heard that one before. 
 
When asked about the rights of farmers and hunters to own 
firearms, Mulcair retorted, “What kind of duck do you hunt 
with an assault rifle? A pterodactyl?" It makes sense why the 
NDP would reference dinosaurs. Their ideas are prehistoric. 
 
Our government remains opposed to the long gun registry. It 
unfairly targets law-abiding Canadians while doing nothing to 
reduce crime or strengthen our efforts to keep guns out of the 
hands of criminals. Since it was created, the registry wasted 
over $2 billion. This is money that would have been better spent 
cracking down on real criminals. 
 
This is more evidence that the NDP want to drag us back to the 
past. Will the Leader of the Opposition stand up to his federal 
leader, demand that he remove this wasteful platform that 
attacks law-abiding gun owners, or will he support his federal 
leader, planning to stick to the tried and true NDP script of 
prosecuting the people of rural Saskatchewan? Well we’re 
about to find out. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Keeping Saskatchewan Strong 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the fall session of the 
Legislative Assembly focused on keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
The session ends today but the job of keeping our province 
strong continues. On Friday we learned there were 15,300 new 
jobs created in Saskatchewan in the past year — the fastest pace 
of job creation in Canada. Our unemployment rate dropped to 
just 3.4 per cent, the lowest unemployment rate in Canada for 
24 consecutive months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past seven years Saskatchewan has grown 
by over 120,000 people. Now compare that with the previous 
seven years when our population actually dropped by 5,500 

people under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 400 more doctors, 2,600 more nurses, 
750 more people working in long-term care than under the 
NDP. Surgical wait times have gone from the longest in Canada 
under the NDP to the shortest in Canada today. Our government 
has invested over $6 billion in building hospitals, schools, and 
highways since taking office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP come to this House every day and say 
it’s not enough. And we know there’s more to be done. But 
compare it to their record of losing doctors, losing nurses, 
losing jobs, losing people, building nothing, and dragging 
Saskatchewan back. Today Saskatchewan is strong and moving 
forward. There’s more to be done, so our government will keep 
working hard to keep Saskatchewan strong. But, Mr. Speaker, 
what a great time to live in Saskatchewan. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Fatality in Care Facility and Provision of Long-Term Care 

 
Mr. Broten: — Fern Chingos was just 65 years old when she 
died prematurely in Parkridge Centre on April 6th of last year. 
Her family travelled hours to be here today because they’ve 
seen the heartbreaking stories on the news the last few weeks 
and they’re tired of hearing the government say that those are 
just isolated incidents. They want some good to come as a result 
of their mother’s premature death. They want to ensure that our 
seniors’ care system is fixed so that no other senior has to 
experience what their mother experienced, and that no other 
family has to experience what they’ve gone through.  
 
My question is for the Premier. Will he listen to Fern’s family 
or will he once again claim that this is just another isolated 
incident? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
think anybody in the government has ever claimed that the 
situations being brought forward, either by members of the 
opposition or our own MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], have ever been isolated incidents. 
 
I think from the very beginning of our government being 
elected to office in 2007, we’ve sought to bolster, to increase 
supports for long-term care. That’s why there are today 750 
more front-line workers in long-term care than there were when 
we took office. That’s why our government has been replacing 
and building anew long-term care beds that were previously 
closed down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we know — not just from this session but 
from what MLAs have said and by our own good work, the 
MLAs’ work — is that there are issues in long-term care that 
we need to continue to deal with. That’s why we need to 
continue to invest in more resources for the front line. That’s 
why we need to look at models of care. It’s why we need to 
ensure that we have the most modern facilities available. 
 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6285 

I can only say to the family that’s here on behalf of Fern that 
they obviously have the complete sympathy of every member in 
this House. And with respect to this specific case, again it’s 
something we would want to look into. But make no mistake, 
Mr. Speaker. The government’s commitment to the long-term 
care has not just been proven in words. We have invested. We 
have increased the complement of staff. And we know there is 
more work to be done, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’ll be about 
that business in the weeks and months ahead. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it was this government’s Throne 
Speech that had absolutely nothing new to fix the seniors’ care 
crisis here in Saskatchewan. And Fern’s family has travelled to 
Regina today, Mr. Speaker, because they’ve heard the 
dismissive approach that this government has had. Fern’s 
family has many concerns about the quality of care, about the 
effects of short-staffing, about residents not receiving the help 
that they need. But their biggest concern is with Fern’s 
premature death. 
 
Fern had a severe allergy to ciprofloxacin which was 
specifically noted on her allergy sheet in her care plan. But on 
April 6th of last year, she was given that medication and she 
died as a result. Fern Chingos was just 65 years old. It’s 
absolutely heartbreaking. But her family has been told that this 
kind of thing happens all the time, and that has to stop. So 
again, to the Premier: will he listen to Fern’s family or will he 
yet again pretend that this is simply an isolated incident? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the very 
seriousness of the case that’s been presented in the loss of Fern, 
I want to be very clear again. This government, throughout 
these questions — not just in this session but previous ones, 
throughout the years that we have had the good fortune to form 
the government in 2007 — have been anything but dismissive. 
And we need to correct the record because, were that the truth, 
then the Government of Saskatchewan, duly elected in 2007, 
would not have sought to replace 13 long-term care beds. We 
would not have sought to build anew beds across the province, 
in Saskatoon and now expanded in my home community of 
Swift Current, with projects planned for the rest of the province. 
 
If we were dismissive, Mr. Speaker, we never would have 
financed with tax dollars, 750 more front-line workers in 
long-term care; more care aids, 9 per cent more care aids; 
significantly more LPNs [licensed practical nurse] to work in 
long-term care; more doctors to practise across the province. 
 
There’s absolutely more work that needs to be done. With 
respect to this specific case, this is something we’ll want to look 
into. I know the Minister of Health will, and that work will 
happen. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to make 
long-term care a priority, with the acknowledgement that we 
need to do better and we need to do more by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s why we react . . . By the way, he said there’s nothing in 
the Speech From the Throne. In an unprecedented way, months 
before that, we added $10 million in urgent funds, Mr. Speaker, 

on top of these additional resources we provided. We know that 
there is a case to be made for a different approach and for more. 
We’re in budget process right now, Mr. Speaker. It has the 
focus and the attention of the government. It’s a top priority. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unbelievable actually to hear 
the Premier pat himself on the back and this government on the 
back for a one-time fund which is horribly inadequate — 
horribly. Saskatoon Health Region said they needed 450 care 
aids to start providing the care they needed and want to give. 
They asked for 38. All they got were 19. 
 
Fern’s family, Mr. Speaker, were told by Parkridge that the 
nurse couldn’t find the allergy sheet in her binder, and 
Parkridge said that the computer program on the drug cart had 
crashed the week before and Fern’s information was lost as a 
result and never re-entered into the computer. So on the evening 
of April 6th, Fern was given ciprofloxacin. Fern’s body had 
already been picked up by the funeral home by the time the 
pharmacy called Parkridge to raise a red flag about Fern’s 
severe drug allergy, and that’s when the coroner started to 
investigate this as a suspicious death. It is tragic and it should 
have been a wake-up call to this government to make some 
major changes.  
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Why didn’t this 
government at least, at least learn from Fern’s premature death 
and make the much needed changes to our seniors’ care system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well on the face 
of this particular case, Mr. Speaker, obviously there’s a lot of 
questions that need to be answered in terms of procedures that 
perhaps were not followed. I’m not sure what can be learned 
from this case specifically today on the face of the matter in 
terms of resource. It may well be that it is a resource in 
question. That’s something we’d like to find out. I’m sure the 
Minister of Health will want to find that out. Was there a 
critical incident report generated as a result of this and then 
what was the reaction, either from the ministry or the region, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
This is a very, very serious situation and a tragic loss for the 
family. And so we’d want to find out all of the answers to 
determine what could have been done to prevent it, and if there 
is a resource question or a precedent here, what can be fixed 
immediately to prevent it from happening to anyone else, any 
one resident in long-term care and to their families? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we point out the things the government has 
done, we’re not trying to pat ourselves on the back. We’re 
trying to say that the opposition has brought forward concerns. 
Our own MLAs have brought forward concerns. We were 
aware of concerns, having sat in those benches and watched 
what happened to long-term care in this province under 
members opposite when they were in power. We are aware of 
those things. That’s why we’re acting. 
 
And so when the hon. member raises these questions in the 
House, we’re of course going to point to the things we’ve done. 



6286 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

And it’s completely reasonable, meet and right, for the Leader 
of the Opposition to say, well that’s not enough. But I hope he 
will accept this: that it’s not about patting anyone on their own 
back. It’s about making the case for the fact that this is a 
priority for the government. We have done these things. We’ll 
have a debate about whether they’ve been adequate or not or 
what needs to be done additionally. We’re having that 
discussion as a government today. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t doubt the sincerity or the earnestness 
of the Leader of the Opposition with respect to this issue. I hope 
that he does not doubt the sincerity or the earnestness of 
members on this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech which is 
supposed to lay out the blueprint where priorities are, there’s no 
mention, Mr. Speaker, of new resources being put in place to 
address the seniors’ care crisis. 
 
There’s a tremendous amount that this government and our 
province can learn from Fern’s tragic story, but this government 
has not learned those lessons. Just last week, the Provincial 
Auditor said that care facilities are still putting seniors at risk by 
not updating and following medication plans, and we keep 
hearing stories about inadequate staffing. 
 
The drug was administered to Fern around 9 p.m. and no one 
checked in on her again until almost four hours later when they 
found, Mr. Speaker, that she was dead. If only Fern’s 
medication plan had been properly updated and followed, she 
would not have died. And if only staff had checked in on her 
after she was given the drug, they might have seen that she was 
going into anaphylactic shock and perhaps they could have 
saved her. 
 
Her family wants to know how many others will have to die 
prematurely before we see real change in our seniors’ care 
system. My question for the Premier: what is his answer to their 
question? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is certainly an issue that we take seriously as government, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the government did point out in the 
Throne Speech that this government, a year ago, in mid-year, 
Mr. Speaker, took the unprecedented step to allocate $10 
million, Mr. Speaker, to address some of the concerns that we’d 
been hearing in long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working to implement some new systems 
such as some electronic charting at the bedside, Mr. Speaker, 
which we think will make improvements towards not only how 
care is delivered but also how that information is tracked. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also looking at implementing some training 
around purposeful hourly rounding so that residents will know 
and have the assurance that on an hourly basis that somebody 
will be in to check on them, Mr. Speaker, to see how in fact 

they are doing. Mr. Speaker, but I would just say, there are no 
words that I can say to adequately express our sympathies and 
our condolences to this family. But, Mr. Speaker, in any of 
these situations, we use these as learning experiences. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, making a reference in a Throne 
Speech to something that was done in the past and not even 
done to the . . . completely, Mr. Speaker, and to pretend that 
that is an adequate response, completely misses what every 
family has been saying and the concerns they’ve been raising 
forward over the last weeks. 
 
Margaret Warholm, Jessie Sellwood, Lorne Rowell, and now 
Fern Chingos: those are the people we’ve heard about this 
session who died prematurely in care facilities. And it’s been 
heartbreaking to hear these stories and to speak with these 
families. And it’s been heartbreaking to hear the stories of 
Emily Krushelnicki, Art Healey, and Margaret Fraess. And it’s 
been heartbreaking to speak with many families who call with 
concerns but choose not to go public. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, how the Premier can largely dismiss 
these stories, pretend that they are isolated, and say that we will 
wait for some magical pendulum to swing across the province 
when it comes to minimum care standards, when it comes to 
having adequate staffing levels. 
 
My question is for the Premier. Has he heard enough yet to 
recognize that we desperately need better staffing, regulated 
minimum care standards, and real accountability for when those 
standards are not followed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice.  
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again, I would just say that 
we take these issues very seriously. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 
that when the members on this side of the House look to 
formulate budgets where we see, Mr. Speaker, issues that arise, 
where we make determinations of where the taxpayers’ dollars 
of this province go, Mr. Speaker, each and every year we have 
given careful consideration, knowing that there will be more 
work to do, but careful consideration that has allowed us to 
provide funding to regional health authorities at record levels 
which have seen more than 750 additional full-time equivalents 
working in long-term care, Mr. Speaker, additional staff, 
additional maintenance and equipment added to long-term care 
facilities. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we see issues such as the prevalence of 
falls in long-term care, Mr. Speaker, this side of the House took 
the position that it wasn’t just good enough, Mr. Speaker, to 
accept that that was the record of the province and of our 
system, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we put forward a falls 
collaborative. We’re always looking for those ways that we can 
improve care to our residents, and we’re not going to stop that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6287 

Contract with Lean Initiative Consultant 
 
Ms. Chartier: — It’s so frustrating, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government keeps trying to minimize the crisis in seniors’ care 
while it keeps pouring so much money into John Black and its 
lean pet project. We learned last week that lean events cost 
approximately $34,000 each, and that is over and above the cost 
of John Black. Yet Prince Albert Parkland Health Region has 
just saved $131.26 as a result of John Black’s version of lean. 
 
John Black’s contract has a provision that allows the 
government to terminate the contract with three months’ notice. 
So the Health minister could give notice today and our 
province’s health care system could finally be free of John 
Black at the start of spring session. My question is for the 
Premier. Will he finally listen to doctors, nurses, other 
front-line health care workers, and senior administrators, and 
fire John Black today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
embarked upon deploying lean throughout the entire health care 
system, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have to this point saved 
nearly $16 million in the system. But, Mr. Speaker, I think more 
importantly — and I’m not sure exactly the parameters that the 
members opposite perhaps put on their FOI [freedom of 
information], Mr. Speaker, but that’s the information both 
pre-JBA [John Black and Associates] and including JBA, Mr. 
Speaker — but this has also allowed us to make improvements 
in the system. 
 
And the members opposite, to their credit, bring up some 
important information and some important issues in the health 
system around medication, around falls and other, Mr. Speaker. 
But as I’ve said before, distribution of the wrong medication, so 
an error in the system, in mental health unit at Five Hills in the 
Moose Jaw area prior to lean was 17 a year on average, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve got that down, the system has got that down in 
that region down to one a year.  
 
One is still too many, Mr. Speaker, but that speaks specifically, 
Mr. Speaker, to the quality improvement work that we’re seeing 
with the use of lean methodology in the health system, Mr. 
Speaker, used by organizations such as Virginia Mason, the 
Mayo Clinic, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re trying to make 
those improvements to reduce errors and improve the quality of 
our system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The vast majority of doctors, nurses, and 
front-line health care workers can’t stand John Black’s version 
of lean. And senior health administrators have major problems 
with John Black. They say he lacks respect, tattles on leaders if 
they question, gossips, and undermines. And they say the only 
reason the government is keeping John Black around is they 
think the optics would be bad if they walked away. And last 
week the Provincial Auditor said that John Black has way too 
much control and that things will improve once he’s gone. 
 
So again, to the Premier: in the face of all that damning 

evidence, why won’t he fire John Black? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this is just the words of 
one front-line staff member, Dolly Kosar, who took place in a 
5S [sort, simplify, sweep, standardize, self-discipline] event at 
Regina General post-anaesthetic care unit, Mr. Speaker, her 
line, and she’s a registered nurse: “It’s amazing. People used to 
yell where’s this, where’s that because no one could find 
anything. Now we know where things are. We know when 
we’re out of supplies.” Mr. Speaker, not only has that allowed 
them to make improvements to the way that inventory is 
provided for in that one particular unit, but they were also in 
fact able to remove 3,500 pieces of supplies back to the 
manufacturer for a credit, Mr. Speaker, saving dollars. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we can replicate that work across the 
entire health system, we can see the improvements that we’re 
seeing, for example, with MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging], 
access to MRIs, Mr. Speaker, where one health region has 
increased their productivity by 7 per cent, meaning that, Mr. 
Speaker, if we can replicate that, that would equate to thousands 
more MRIs without a single dollar more of taxpayers’ dollars. 
Mr. Speaker, a more effective and efficient health system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we know that John Black has 
racked up over $1 million in flight expenses and over $1.2 
million in hotel expenses, and hundreds and hundreds of 
thousands of dollars in meals and incidentals. Meanwhile the 
entire Prince Albert Parkland Health Region has saved $136.26 
because of John Black’s version of lean. 
 
My question is for the Premier. Why won’t he table all of John 
Black’s receipts today? Is it because he’s worried about how 
many of John Black’s meals exceeded the 131 bucks he helped 
save for taxpayers, or what? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
certainly this system, we have seen savings of nearly $60 
million using lean methodology, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to continue to see good savings, Mr. Speaker, in 
the system and an improved and more efficient system. 
 
I am glad I have the opportunity to, Mr. Speaker, correct 
something that the member from Elphinstone said a couple of 
weeks ago in talking about a personal note to John Black, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the member may or may not know that 
there was an error in the tender that was produced by SAHO 
[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations], Mr. 
Speaker. There was some information from a previous non-JBA 
tender that was cut and paste about the health system, Mr. 
Speaker, to the point where the reference of a personal visit in 
February, Mr. Speaker, clearly wasn’t about John Black, Mr. 
Speaker, because, well because John Black first didn’t arrive in 
the province until April not February, Mr. Speaker. So the 
personal note clearly wasn’t in reference to John Black. And 
I’m pleased to be able to clarify that for the member from 
Elphinstone. 



6288 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Review of Smart Meter Program 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government ignored 
major safety problems with Sensus smart meters and strapped 
dangerous, fire-prone meters to the homes of Saskatchewan 
people, 105,000 homes. And at every step of the way 
throughout session, the media and the opposition have had to 
drag information out of that SaskPower minister and that 
Premier. 
 
The Premier still hasn’t answered why he went out of his way 
to refute what the former SaskPower president said about the 
$18 million store credit, so to the Premier: why did he say we’d 
get all of our money back no matter what, when it simply 
wasn’t true? And why won’t he finally just refer this whole 
mess, the Sensus contract, to the Provincial Auditor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan took a number of actions around the Sensus 
smart meters. Right from the very outset when the problems 
became known, Mr. Speaker, our government responded 
immediately. We directed SaskPower to remove all of the smart 
meters. We got the taxpayers’ dollars back from Sensus. We 
ordered a thorough and independent review of the problems 
with it.  
 
To date, Mr. Speaker, I can report that approximately 65,000 of 
the meters have been removed from the homes of people here in 
Saskatchewan. The employees of SaskPower, I believe, are 
doing a good job. They’re trying to move this timetable up as 
quickly as possible. SaskPower will follow through on the 
recommendations that were set out under the reviews as we 
know. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Government Use of Consultants 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the 
Premier, not to the minister whose story changes by the day. 
And what he said here today again doesn’t even hold water, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
Another claim that doesn’t hold water is the Premier’s claim 
about cutting the size of government. The government is in fact 
paying 12 per cent more in salaries, despite cutting the number 
of jobs. So there’s been no real savings on that front, despite 
pretending otherwise. But what’s most concerning is that this 
government has dramatically ramped up consultants by an 
astonishing 228 per cent. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he admit that he’s just used his 
job-cutting plan to the public service to massively ramp up the 
dollars being doled out to consultants and that it’s costing 
Saskatchewan taxpayers way more? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I know 

the member for Rosemont very much wants to hear from me. 
And so on behalf of the government I’m pleased to report that 
since taking office in 2007, Mr. Speaker, there has been an 
historic level of construction, public sector construction, in 
Saskatchewan, specifically historic investments in 
infrastructure: historic Highways budgets year after year after 
year, Mr. Speaker; historic funding to municipalities who in 
turn are also building; historic, Mr. Speaker, investments in 
health care infrastructure and education infrastructure. And with 
that building comes consultants. 
 
Now the NDP approach might have been to hire a permanent 
complement of government staff to take care of those projects. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to do that. We’re going to 
use the private sector. We’re going to use them on a temporary 
basis . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member for 
Athabasca’s interested in the story. He should be because we’re 
building that important road in northern Saskatchewan. I expect 
consultants have been hired for that as well. And do you know 
what, Mr. Speaker? Do you know what? The net result of the 
growth plan of the province . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Will the members come to order. I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to hear the 
answer. They don’t want to hear the answer because of record 
infrastructure investment on top of competitive taxes, on top of 
fiscal responsibility, on top of an innovation agenda, has availed 
what exactly? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s availed this result for the 
people of this province: the lowest unemployment rate in 
Canada for two years, the best job creation record in Canada for 
the last seven years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Compare that to the other guys, the NDP in power, their last 
seven years: the worst job creation record in the country and a 
net loss of 5,500 people. We will keep building the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Poverty Strategy and Inquest Into Death 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And that 
was a most bizarre answer, when we see the worst record of 
keeping track of those consultants — 75 per cent without a 
record of what they actually do or what they’re doing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we asked this government a few weeks ago 
for an inquest into the death of Jerry Peequaquat. Jerry needed 
help, but his family says he was cut off social assistance despite 
being desperate and homeless, and Jerry died in a makeshift 
shelter in Saskatoon. We called for an inquest to investigate the 
circumstances of Jerry’s death and to make recommendations to 
prevent some more deaths in the future because no one should 
freeze to death in a province as rich as ours. 
 
To the Minister of Social Services: will she commit to an 
inquest today? 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6289 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my answer is no 
different than when the member asked it last time. To ask for a 
coroner’s inquest is usually done by the coroner. We still do not 
know the details of how this gentleman died. And so therefore 
we are waiting for the final test results from the coroner, and 
determination can be made then as to what best to do. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work on 
issues of homelessness and poverty, and that’s why we’ve 
announced a poverty strategy that we’re undertaking very 
shortly within this province. Our poverty rates are going down, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re the second lowest in our country. However 
we know there is more that needs to be done, and that’s why 
we’ll be working with our stakeholders to come forward with 
the poverty strategy. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 

Oilseed Producers Gain Access to Quebec Markets 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to provide members of the Legislative Assembly with 
some welcome news on the internal trade dispute our 
government has had with the government of Quebec over edible 
oils. 
 
When I last reported to the Assembly in late October, it was on 
a day that an appeal panel was hearing arguments from the 
Quebec government and our government at a public hearing in 
Regina. Members will recall the process around this dispute, but 
let me quickly recap some of the deliberations of the last year. 
 
Back in January, we successfully challenged Quebec through an 
agreement on internal trade dispute process. We challenged the 
Quebec government’s restrictions preventing the sale and 
marketing of certain margarines, coffee whiteners, and dessert 
toppings in the Quebec market. Those restrictions were denying 
market opportunities to Western oilseed producers and 
processors and were flying in the face of well-established 
internal trade rules. 
 
Our challenge was supported by the governments of Alberta, 
British Columbia, and Manitoba. It was backed by producers 
through the Vegetable Oil Industry of Canada. A dispute 
resolution panel established under the AIT [Agreement on 
Internal Trade] came down with its decision in late April, ruling 
in our favour. The panel ruled that Quebec’s restrictions 
unfairly denied market opportunities for our Western oilseed 
farmers and processors and are contrary to Quebec’s trade 
obligations under the AIT. 
 
The panel instructed Quebec to bring its dairy regulations in 
line with its AIT obligations. Quebec decided to appeal the 
panel’s decision, which resulted in the October hearing in 
Regina. The appeal panel is expected to make its ruling at the 
end of January, and we’re confident that the ruling will once 
again be in our favour. 
 
In the meantime though, I can report to members that last week 

the Government of Quebec took actions that, in our view, result 
in a major step forward for Saskatchewan’s oilseed producers. 
The Government of Quebec approved and implemented 
changes to its Food Products Act, removing barriers to the 
production and sale of vegetable-oil-based dairy products. 
Those were the barriers that Saskatchewan successfully 
challenged through the AIT process. While Quebec still has 
rules in place for now that prohibit the use of terms like milk, 
butter, and cheese for dairy substitute products, the major 
legislative changes that Quebec has just implemented mean that 
Saskatchewan edible oil products can now be freely sold in 
Quebec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that really is a huge win for Saskatchewan, and 
it’s a huge win for our canola industry. Our producers will now 
have access to a large Quebec market and will have more 
market access opportunities for the many products with 
Saskatchewan edible oil ingredients. We’re hopeful Quebec’s 
actions last week reflect a genuine commitment to finally tackle 
these unfair barriers to trade. And we view this as a positive 
sign more broadly as provinces, territories, and the federal 
government continue negotiations to improve internal trade in 
Canada. 
 
We believe the appeal panel will confirm that the amendments 
Quebec just made to its Act were indeed necessary to address 
unfair trade barriers. And we hope that the final ruling will also 
ensure that Quebec addresses the outstanding barriers to 
marketing oil-based dairy products within its borders. 
 
I know that all members of the House will join with me in 
welcoming this latest development for Saskatchewan producers. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 
on a couple of other occasions when the minister has risen to 
his feet on this matter, this is an important endeavour for our 
province, for oilseed producers, for our canola industry. I’m 
thankful for the effort worked in partnership with governments 
and officials from Manitoba, Alberta, BC [British Columbia], 
and certainly all those involved here in Saskatchewan. Certainly 
resolving this matter is in our economic interests as a province, 
and certainly in the interests of those fine producers here in 
Saskatchewan. So we welcome this update and look forward to 
further progress towards positive resolution. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 

Launch of Career Development Website 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
had the honour today of co-launching a brand new tool for 
Saskatchewan’s youth and job seekers. SaskCareers.ca is a 
website that was developed in partnership with the Saskatoon 
Industry-Education Council and the ministries of the Economy, 
Education, and Advanced Education. Website users will be able 
to take part in online activities that will help them identify what 
their skills are and learn about different careers that they can 
pursue. It’s estimated that there will be over 95,000 job 
opportunities in our province by 2017. Educating, training, and 



6290 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

developing a highly skilled workforce is a key goal of the 
Saskatchewan plan for growth. SaskCareers.ca helps us with 
that goal by engaging new and current workers with what 
opportunities are available to them in today’s strong 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Ministry of the Economy has provided over $1 million of 
funding towards the SaskCareers.ca website, and we have 
recently approved close to an additional $600,000 in funding 
for further website development. 
 
One component of the website to assist students specifically is 
myBlueprint. It will allow students to set career objectives, 
develop an educational plan, discover post-secondary training 
options, and track their progress throughout. Currently eight 
school divisions and two First Nations schools have full access 
to myBlueprint. The Ministry of Education has invested 
$549,000 to expand access to myBlueprint to all school 
divisions in Saskatchewan by the next school year. 
 
The sooner students learn about possible careers that are out 
there for them and, more importantly, know what classes they 
need to take in schools and afterwards, the sooner they’ll be 
able to have a rewarding career and all of the opportunities that 
our Saskatchewan has today. SaskCareers.ca will help keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this seems like a very reasonable tool and one that we would 
welcome, and a tool that’s important for all Saskatchewan 
people to utilize, something that hopefully connects directly 
with some of the economic needs in the province as well. 
 
So we welcome this announcement. We also, of course, if we’re 
talking about post-secondary and skills training and 
opportunities for young people, it would be wrong for us not to 
touch on the fact that we need to do a much better job. And this 
government has to do a better job of extending opportunity, of 
making sure that those opportunities are more accessible, more 
affordable for all Saskatchewan people. That’s going to truly be 
what allows us as a province and all Saskatchewan people to 
move forward in a positive way with bright futures. But we 
certainly welcome this new website. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 585 to 589. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 585 through 589. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 590. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered response 

to question 590. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 591 to 606. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 591 through 606. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 171 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 171 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following question 
period today, it’s a tremendous honour for me to stand in the 
Assembly and speak in favour of Bill 171. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
do see this as a very momentous occasion and an important 
moment as we add gender identity to our province’s Human 
Rights Code. 
 
As we take this step today, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also 
important to recognize those in the community who have been 
working for this for some time. And I think it’s also important, 
Mr. Speaker, to recognize many individuals in our province 
who have suffered over the years because their fundamental 
human rights were not recognized because their equality was 
not embraced and that their diversity was not celebrated. So 
today, Mr. Speaker, as we consider Bill 171, we also stand — at 
least I stand, Mr. Speaker — to remember and to pay tribute to 
those individuals. 
 
And we pay tribute, Mr. Speaker, to the many people in the 
province who have worked hard for this change. We’re joined 
by many of them today in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, and many 
others who weren’t able to make it to the Assembly today, Mr. 
Speaker. But I want to say a special thank you to these 
individuals for working hard, for having the courage of their 
convictions, for not giving up, for staying focused, and for 
building bridges with many people in the province. Thank you 
to all of you who have worked hard to make this a reality. 
 
I would also, Mr. Speaker, like to extend my words of thanks to 
the Minister of Justice. I’m grateful that he has taken this step 
and I want to say thank you to him for that. I also, Mr. Speaker, 
want to add my words of appreciation to the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. When I became Leader of the Opposition, I 
felt it was important to have a stand-alone critic for the area of 
diversity, equality, and human rights. And, Mr. Speaker, I knew 
that the member from Centre would take that on with gusto, and 
I want to say thank you to him for his determination and 
willingness to work with many people in the province to see 
positive changes take place. So I would like to thank the 
member from Saskatoon Centre. 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6291 

Mr. Speaker, today as we celebrate this achievement, we do so 
recognizing that there is much more work to do in order to 
ensure that diversity, equality, and human rights continue to be 
advanced in our province. Mr. Speaker, thank you for the 
opportunity to make some remarks on this important day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed 
a pleasure to enter into this debate on Bill No. 171, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. And I want to 
thank all the guests who’ve come here from across the province. 
And I want to especially thank the Chief Commissioner of the 
Human Rights Commission for the good work that he has done, 
and played a huge role in bringing this forward, and also to the 
Minister of Justice and this government and the Premier for 
bringing this bill forward. It’s a very important bill. 
 
But even more to the citizens who worked tirelessly to see this 
day. You know, our leader said if a bill makes sense, then we 
will be here to support it. And so we are here today, and I think 
this is a good thing. I also want to recognize the important work 
of community groups such as TransSask Support Services, 
Avenue Community Centre, gender equity, and Time 4 Rights. 
And raising awareness is about the challenges facing a sex- and 
gender-diverse community while celebrating the lives of 
transsexual, transgender, and intersex people from across, in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We believe that all people of Saskatchewan should have the 
resources and support to lead their lives however they wish to 
and have their needs accommodated without being hindered by 
discriminatory practices. The Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights affirms that all human beings are born free and equal in 
dignity and rights, and that everyone is entitled to all the rights 
and freedoms set forth in that instrument without distinction of 
any kind. 
 
The acts of violence and discrimination directed towards people 
because of gender identity or expression are simply 
unacceptable. To that end, the opposition has called in the past 
for greater protection by changing The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code to include the terms gender identity and gender 
expression as prohibited grounds for discrimination. We were, 
to paraphrase the words of Martin Luther King, Jr., appalled at 
the silence of The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code to address 
the protection of the trans community. But today we celebrate 
its strong voice. This is a good day. We are told the protection 
is there. It’s implicit, not explicit like everybody else’s. But it 
reminded me of the civil rights movement in the ’60s when 
Afro-Americans were told they were equal too but just separate. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Every member of society expects explicit protection from our 
Human Rights Code — say what you mean and mean what you 
say — and we have that today. The struggle continues though 
for sure, for example, to ensure that there are supports in our 
schools for students who request support like GSAs 
[gay-straight alliance]. And we will continue to monitor 
whether gender expression is needed as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Wednesday, December 10th, is international 

Human Rights Day. This year’s slogan is Human Rights 365. 
 
It encompasses the idea that every day is Human Rights 
Day. It celebrates the fundamental proposition in the 
Universal Declaration that each one of us, everywhere, at 
all times is entitled to the full range of human rights, that 
human rights belong equally to each of us and bind us 
together as a global community with the same ideals and 
values. 

 
And so we should celebrate human rights every day. 
 
In closing, Martin Luther King said, “The arc of the moral 
universe is long, but it bends towards justice.” Today that arc is 
bending even more here in Saskatchewan. Thank you very 
much. The opposition is now prepared to have Bill 171 move to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before us is second reading of 
Bill No. 171, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. The ayes have it. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill 171, 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014 
be committed to Committee of the Whole on Bills and that the 
said bill be considered in Committee of the Whole on Bills 
immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to Committee of 
the Whole. I do now leave the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 171 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Chair: — I’ll call the Committee of the Whole to order. 
The item of business before the committee is Bill No. 171, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014. 
Clause 1, short title, is that clause agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 



6292 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as follows: 
Bill 171, an Act to amend the Human Rights Code, 2014. I 
recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the committee 
report the bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 171 be 
reported without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Mr. Chair, I move that the committee rise, report progress, and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave 
to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 171, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? I 
recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that the bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for Bill No. 
171, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 
2014 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Minister of Justice. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 171 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 171, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment 

Act, 2014 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:38 until 14:41.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour, please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 53] 
 
Wall Morgan Stewart 
Wyant Duncan Krawetz 
Boyd Eagles McMorris 
Reiter Harpauer Doherty 
Moe Docherty Campeau 
Heppner Cheveldayoff Harrison 
Tell Ottenbreit Norris 
Hart Kirsch Bjornerud 
Makowsky Weekes Cox 
Draude Wilson Marchuk 
Ross Bradshaw Michelson 
Merriman Hutchinson Young 
Jurgens Steinley Hickie 
Lawrence Tochor Parent 
Phillips Doke Broten 
Forbes Wotherspoon Vermette 
Belanger Chartier McCall 
Nilson Sproule  
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed? 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the third reading 
motion, 53; those opposed, nil. 
 
The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I am advised that Her Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor is here for Royal Assent. Please rise. 
 
[14:45] 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 14:46 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6293 

to the following bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed a bill which in the 
name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to which 
bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bill is as follows: 
 
Bill No. 171 - The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please you Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 173 - The Appropriation Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
 
to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:49.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers 
Act, 2014. The Registered Teachers Act will create a new 
regulatory body for teachers in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s safe to say that the government has done its 
homework on this file. 
 
Currently the minister is responsible for certifying all of 
Saskatchewan’s teachers; however, disciplinary matters are 
being performed by three separate entities. The Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation holds the responsibility for disciplinary 
processes of teacher misconduct at publicly funded schools. 
Disciplinary processes concerning administrators, such as 
directors of education, superintendents, are held by the League 
of Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents. 
Meanwhile teachers at independent schools, custody care 
facilities, and post-secondary institutions fall under the 
disciplinary responsibility of the ministry. 
 
The Registered Teachers Act will consolidate the 
responsibilities for teacher certification and discipline within 
one legislative framework by which the new Saskatchewan 
Professional Teachers Regulatory Board will be governed. 
 

An overview of The Registered Teachers Act, 2014 includes, 
firstly, the establishment of the Saskatchewan Professional 
Teachers Regulatory Board; secondly, establishment of the 
nine-person board of directors consisting of seven registered 
teachers and two members of the public. Thirdly, it prescribes 
the duty of the SPTRB [Saskatchewan Professional Teachers 
Regulatory Board] to serve and protect the public and to 
exercise its powers and discharge its responsibility in the public 
interest. 
 
Fourthly, it prescribes the objectives of the SPTRB, which are 
to establish and administer the professional certification and 
standards of professional conduct and competence of teachers 
for the purpose of serving and protecting the public. Fifthly, it 
grants the Saskatchewan Professional Teachers Regulatory 
Board authority to issue teachers’ certificates. Sixth, it grants 
the regulatory board responsibility for intake, investigation, 
hearing, and ruling on allegations of professional misconduct 
and incompetence. 
 
Seventh, it establishes a public register in which the status of a 
registered teacher’s certificate will be found. Eighth, it 
establishes a five-person professional conduct committee for the 
purpose of investigating allegations of professional misconduct 
or incompetence. Ninth, it establishes a five-person disciplinary 
committee for the purpose of hearing allegations of professional 
misconduct or incompetence that call into question the 
suitability of a teacher to hold a teaching certificate. 
 
The transition committee, consisting of representation from the 
Ministry of Education, the league of educational administrators, 
directors of education and superintendents, the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation, the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 
and First Nations director of education, they have all reviewed 
and provided extensive feedback on the new Act. They are 
supportive of the regulatory model the new Act creates as well 
as the structure and governance of the Saskatchewan 
Professional Teachers Regulatory Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also know that the members opposite have 
taken a keen interest in this. I’m going to quote from The 
StarPhoenix article dated June 29th, 2013. The article stated 
that the member for Saskatoon Centre would, and I quote, “. . . 
also spend the summer doing extra homework on teacher 
regulation practices across Canada.” Mr. Speaker, I look 
forward to hearing from the members opposite about everything 
they found. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite also stated in the 
same article: 
 

We want to make sure that the public and parents, and 
colleagues in the profession, everyone has full confidence 
in the system and the process. That means it’s transparent, 
it’s accountable, but it’s also fair, and that student safety is 
the No. 1 issue here. 

 
We couldn’t agree more, and I sincerely hope that after 
spending last summer doing extra homework, the members 
opposite continue to agree on the need for a transparent, 
accountable, and fair process that protects our students. We 
know that the member from Saskatoon Centre has admitted to 
doing a bit of nitpicking at times when he tries to find a reason 
to criticize some government bills. I hope that he will avoid the 



6294 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

urge to do that on this particular bill. 
 
We also know that there has been substantial support for this 
legislation from across the education sector. From Connie 
Bailey, president of the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association, “We are encouraged by the movement toward 
increased transparency and clarity.” From Gwen Dueck, 
executive director of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation: 
 

What we celebrate, even through this process, is that it is 
unique in the country . . . that we have developed 
something in Saskatchewan that brings together all of the 
processes. 

 
The editorial board of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix is also 
supportive of this new direction: 
 

With Morgan promising greater transparency and public 
reporting of the work of the new agency, the government 
seems to do have done the homework necessary to ensure 
the initiative is a success. 

 
We are even hearing support from the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition: “I am hearing a general comfort with what’s being 
brought forward.” I look forward to hearing what they have to 
say, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully their homework will warrant a 
passing grade. 
 
The teachers of this province are incredibly hard-working and 
dedicated. They are professionals just like doctors, lawyers, and 
nurses. They deserve a teacher-led regulatory body. They 
deserve to be treated like the professionals that they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move that Bill No. 174, The 
Registered Teachers Act, 2014 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act, 2014. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
am pleased to be able to enter the discussions on Bill 174. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been here for a few years and I was quite 
surprised and taken aback by the comments made by the 
minister in reference to the member from Saskatoon Centre. 
And while I can appreciate he’s reading quotes, it’s the first 
time I’ve seen an introduction and explanation of a bill where a 
minister is reading quotes that are deriding another member of 
the Assembly’s comments in reference to a process to 
understand the bill better. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find that absolutely bizarre in the sense of, 
the minister should get up, explain the bill and the process of 
the bill, but not become political to a point where he’s now 
bringing forward quotes in reference to the member from 
Saskatoon Centre, in terms of the member from Saskatoon 
Centre’s concern and right to be able to research the bill 
diligently, Mr. Speaker. So again I find it absolutely bizarre that 
the minister would take that opportunity to play that particular 
card during the introduction and explanation of his bill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Typically the process in this Assembly, from what I understand, 
is the minister at second reading gets up, explains the bill, 
explains the process and, Mr. Speaker, that’s about it. But once 
again we see, Mr. Speaker, that he’s taking the opportunity to 
bring politics into the explanation of a bill so the people in 
Saskatchewan can understand the bill, Mr. Speaker. I find that 
very bizarre and I certainly find it something that’s new to the 
Assembly. And if that’s the process that the minister wishes to 
embark on, then by all means we’re more than prepared to do 
exactly that: become political in this whole process of trying to 
explain the bill to the public out there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again I want to point out for the record that I 
find that action and that behaviour absolutely bizarre in a sense 
of explaining the bill to the public so that they can understand it 
and objectively try and interpret whether it’s good or not, Mr. 
Speaker. And obviously making political comments to that 
effect is disturbing. And certainly I don’t think that’s a proper 
process for the bill to be introduced in the Assembly through 
the second reading phases. So, Mr. Speaker, again I find the 
actions of the minister a bit bizarre as it relates to the 
introduction of this bill, Bill 174, and of course the 
complementary Bill 175. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in order for me to try and do justice to the 
process that the minister completely ignored in the introduction 
of his Act, in the sense of saying that Bill 174 creates an 
arm’s-length regulatory board that will oversee teachers’ 
discipline and certification, Mr. Speaker . . . And now when we 
see the minister now sitting there and laughing at this whole 
scenario, we’re going to let a lot of teachers know at the 
introduction of this particular bill, he found it amusing 
somewhat, to be sitting in his chair, laughing away and giggling 
away, Mr. Speaker, on something as important as teacher 
disciplinary measures. And really important, Mr. Speaker, is 
teacher certification. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So I think it’s really important that we let the teachers know 
that this is a process that the minister has not been responsible 
with and certainly has not been respectful to in a sense of trying 
to make sure that the teachers are respected, that the discussion 
around their contract has got a lot of attention by the 
appropriate individuals, you know, from within government, 
but especially by the lead minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we look at the whole notion of Bill 174 and 175 in a sense of 
one of the primary objectives that we have when we talk about 
our teachers is to do one particular thing, is to afford them the 
respect that they deserve. And when you see the kind of process 
that’s been undertaken to date on Bill 174 and 175, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to let a lot of teachers know when we 
speak to them that it is something that was totally untoward of 
the government to come along and politicize the introduction of 
a very important part of the bill when it talks about teacher 
certification and of course teacher discipline. 
 
Now we understand that the board will be made up of seven 
teachers and two members of the public. The provincial 
government will have the power to appoint three teachers and 
two members of the government. The STF [Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation] will appoint three teachers, and of course 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6295 

the League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents will appoint one teacher themselves. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the teachers themselves, we haven’t had the 
opportunity to really talk to them about what their issues are as 
a result of the regulatory board that’s being established in Bill 
174 and 175. 
 
It’s important to know that we had a congregation of people that 
were involved with education here several days ago when the 
first introduction was made of this particular bill. Mr. Speaker, 
there was a lot of different groups and organizations in the 
Assembly but important to know that there was the STF 
present. There was LEADS [League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents] present. There 
was a First Nations leader as well present. The Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association members were also present. So, Mr. 
Speaker, they were the team of people that are primarily 
involved with the delivery of our K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 
12] education system in the province. They were here that day. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of discussion in the 
backrooms of what this particular Act entails, what it involves, 
Mr. Speaker. And of course as we begin to look at the bill in 
greater detail, we begin to understand the bill in greater detail. 
And we begin to consult with the different people that are 
involved with this particular bill, and I named a few. But we’re 
going to talk to a lot of teachers on this, Mr. Speaker, to see 
how they feel about this particular regulatory body being 
introduced by the minister that really in a sense displaces the 
former model in which STF dealt with all of these particular 
issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand from the questions that were posed to 
the minister that the cost to operate this particular board is 
around the $2 million mark, I believe. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
cost of $2 million per year, this I think is being discussed in 
which the teachers have to pay the cost of operating this board 
to the tune of $175 per teacher, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We haven’t yet negotiated a contract with our teachers. We 
have seen disparity, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the start of the 
school year in a sense of certain schools and certain regions. 
And my region is a good example where there’s an extra 100 
hours required of the teachers as a result of the, again, this 
particular minister’s meddling in the start of the school year in 
which there was a lot of backlash, Mr. Speaker. There was a lot 
of anger and there was a lot of people that weren’t happy with 
the minister’s meddling in terms of the school year. So we had 
to come back and recant the start of the school year and now 
we’re back here again talking about teachers’ discipline and 
teachers’ certification. 
 
He wants to establish a board, and in this board that talks about 
certification of teachers and discipline of teachers, it’s going to 
cost $2 million a year to operate this board. And guess who’s 
paying for it, Mr. Speaker? It’s $175 each coming out of the 
teachers’ salaries, out of their pockets, Mr. Speaker. And 
they’re the ones that are going to be paying for the effort by this 
minister to establish a separate process that was handled 
previously under STF to deal with teacher certification and 
teacher discipline. 
 

Now I understand that the government themselves, in the 
previous arrangement, did deal with the certification of the 
teachers and of course STF dealt with the discipline, Mr. 
Speaker. And while we have a couple of letters here in press 
releases in the sense of . . . Generally you look at the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association, SSBA. They are also 
supportive of the introduction of teacher regulation legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. STF has been quoted as well. 
 
But we need to really talk to the rank and file members as well, 
just to be thorough in our work and in our discussions with 
them as to how they feel about this particular Act and certainly 
how they feel about being able to go to a one-step process for 
discipline and certification; but more so, how they feel about 
paying $175 each as teachers to this process that the 
Government of Saskatchewan and namely the Minister of 
Education has imposed upon them without good consultation 
with the rank and file members. And, Mr. Speaker, that part is 
really important that we do all we can to reach out to them to 
ask them questions. 
 
This is the same government and the same minister has not 
dealt with the teachers on a fair and respectful playing field, Mr. 
Speaker. Obviously, as I said at the outset, there are disparities 
from different school boards across the province in reference to 
the school year as to how it impacts their work plan, how it 
impacts their daily work schedule, how it impacts the law to 
have certain hours of instruction on an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that start of the school year when the minister 
meddled in that particular process, it really created a lot of 
problems in different areas and compounded some of the 
frustration that teachers had on many fronts, including in my 
particular area where they have to work an extra 100 hours to 
accommodate the minister’s short-sighted change in the start of 
the school year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, now we see he’s come back and said 
obviously that was the wrong thing to do, so I had to do another 
Act and amend another Act prior to that. And, Mr. Speaker, 
after a while many people became frustrated, but they also 
became confused as to what the minister was doing. And we’re 
still trying to figure that out, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully at the 
end of the day, that this Assembly would be able to help him 
figure it out, get it right, and not try and meddle into the future. 
 
So look at Bills 174 and in particular 175, Mr. Speaker. We do 
have to have the consultation. There are many issues that we 
have to deal with when it comes to the teachers. And I’m very 
curious at the outset that I’m confident that the STF will appoint 
three quality teachers, as was indicated at the outset. I’m 
confident that LEADS, the League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents, will appoint one 
quality teacher. Mr. Speaker, where I’d like to ask some 
questions is how the government will determine which three 
teachers and two members at large or of the government that 
they will be appointing? I really need to be able to see, Mr. 
Speaker, the breakdown. 
 
Obviously you look at the province themselves, they’ll have the 
power to appoint five of the nine-member board, Mr. Speaker. 
So obviously of the nine-member board, seven of them will be 
teachers. Now who the other two will be, Mr. Speaker, is very 



6296 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

curious to me. It says members of the government could be 
appointed by the government. We need to know who those 
members would be. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, it is very important that 
those members that are appointed by the public at large, 
whether they’re government members or again by the public, 
that these individuals have a deep-rooted respect for the 
teaching profession in our province, that these members 
appointed by the government — not the teachers — but the 
members at large, that they’re not there to simply direct the 
teachers and to threaten the teachers and to box in the teachers. 
 
It’s really, really important, Mr. Speaker, that we get the 
information as to who the government’s planning on 
appointing, not from the teaching profession, but who their two 
appointments are from the public at large, Mr. Speaker. We 
need to know which people are they going to place. And again 
the primary point that we would make on that front is that these 
individuals that are appointed above and beyond the teachers to 
this board must have a deep-rooted respect for the teachers. 
They must absolutely know the impacts of their decision on 
how it’s going affect staff morale, how it’s going to affect the 
retention of teachers in the various regions of our province, how 
it’s going to strengthen the teacher base, how it’s going to gain 
the confidence of the public, the students, and the parents 
involved, Mr. Speaker. These are all issues that are really, really 
important. 
 
So if you’re going to appoint somebody from the public at 
large, then make sure that these people that are being appointed 
do not have a pre-existing negative attitude or do not have 
marching orders from the minister or the Premier, or from the 
government in fact, to be able to become cumbersome to the 
whole new organization. Because we find at times, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the appointments of government, to various 
boards, of their friends and colleagues do create a lot of 
problems and does create conflict at the board level, Mr. 
Speaker. And we are hoping that on this front that there isn’t 
that particular mindset being established when you look at 
appointment of the two members at large to this new board that 
regulates certification of teachers and deals with teacher 
discipline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues will have a lot more to say about 
this. We’re going to be hearing a lot about this as we travel. We 
have a lot of discussions and we have a lot of contacts with the 
teaching profession. We bump into teachers every day. We 
often, as MLAs, attend school functions. We attend SSBA 
functions. We attend the STF functions. We talk to teachers on 
a regular basis. We’ve had a number of teachers that have ran 
for us and will continue to run for us. So we need to have that 
particular communication as to how they feel. 
 
Obviously we want to also deal with SSBA. We also want to 
deal with LEADS. We want to deal with the STF. We want to 
deal with the Aboriginal participants, whether they’re from 
FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] or from the 
Métis Nation or, you know, from an Aboriginal background. 
 
We need to talk to those that are engaged in the teaching of our 
teachers, to be able to coach our teachers to becoming good 
teachers that are certified, disciplined, and certainly totally 

committed to the job. And we all know that there’s the vast, 
vast . . . a huge amount of teachers are obviously that, Mr. 
Speaker. And these are some of the organizations and some of 
the people that we need to speak to to see if this is the right 
model and this is the right format. 
 
I know one of the sticking points and one of the arguments that 
the teachers will make is that this new board costs $2 million to 
operate, $2 million each and every year. And obviously who’s 
paying the cost of that, Mr. Speaker is the teachers themselves, 
the $175. So if they’re the ones paying the whole cost of 
operating this board, then one would assume they’d have total 
autonomy and authority to (a) to be able to certify who they 
want on this board. 
 
And that’s one of the points that I think that I want to make is 
that if the costs were cost shared, in the sense of being able to 
say, okay the government appoints five members to this board 
and the STF appoints three and LEADS, the administrators and 
the principals’ organization, they appoint one, then typically 
what should happen is that the government should pay for the 
cost of five of those members, and of course STF would pay 
their own and of course LEADS would pay their own as well. 
That should be the breakdown. But, Mr. Speaker, what happens 
here is that obviously we have to find these issues out. 
 
It’s going to cost $2 million, and it appears that $175 for each 
and every teacher will be collected by that minister to operate a 
board on certification and discipline, Mr. Speaker, which I think 
is totally unfair. But yet the minister has the right to be able to 
appoint five of the nine people, and yet 100 per cent of the costs 
of operating this board is being borne by the members of the 
STF. And that, Mr. Speaker, is patently unfair. And we have to 
have consultation and discussion on that front to ensure that 
they know that their voices can be heard. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we already know that the teachers’ 
relationship with this minister and with this government is 
tenuous at best. There are a lot of concerns out there. There’s a 
lot of issues that are coming to the forefront. And once again we 
continue seeing this particular minister and the government 
continue to disrespect teachers and continue taking them for 
granted, Mr. Speaker. And this is yet another example of how 
they are going to create a new body to regulate teachers, to 
license teachers, to discipline teachers when there is occasion 
for disciplinary action to be undertaken. And guess what? The 
teacher pays all those costs; the government does not. 
 
So it’s unfair for the member to say the things that he said in the 
sense of that the comments he made in reference to the member 
from Saskatoon Centre. I think the member from Saskatoon 
Centre, being a former teacher himself, is probably aware of 
some of the challenges faced by many of his colleagues in the 
teaching profession as it relates to some of the legislative 
agendas and items that this minister and this particular 
government had brought forward without due consultation and 
recognition of the teachers, the school board association, the 
parents, and many others. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this particular 
bill. We have a lot more issues that we want to build into this 
particular bill to ensure that there’s fairness in the sense of 
representing some of the teachers’ views. We want to make sure 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6297 

that we’re on record to be able to achieve that. And, Mr. 
Speaker, once again we see that we’re praying on this side of 
the Assembly that the minister knows what he’s doing when it 
comes to introducing this particular process. From the outset it 
shows that he doesn’t because he makes light of the issue, Mr. 
Speaker. He politicizes the introduction of this bill, which he 
should not. It should not occur. It’s kind of bizarre behaviour on 
his part. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, a disciplinary and certification body 
that he’s created, that he gets to appoint five members, and who 
pays the bill? Who pays the cost for the entire $2 million 
operation? It’s each and every single teacher out there. They 
pay $175 per year to operate this board that that minister and 
that government’s putting in place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need to have that consultation, and we 
need to have that discussion with the appropriate agencies of 
course, Mr. Speaker. But more important as well is to talk to the 
individual teachers, which we fully intend to do. So on that 
note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 174. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[15:15] 
 

Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 175, The Registered Teachers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. 
 
As you know, we have just introduced the creation of The 
Registered Teachers Act, 2014. This Act seeks to form a new 
regulatory body for teachers in Saskatchewan. The development 
of this new regulatory body has the support of our education 
stakeholder partners. To support this new Act, we require 
amendments to be made to The Education Act, 1995; The 
Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006; The League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents Act, 1991; The 
Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act; and The 
Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Registered Teachers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014 will address the required amendments 
and will specifically remove all mention of certification and 
discipline functions from The Education Act, 1995. 
 
A transition committee has been established and consists of 
representation from the ministry, LEADS, STF, Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association, Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations, and First Nations directors of education, as well as 
members of the public. The committee has reviewed and 

provided extensive feedback on the consequential amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier the member opposite spoke to Bill No. 174 
and made reference to the fact that we had commented 
specifically on statements made by the member for Saskatoon 
Centre and the member for Saskatoon Rosemont. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to make it clear that that was done, not to politicize the 
thing, but to indicate that there was broad support for it, 
including both sides of the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was also done specifically for the member 
opposite because the member opposite has had a regular pattern 
where he is not onside with his own members. So this was a 
signal to him that his members are supporting this, so he may 
well want to support it as well so that his leader is not dealing 
with the same issue he has had to before where he is offside 
with his own party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact that we have sent that signal to 
him, he has once again chosen to freelance and make comments 
on and taken a position with regard to who should bear the cost 
of the Act, something that should be dealt with elsewhere other 
than in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, I am pleased to move that Bill 
No. 175, The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2014 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 175, The Registered Teachers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Merci, monsieur le Président. [Translation: 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] Basically we want to again point out 
that the Bill 175, in reference to the consequential amendments 
Act, obviously all the discussions we had in relation to Bill 174, 
this particular bill is primarily transposing all the information 
into the French version, Mr. Speaker. And it’s important that 
certainly from, one would assume, that based on the importance 
of this particular bill, that you want to also celebrate and 
accentuate the bill and the importance and the context of the bill 
into the French language as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker: je n’ai parlé pas française bien, mais je vais 
essayer. [Translation: I don’t speak French well, but I am going 
to try.] And, Mr. Speaker, obviously when people ask me if I 
speak French, I say, un petit peu [Translation: a little bit]. 
 
So again it’s important that we respect the language of French. 
And obviously on Bill 175 that we want to ensure that any of 
the bills that are being presented, Mr. Speaker, are presented in 
the French version as well, and I believe Bill 175, The 
Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act primarily 
serves that purpose. So on that, I move that we adjourn debate 
on Bill 175. Merci beaucoup. [Translation: Thank you very 
much.] 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate with Bill No. 175, The Registered Teachers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



6298 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real 
pleasure to rise in this House — I haven’t done it much lately 
— but to rise today to move second reading of The Traffic 
Safety Amendment Act, 2009. The Act administrated by the 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance sets out the laws for road 
use in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments provide stronger measures to 
help make our roads and highways safer. It includes measures 
to curb high-risk driving behaviours like distracted driving, 
excessive speed, and failing to stop for a police officer. 
 
In 2013, Mr. Speaker, excessive speed was a factor in 24 deaths 
on Saskatchewan roads. Distracted driving was a factor in 33 
fatal collisions. Mr. Speaker, that’s 57 lives lost needlessly in 
2013 because of high-risk driving behaviours. 
 
For this reason, we plan to implement a three-day licence 
suspension for employees who commit these high-risk 
behaviours while driving their employers’ vehicle. The 
suspension will be in addition to the seven-day vehicle seizure, 
Mr. Speaker, supporting regulations giving employers the 
chance to appeal their vehicle’s early release if it has been 
seized because of an employee’s actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment and its supporting regulations 
responds to the concerns brought forward by the business 
community, concerns that we have heard and have acted upon. 
Currently there is no driver licence suspension with commercial 
vehicle seizures and no appeal process for early release of the 
vehicle due to actions of the employee. This amendment and its 
supporting regulations change that. They provide swift, strong, 
and certain consequences for employees who commit certain 
high-risk behaviours. They also ensure their employers can 
continue doing business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to be tough on high-risk drivers, but we 
need to listen to the concerns of our stakeholders too. This 
change strikes a fair balance between the interests of 
commercial vehicle owners and the safety of Saskatchewan 
road users. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Traffic 
Safety Amendment Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again we’re pleased to give the initial comments on Bill 176, 
The Traffic Safety Amendment Act. And, Mr. Speaker, 
obviously, you know, as was pointed out, the excessive speed 
issue is certainly a challenge for a lot of people that travel and 

use our highway system, Mr. Speaker. The distracted driving, 
when we look at some of the deaths that occurred as a result of 
two of those activities, Mr. Speaker, it’s obviously a very deep 
concern. And many of us need to learn the lesson that excessive 
speed or distracted driving is something that needs our constant 
attention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to focus a bit on the three-day licence suspension matter. 
Obviously, you know, when companies lend vehicles to the 
employees for work, Mr. Speaker, there’s obviously a lot of 
trust that an employee would be afforded by his or her 
employer, Mr. Speaker. And I think a lot of the business 
community out there, they’re probably a bit concerned with the 
fact that . . . with two things. 
 
Number one is that obviously they don’t encourage their 
employee to go out there and break the law while using their 
company vehicle, Mr. Speaker. So when the vehicle is actually 
impounded, many of the business owners out there would say, 
well why am I paying for the impound fees? Why am I paying 
for the loss of my vehicle for a number of days? Why am I 
doing all this work? Because it was not me that was doing this. 
It was an employee, so why should I pay the consequences? 
Why should I pay these fines and why should I lose the access 
to my company vehicle as a result of an employee not following 
the rules? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s one of the issues that’s really, 
really important that we bring up, is that a lot of the businesses 
as we know in the fast-paced economy, that there’s a lot of 
vehicles out there, company vehicles. There’s probably 
hundreds of company vehicles from a number of companies that 
travel on a regular basis, being driven by employees. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the important note that I gather from some of the 
conversations, and the media as well, is the sense that many of 
these business owners are absolutely upset. They’re quite angry 
with the fact that, obviously when their employee gets caught 
either excessive speeding through certain zones or distracted 
driving, Mr. Speaker, that they lose their company vehicle. 
 
Now what happens to that employee after the employee’s 
brought into the employer’s office? There’s probably a lot of 
anger and a lot of frustration expressed at that particular 
meeting. And there may be even . . . I’m not even certain, Mr. 
Speaker, if there is a law that would allow the company to be 
able to fire that employee as a result of their company vehicle 
being seized for either excessive speed or for distracted driving, 
Mr. Speaker. So they come along. They obviously talk to the 
government, explain to them that this is not fair for the 
businesses and the company owners that lose their vehicle and 
have to pay fines and so on and so forth. 
 
So I guess the biggest thing that I would point out is that how 
the companies deal with the employees is also really important 
to ask on this particular bill. How would they be dealing with 
the discipline of that employee? Will that employee be fired? 
Will they be expected to pay the fine? Would he be expected to 
pay the loss of the vehicle or the impound fee? It’s very 
difficult to see how the employees would be treated in the event 
that they’re guilty of these infractions, and as a result of their 
infractions, companies lose access to vehicles. They’ve got to 
pay a fine to recover their vehicles. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of 
companies are quite upset with that, indicating that that was not 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6299 

their fault. That’s not their doing. 
 
And when they went back to the government to explain this, the 
government obviously said, whoops, we made another mistake 
here. We made another legislative error. So now we’ll come 
back and we’ll fix that again. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly 
what this particular bill is. It’s once again, Bill 176, the 
government of the day over there saying, whoops, we have to 
make another amendment. Whoops, we’ve got to do another 
change of rules here. We’ve got to do another Act. 
 
We’ve seen this is on a continual basis. Legislatively the 
government is way off track. They need to get these things 
figured out before they introduce bills so we don’t have an 
amendment to an amending bill that was amended from a 
different bill and changed from their name and amended once 
again. So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, it’s probably frustrating 
for a lot of people out there that like to follow sound process 
when it comes to governing, and obviously they’re not getting 
any evidence of that, nor are they getting that from the 
Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the companies themselves are quite angry 
about this. There’s a lot of frustration out there with how this 
matter is dealt with. The companies I think simply wanted to be 
able to say, look, if our employee is driving a vehicle and is 
guilty of any of the activities that warrants our company 
vehicles to be impounded, please let us know. We need our 
company truck back the same day. If there’s an impound fee 
and if we have to pay that fee, we will deal with our employee 
on that front, Mr. Speaker, but don’t hold up our vehicle for 
three days. Don’t hold up our vehicle for seven days. Let’s try 
and figure something out better in a sense that these companies’ 
issues and points would be heard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So a lot of the business people themselves are going to ask the 
question: if we don’t want our vehicles impounded for seven 
days, why should we want our vehicles impounded for three 
days? There’s got to be good consultation, and we need to ask 
the questions of the different companies that are quite upset 
with this, Mr. Speaker. And we need to seek their advice and 
see what their perspectives are on when it comes to their 
employees using their company vehicles. What is the best way 
to ensure that the guilty party, in this case the employee, learns 
from this and is aware from this? We need to make sure that it 
doesn’t cost the company any more money as a result of this 
behaviour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And above all else, consultation with the impacted companies 
should be undertaken, Mr. Speaker, should be undertaken. And 
there should be some great, great effort to try and minimize the 
anger and the frustration with these companies by simply sitting 
down with them, talking with them to see what options exist 
when you talk about employees using their company vehicles 
and not following the traffic laws, and then they in essence end 
up having egg on their face as a company, losing money as a 
result of the fine, and certainly not having access to their 
vehicles for a number of days and a number of processes. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of issues that need to be resolved on this. 
And if there’s any evidence of how the former minister of 

Highways handled, you know, the Regina south bypass project, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing evidence again in Bill 176, The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, that once again he’s back to the 
drawing board, trying to figure this whole mess out. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that ends up in having a lot of people in Saskatchewan 
frustrated and angry, and that includes a lot of businesses and 
business people that are quite angry about the rule around 
losing their company vehicle because an employee is not 
following the law when it comes to cellphone use or excessive 
speed, Mr. Speaker. We want the issues settled, and we all 
could learn from that. Nobody’s arguing about that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are some parties that are not guilty of 
the process. Simply trusting other people is important, Mr. 
Speaker, and we need to make sure that there’s good 
consultation, good discussion, and that you minimize backlash 
from the business owners that are being impacted by having 
their vehicles impounded, not just for three days in instances, 
Mr. Speaker, but previously seven days. Seven days back to 
three days does not really show a lot of understanding of some 
of these businesses, Mr. Speaker. So again I would point out 
that it’s important to consult with the business community. 
 
And the minister is asking, should we go back to seven days? 
Well you talk to the companies. You figure it out. You’re the 
government, Mr. Speaker. We’re just saying that, had you 
consulted with the business owners previous to this, they would 
tell you again that even three days is too long and the fines are 
too heavy for them to be paying for all the employees that may 
be driving and not following rules. Why should they pay the 
costs? That was their message, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly we need to find further consultation or seek 
further consultation on that particular perspective, Mr. Speaker. 
Because awareness and treating the employees fairly and 
respecting the business owners that are impacted by laws of this 
sort is paramount to being good government. And, Mr. Speaker, 
to date we have seen no evidence of that from the Saskatchewan 
Party government. So on that notion, I move we adjourn debate 
on Bill 176. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
Carried. 
 

Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Insurance Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Insurance Act was first passed 
in 1913, and despite certain amendments over the years has 
remained largely unchanged since that time. Several provisions 
are outdated and no longer reflect a financial services industry 
that is substantially integrated and making significant use of 
technology. 
 
The proposed amendments are a result of an extensive review 
project that has involved ongoing consultation with the 



6300 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

insurance industry and other jurisdictions over several years. 
This overall approach, the replacement and modernization of 
the Act, has the support of the insurance industry in 
Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Insurance Act will be 
replaced with a new Act to modernize the regulations of the 
Saskatchewan insurance industry in accordance with the 
regulatory frameworks in place in other Canadian jurisdictions, 
primarily Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part I of the Act deals with preliminary matters, 
including the definition for terms to be used in the Act and a 
specification of the application of the Act to certain forms of 
insurance. Key terms that are defined in this part for application 
throughout the Act include: beneficiary, contract of insurance, 
insurance, mutual insurance, mutual insurance company, 
provincial company, provincial crop hail company, reciprocal 
insurance exchange, special broker, spouse, and superintendent. 
 
This part includes new provisions to exempt salary continuance 
plans offered by employers and unions in the event of sickness 
or disability from licensing that creates the ability by regulation 
to impose capital and solvency requirements, audits and 
investigations, and require compliance with other standards and 
practices normally required of licensed insurance companies. 
 
It’ll exempt extended health benefit plans offered by employers 
and unions from licensing subject to similar regulatory 
governance. It will allow insurance agents to adjust property 
claims up to a prescribed dollar maximum such as $15,000, but 
not including third party liability claims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part II of the Act sets out the processes for the 
insuring: the licensing of insurers, establishes the duty of 
insurers to be licensed, sets the licence requirements, and 
provides for the expiry, amendment, suspension, or cancellation 
of those licences. This part carries forward much of the existing 
licensing process. 
 
This part also sets out the authority to establish the classes of 
insurance that insurers will be able to offer to undertake 
insurance for. Important revisions to the licence requirements 
includes updating the reporting requirements for licensed 
insurers, as well as including capital adequacy and liquidity 
provisions with respect to provincial companies. 
 
Part II also addresses the licensing of reciprocal insurance 
exchanges. This part includes new provisions that establish base 
capital requirements for a provincial company or 
extraprovincial companies seeking a licence, authorize the 
superintendent to require annual financial statements from 
licensed insurers, authorize the superintendent to suspend or 
cancel a licence, and require provincial companies to keep 
separate accounts for different classes of insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part III of the Act largely carries forward the 
detailed governance requirements for provincial companies 
including provincial mutual companies. It regulates the business 
transactions of provincial companies, the creation and 
maintenance of segregated funds and their transactions, and 
provides for the application to carry on insurance business in 
Saskatchewan. It addresses provincial mutual insurance 
companies and provides for their powers and restrictions, 
meetings, the duties and powers of boards of directors, and for 

demutualization. This part also addresses the amalgamation, 
transfer, and fundamental reinsurance of provincial companies, 
and the process if a licensed insurer leaves Saskatchewan as 
well as the process for liquidation of an insurer. 
 
With respect to provincial insurance companies, division 8 of 
part III establishes the head office, records, and financial 
statements required for insurers and actuaries; the adequacy of 
assets, capital adequacy and liquidity; and restrictions on 
investments. Part III also addresses portfolio limits, restrictions 
on transactions with related parties, and finally conflict of 
interest requirements for provincial insurance companies. 
 
This part includes new provisions to permit a provincial mutual 
company to convert to a provincial company with common 
shares, permit the voluntary liquidation of provincial 
companies, address liquidation orders made by the court 
including the powers of the court and the authority of the 
company to act after a liquidation order has been made, 
appointment of a liquidator, and costs. It also includes a guide 
to the use of actuaries by provincial companies including their 
appointment or designation, professional requirements, removal 
and replacement, and valuation standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part IV of the Act addresses fraternal societies. 
 

“fraternal society” means a non-profit body corporate 
formed for the purpose of making, with its members only, 
contracts of life, accident or sickness insurance in 
accordance with its constitution, bylaws and rules and this 
Act. 

 
Part IV addresses fraternal societies that act as insurers, such as 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation or the Knights of 
Columbus. This part maintains the existing restrictions on 
licensing of fraternal societies; addresses the constitution, 
bylaws, and rules; members’ rights and liabilities; reports and 
readjustment of contracts; as well as special rates and benefits 
with respect to fraternal societies that act as insurers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part V of the Act addresses insurance 
intermediaries and provides for major revisions regarding 
insurance councils. Insurance intermediary is used as a general 
term that includes an insurance agent, an insurer’s 
representative, a managing general agent, or third party 
administrator. 
 
With respect to insurance intermediaries, the Act provides for a 
new licensing regime which includes a process for 
recommendations for insurance agents and insurance 
representatives, initial screening of those individuals, and 
ongoing supervision. This part also provides for business 
conduct rules regarding insurance intermediaries and a 
reporting mechanism for any changes in status. It also sets up 
prohibitions and penalties with respect to insurance 
intermediaries. 
 
Part V also addresses the licensing insurers or adjusters and 
rules of conduct for adjusters. Restricted insurance agents are 
also addressed with procedures and limitations set out regarding 
their ability to conduct the business of insurance under a 
restricted licence. 
 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6301 

Division 5 of part V, Mr. Speaker, provides for a restructuring 
of the insurance councils and a redefinition of their powers and 
procedures. This part includes new provisions to restructure the 
Insurance Councils of Saskatchewan to consolidate the Hail 
Insurance Council’s responsibility with the General Insurance 
Council, to give the general council and Life Insurance Council 
the power to appoint advisory committees to provide advice to 
the councils on crop insurance matters, restricted insurance 
agents’ licensing, etc. New provisions also create a new 
insurance council responsible for only providing administrative 
services to the two other councils. 
 
Licensed managing general agents has a separate category. Also 
in order to obtain a licence, we will require MGAs [managing 
general agent] or licensed managing general agents, insurance 
businesses, and life insurance agents to be recommended by a 
licensed insurer offering the same class of insurance for which 
the person applying seeks to be licensed. It will also require 
insurance to carry out screening of any applicants that they 
recommend for a licence. It will add regulation-making power 
to set the minimum number of companies that licensed agents 
must have contracts with before they can hold themselves out as 
insurance brokers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part VI addresses unsolicited insurance, 
reinsurance, and special brokers. This part sets out restrictions 
in dealing with unlicensed insurers providing unsolicited 
insurance and requires them to provide notice to the 
superintendent if contracts are entered into. An example of this 
would be where American insurance company cold-calls 
Saskatchewan residents offering warranty extensions on an 
existing warranty. 
 
This part also addresses reinsurance with an unlicensed insurer 
and sets out more detailed requirements regarding insurance 
through special brokers and the requirements for an agent 
operating with a special broker’s endorsement, including the 
application of tax requirements regarding premiums received by 
special brokers. This part includes new provisions for special 
brokers that consider the application, eligibility, and issuance of 
a special broker’s endorsement; the effect of an endorsement if 
the status of the special broker’s insurance licence changes; 
reporting requirements; and bookkeeping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part VII of the Act is a particularly important 
initiative. It provides for a new stand-alone part to address 
essential consumer protection requirements and provide for 
specific market conduct rules for insurers. The Act sets out 
general rules regarding payments, disclosure, and the role of 
intermediaries with respect to an insurance contract. It also 
establishes specific fair practices in the conduct of the insurance 
business that all insurers and adjusters will be required to 
adhere to. The part also provides direction regarding the ability 
to rescind the contract of insurance, the refund of a premium, 
and adequate notice and disclosure provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part VIII of the Act addresses a broad range of 
contracts of insurance. Division 1 sets out general provisions 
regarding contracts of insurance regarding form of policy and 
applications. 
 
Division 2 addresses property and casualty insurance 
provisions, including providing for statutory conditions for 

contracts, the contents of a contract of insurance, waiver and 
estoppel, and disclosure requirements. 
 
Division 3 addresses automobile insurance, provides for the 
content and form of the statutory conditions for those contracts 
as well as setting out specific liabilities and exemptions in 
motor vehicle liability policies. 
 
Division 4 of part VIII provides for the rules and restrictions 
regarding executing crop hail insurance contracts in the 
province, including setting out statutory conditions. 
 
Division 5 of part VIII addresses the contents of life insurance 
policies, the process for formation of the contract, the 
beneficiaries, the specific dealings with the contract, and 
proceedings under the contract for enforcement. 
 
Division 6 addresses accident and sickness insurance in much 
the same manner as life insurance is addressed in division 5. It 
sets out insurance requirements and the contents of a policy, 
formation of the contract requirements, beneficiaries, and 
statutory conditions. 
 
Part 7 of this part establishes the regulatory authority for a more 
fulsome dispute resolution process. This part includes new 
provisions that change the licensing trigger that determines 
where property and casualty insurance companies are required 
to be licensed from the deemed made-in-Saskatchewan test to a 
test that looks to whether the insurer is transacting insurance 
with a Saskatchewan resident or if the property is located in 
Saskatchewan. It will also include a requirement that requires 
insurance companies to specifically identify provisions in an 
insurance policy where the amount payable for a loss will be 
reduced rather than current vague wording, “this policy contains 
a clause which may limit an amount payable.” 
 
[15:45] 
 
It will prevent an insurer from voiding the policy for alleged 
fraud with respect to material facts represented by an insured 
after two years where the insurer had the means available to 
ascertain the accuracy of those facts within two years of the 
policy’s issuance but neglected to do so. It will also allow 
innocent insureds to recover losses under insurance contracts 
where they are not a party to another named insured’s criminal 
act of arson, fraud, etc. It will give discretion to crop hail 
insurance umpires adjudicating disputed awards to producers 
for hail damage to crops. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part IX of the Act provides the superintendent 
with general powers to conduct the regulatory scrutiny 
necessary to ensure compliance with the Act and the protection 
of the public interest. It also provides for an asset appraisal 
process and a process whereby, if necessary, the superintendent 
may take control of the assets of an insured to protect the public 
interest. 
 
Part IX sets out the standard offence, penalty, and enforcement 
provisions regarding contraventions under the Act. This part 
includes new provisions that provide for appraisals of assets 
where a provincial company takes a mortgage on real property, 
permit a provincial company to enter into a compliance 
undertaking with the superintendent. Then, so long as the 



6302 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

company complies with the undertaking, the superintendent will 
not pursue a prosecution against the company on the subject 
matter of the undertaking and establish the circumstances in 
which the superintendent may take control of the assets of a 
provincial company or an ex-provincial company where 
necessary to protect the public interest. 
 
Part X of the Act provides for the appointment of the 
superintendent of insurance, sets out his or her general powers 
under the Act, and requires the maintenance of insurance 
registers. It addresses the quasi-judicial role of the 
superintendent in hearing a variety of matters under the Act 
such as a decision to amend, modify, or vary terms and 
conditions imposed on a licence. This part also imposes on the 
superintendent statistical reporting requirements and authorizes 
the superintendent to commence actions or intervene in actions 
on behalf of consumers. Part X also sets out the appeal process 
for proceedings under this Act to an appeal panel at the FCAA 
[Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan]. 
 
Finally this part addresses restrictions on access to records, 
agreements with other jurisdictions, and agreements with the 
industry ombudsman associations such as the General Insurance 
OmbudService and the OmbudService for Life & Health 
Insurance. This part includes new provisions to authorize the 
superintendent to issue interpretation bulletins to insurers, 
insurance agents, and adjusters with respect to any matter of 
practice, procedure, and regulation. It will establish the hearing 
and appeal process for insurance agent compliance matters at 
both the insurance councils and the FCAA levels. 
 
Part XI of the Act provides for the necessary consequential 
amendments, transitional and repeal provisions. These are 
lengthy due to the change in name of the Act and the need to 
change references in other legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this new Act, the insurance sector will enjoy 
the flexibility it needs to expand and evolve in a rapidly 
changing environment, and it will ensure that the superintendent 
has full suite of governance powers to ensure compliance with 
the Act. Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it will also ensure that 
consumer protection through fair process in the insurance sector 
remains a singular operating priority for all stakeholders. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 
of The Insurance Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act be read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
have gone through Bill 177 at great lengths. We have a great 
number of questions. We’ve researched the bill and, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a wide array of issues that are really, really 
important. Like I said at the outset, we want to be able to pay 
attention to the bill. We have gone through it as best we can and 
as quickly as we can, but there are issues and concerns that we 
have on this bill. Always you want to be able to make sure that 
the minister has enough time to be able to explain the bill and 
thoroughly with us as well as to what the changes are. 
 

As we indicated at the outset, and he’s pointed this out during 
his presentation, it is an extensive bill. There are a number of 
changes attached to the insurances of our province, so it’s 
important that we get it right. 
 
And one of the first things we’re going to do as an opposition is 
to consult with the various stakeholders that are involved with 
this bill. We want to be able to see what the changes are, 
obviously look at some of the matters that we’re dealing with. 
Whether it’s flooding, home insurance, whether it’s fire 
insurance, Mr. Speaker, there’s all these matters that are of 
significant interest to the people of Saskatchewan. It is a huge 
bill. It is a huge undertaking. We need to make sure we have the 
time and resources to do the exact study that is required to see 
what the bill is all about, what the changes are, and how that 
will affect the average person out there, the average family, and 
of course the business community as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of questions on this bill. We will 
be paying very close attention to some of the issues that the 
minister has identified. We will be consulting with 
stakeholders. And we’ll certainly bring forward the weaknesses 
of the bill itself in due time, Mr. Speaker. The break gives us 
the opportunity to research the bill, and we will be presenting a 
number of issues and concerns on the bill as we begin those 
consultations with the various stakeholders. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, a lot of questions remain on this 
bill, but I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 177, The 
Insurance Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Assiniboia has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No, 177, The Insurance Act. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 172 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 172 — The 
Naturopathic Medicine Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
As always, I’m honoured to be able to rise from my seat and 
provide comment on the debates of the day, and in particular 
today on An Act respecting the Practice of Naturopathic 
Medicine and the College of Naturopathic Doctors of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is replacing another Act. We seem to have a lot of that 
happening this session, Mr. Speaker. And in particular it’s 
replacing The Naturopathy Act which was introduced in, I guess 
before 1978, but it’s been amended a number of times. But it 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6303 

looks like this government has taken upon itself to get rid of the 
old Act and start fresh with a new one. As a result, we don’t 
have any explanatory notes being provided to us nor do we have 
a side-by-side which explains if anything is being kept from the 
old bill or if everything is being thrown out. 
 
I looked at some of the definitions and certainly there are some 
definitions that are being retained in the new bill from the old 
bill. There’s a couple of other clauses that appear to have some 
similarities but without sort of a side-by-side or an explanatory 
note provided to us by the officials at the Department of Justice, 
it would be difficult to sort of comment on that in any great 
detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another thing that we don’t have in front of us is a good 
explanation by the minister as to why they felt it necessary to 
bring this bill forward. He gave a very, very brief introduction 
to the bill in his second reading speech on December 3rd, 
basically telling us that the bill came from I guess the 1950s, 
according to him, and hasn’t really been updated since its 
inception in 1955, which really belies the amendments that have 
been made to the bill, at least one, two, three, four times. But 
apparently the amendments were not enough to warrant an 
update in the mind of the minister. 
 
Anyways, he’s talking about modernizing. We know that 
people are turning to naturopaths in greater numbers, that they 
provide a service for a lot of people that is a complement to 
Western medicine. And certainly I’ve availed myself of a 
naturopath for some of my health concerns, and it’s certainly 
something that I think a lot of people are doing these days. 
There’s a lot of interesting ways to treat health, and we know 
that Western medicine is only one part of that and there are 
other ways that people look for health advice and medical 
advice, I guess. 
 
One of the big changes we have here is that there’s a new 
college. They’re establishing a College of Naturopathic Doctors 
of Saskatchewan, and it’s just really a change of name. We 
often see this government likes to do that, change names of 
things to give them a fresh . . . It’s like a new coat of paint, I 
guess, in some ways, tuning up the names. We did that with the 
applied institute of SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology]. It’s now a polytech, is the new 
popular name for the polytechnic. And now we see it here with 
the . . . it used to be the Saskatchewan Association of 
Naturopathic Practitioners Council, which is now the College of 
Naturopathic Doctors of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I guess the role of the association has also greatly increased 
in this new bill. They will be a regulatory body and will have 
the power to stop others from providing services. So that’s a 
good thing because it’s protecting us from people who are 
hanging up a shingle without any sort of authorization or proper 
training. So we don’t know that, and it’s going to be very 
helpful for the members of the public to know that if they go to 
see a naturopath, this is a doctor that has been registered by this 
body, a professional body, rather than somebody just hanging 
up a shingle and saying, hey I’m a naturopath; come and see 
me. So that’s an important change I think for the public. As 
members of the public turn to naturopathic medicine in greater 
numbers all the time, we want to ensure that they’re receiving 
good treatment from people that are properly trained. 

So the bill itself is quite extensive. It’s in much greater detail 
than the previous bill. We have the college being established in 
the first part. We have the council being established in the 
second part. And then the bylaws themselves I think speak to 
the real change in approach here. In this particular Act there’s 
bylaws that go on for three pages. There’s probably 50 or 60 
items that the bylaws can attend to, whereas in the previous Act 
I think the bylaw section there was about 15 or 14, 13 items that 
were identified in the bylaws. So you can see that the 
complexity of the bill has certainly been greatly increased, so 
that’s important. 
 
Once again it’s difficult for me to think above the din of the 
Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is really unfortunate 
when some members want to enter the debate and they don’t 
have . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’m having some difficulty hearing 
the member. I would ask that if there are conversations 
happening that they perhaps be taken outside the chambers. I 
recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I too was having trouble hearing myself. So thank you for 
the request. 
 
Yes, the bylaws are much more extensive, much more befitting 
I think of a regulatory college. And then I would like to be able 
to take time to compare some of the requirements in this set of 
bylaws to the ones for the medical college as well. And I would 
suspect, and I think from the minister’s comments, they’re 
trying to modernize these requirements as well. 
 
One of the big changes is that only certain people now who are 
accepted by the college can use the word doctor. They have to 
identify themselves as a doctor of naturopathic medicine. 
Again, I think that’s a good protection for the members of the 
public to make sure that the people that they’re dealing with are 
actually registered and recognized by their peers. 
 
A number of new changes on discipline, so there’s all 
provisions for disciplinary hearings within the naturopathic 
college, or the College of Naturopathic Doctors. Again, I don’t 
know if this is similar to the new registry that the Minister of 
Education is setting up for teachers. So we know they’re a 
professional body as well, and whether or not they can 
self-regulate, I don’t know if the government is appointing 
some of its own appointees to the board or not. And that’s 
something that we need to look at, whether there’s an 
inconsistency here in the way the government is treating these 
types of colleges vis-à-vis the profession of teaching. And then 
there’s some general provisions at the end. 
 
So this is an interesting bill. I think what’s really missing from 
the minister’s introductory comments is, who asked for this? 
Where did it come from? Who did he consult with? We don’t 
have any information in relation to that at all in his introductory 
comments. So as it so turns out, today being the last day of 
session before we reconvene in March, we certainly will want 
to take an opportunity to ask those questions in the next little 
while before we meet again and have an opportunity to find out 
if this is actually meeting the needs of the doctors of 
naturopathic medicine, but also the patients, the people who 



6304 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

seek the assistance of a naturopathic doctor. So at this point, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 172, The Naturopathic Medicine Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 172. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:00] 
 

Bill No. 170 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 170 — The Fire 
Safety Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise to speak to Bill No. 170, An Act respecting Fire Safety, 
Fire Prevention and Emergency Response Services and making 
consequential amends to other Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again this is a consolidation bill or a whole 
bill that brings together a number of changes that have 
happened over the last number of years since 1992 when the 
previous legislation was passed. That bill was called The Fire 
Prevention Act. And, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we do not 
get the side-by-side comparisons of old legislation to new 
legislation like they do in Alberta and Ontario and some other 
places, and this is another example of a bill which would 
benefit from that kind of information being made available to 
the public and also to the opposition. 
 
I know my colleague made the comment about The Insurance 
Act that is even a much greater, much longer bill that has the 
same aspect. And so I would once again suggest to the Minister 
of Justice that arrangements be made to follow the practices of 
some other provinces and make sure that everybody gets a 
chance to see how this type of a bill, Bill 170, changes the law 
or doesn’t change the law, but at least you can see where the 
various clauses come from in previous legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have this bill. It’s interesting to think about 
the roots of the fire prevention bill or now The Fire Safety Act is 
the short name going to be used I think for this particular bill. 
We know that Saskatchewan has had a provincial fire 
commissioner for many years, and the whole profession of 
firefighting has been around obviously for centuries. But in 
Western Canada the Saskatchewan Association of Fire Chiefs 
has set out how the Saskatchewan provincial fire commissioner 
was often the one that hosted various fire chiefs coming 
together. 
 
And the first reference they have to our provincial fire 
commissioner is in December 1st and 2nd of 1930, when the 
fire commissioner hosted a convention here in Regina. Well he 
hosted a meeting and then they had their first convention in 

Regina in the next year. And I think it’s important to note that 
this office of the fire commissioner, which is very much the 
centre part of the legislation that we’re talking about today, has 
this long history and this long place in the business of fighting 
fires and preventing fires in Saskatchewan. Because the 
question comes, well what is the office of the fire 
commissioner, and what is the job of that particular office? 
 
And I think it’s possible that we should at this point reference 
the mission of the office of the fire commissioner as stated in 
the information provided by that office. It’s dated July of 1999, 
but it’s based on the 1992 legislation, and I think it’s how the 
office has been operating over the last two decades of operation. 
So basically the mission of the fire commissioner’s office is: 
 

. . . to provide communities, fire departments, and 
emergency service organizations throughout Saskatchewan 
with the information, education and leadership to enhance 
their capabilities to protect citizens from the devastation of 
fire, environmental, natural and man made emergencies. 

 
And so how does the office of the fire commissioner fulfill the 
mission? Basically it fulfills it through the mandate that’s set 
out in the present fire prevention Act of 1992. And so the first 
activity that they have is, “promotion and encouragement of fire 
prevention and the protection of life and property against fire.” 
So that’s their number one task. 
 
Their second task is that they collect and disseminate 
information respecting fires in Saskatchewan. Obviously that’s 
to make sure that we learn from the different fire incidents that 
happen in the province so that we can work on the prevention of 
further fires like that. 
 
The third one is that they keep detailed “. . . records of all fires 
occurring in Saskatchewan, including the cause, origin, and 
circumstances of each fire and other information respecting 
each fire that the fire commissioner considers appropriate.” So 
this is a record of the fires in the province. 
 
Fourth task that they have is “investigating fires or causing fires 
to be investigated . . .” So they will do the investigation 
themselves, or they will delegate or designate people to do 
investigations of fires, and also “. . . by holding inquiries into 
any fire . . . [where] the fire commissioner considers it 
necessary to do so in order to ascertain the cause, origin, and 
circumstances of the fire.” And I guess all of us will know 
about fires in our communities where it’s been somewhat 
unclear what caused a fire, so there was a whole investigation to 
find out what the circumstances are. 
 
The fifth area that they have is administering and enforcing the 
legislation and regulations within parkland which is considered 
under The Parks Act, so that would be provincial parks, and 
within regional parks under The Regional Parks Act of 1979. 
 
The sixth activity is to provide training courses in firefighting 
and prevention. 
 
And then finally there’s a catch-all phrase to do “. . . any other 
duties that the minister may direct.” And I know one of the 
activities that happens in that category is the international 
collaboration around the Underwriters Laboratories designation 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6305 

of electrical cords and appliances and other things to make sure 
that they’re appropriate for use within the electrical system that 
we have in Saskatchewan and other related kinds of activities 
which involve co-operation right across North America and in 
some cases right around the world. 
 
And so we have this legislation that’s important in setting out 
some of the tasks and the goals that are necessary for fire safety 
in the province. 
 
Now what we also know is that one of the interesting little 
changes in the new legislation from the previous legislation is 
that the fire commissioner can appoint fire chiefs for parkland 
or for a regional park. And that’s different than what used to be 
there because before, what it said, that you would basically 
make sure there’s a fire service, but now there’s the ability to 
appoint a fire chief. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s because in our province 
since 1992, we have had many more communities that are 
permanent communities that have developed on leased land or 
purchased land within park boundaries or right on the edge of 
park boundaries or in regional parks. And in fact many times 
when you go to various parts of the province, you actually have 
more people living in the park area than you do in some of the 
smaller towns. And so the legislation anticipates that and will 
allow for the appointment of a fire chief in a provincial park or 
in a regional park. And I think that’s a good activity, and it’s 
one that will basically continue to be an interesting challenge 
because many times the communities that develop there have all 
of the characteristics of the local, you know, urban 
municipality, but they don’t have all of the services, including 
fire, including policing, and this is an attempt to at least start the 
discussion about how fire safety, fire services are provided in 
some of those locations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the numbers of activities that are covered by 
this legislation are quite extensive. I know that what we will be 
doing is asking, obviously, some of the people who are 
involved in firefighting to give us any comments as we move 
towards the spring session. We have had some discussion with 
the firefighters, but some of these things here, it’s not entirely 
clear what the impact of it is until we actually see some of the 
regulations that will be part of this. And we’ll also be talking 
with municipalities. I’m not sure if it’s increasing any costs for 
municipalities in any way or if it’s dealing with some of the 
issues that municipalities have around the numbers of 
firefighters and who does which work, where, and how some of 
those things happen. 
 
So the bill is here. We’re going to be continuing to look at it. I 
know that my colleague the other day had a chance to do quite 
an extensive review on a clause-by-clause basis. I’m not going 
to be doing that today, but I know that we’ll be looking at it. 
And once again I make a request of the Minister of Justice that 
he actually provide us with the side-by-side comparison on this 
legislation so that it makes it easier for the public and for us to 
understand exactly what they’re changing. 
 
I note there are a few spelling mistakes in the legislation itself, 
and I’m not sure if it will need an amendment to go ahead or 
not, but we’ll find that out when we get into committee. But at 
this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will move to adjourn debate. 

Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 145 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 145 — The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise to continue to speak about Bill No. 145, An Act 
respecting the Waiver of Fees and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. And if the members will recall, I had 
been able to go through all 16 recommendations of the Law 
Reform Commission of Saskatchewan final report dated May 
2013, and we were able to see which of the recommendations 
had been accepted and are actually part of this legislation and 
also which of the recommendations were deferred to another 
time. 
 
I think that the concept behind the legislation is to meet the 
report, to look at and deal with most of the recommendations 
that were there. Ultimately the purpose of this legislation should 
be to make sure that people that don’t have a lot of money are 
not in a situation where they have no access to justice. In other 
words they will have access to justice. We know that that 
concept is clearly one that all governments support. It becomes 
then a practical question of, how do people get access to the 
courts? 
 
So this particular legislation will make it much easier for people 
who are receiving legal aid or getting advice from the Pro Bono 
Law or CLASSIC [Community Legal Assistance Services for 
Saskatoon Inner City Inc.] here in Saskatchewan, to make their 
entry into the court system. There’s still a number of challenges 
for people who don’t qualify for legal aid around the costs of 
justice, and they will have to be addressed in some other place. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point I think that I have no 
further comments and I look forward to asking questions in 
committee in the spring after I’ve had a chance to talk to some 
of the people that are directly affected by this. And so at this 
point I will move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:15] 



6306 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

Bill No. 146 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 146 — The Fee 
Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 
portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on Bill 146, The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 
2014. And as my colleague before me was talking about some 
of the changes, proposed changes that were coming, and 
amendments, again this consequential amendment just makes 
some changes in some of the other Acts, Whether it’s language, 
it just has to adjust some of the changes that are required 
because you’re introducing legislation. So really at this time on 
this bill I have no further questions about it, and I’m prepared to 
adjourn debate on this consequential amendments 146. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 146. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 144 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 144 — The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to join in on Bill 144, The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Amendment Act, 2014. Before starting out I guess I’d like to just 
talk a little bit about violence. And I know the minister has 
made a number of points clear through his words he shared in 
his second reading, his second reading that he read into the 
record of some of the changes that are coming forward. 
 
But before I get into that, I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like 
to talk about some of the challenges that some of the families 
face out there with violence. Today, whether it’s 
husband-and-wife domestic violence we talk about, they’re 
making a change so that guardianship . . . There’s different 
reasons why you can actually have the changes to protect 
individuals — whether it’s children, individuals, I guess, 
seniors — there’s some changes, caregivers that would take 
care of individuals. 
 
But you know, we have challenges many families have faced. 
They’ve lived in poverty. And sometimes, you know, you look 
at the poverty rate, you look at overcrowding, within families’ 
own issues that they’re facing, and you see some of the 
challenges that are facing many families — frustration trying to 

provide for your family, the frustration. And you know, you see 
addictions affect many families, many individuals. 
 
You know, and I think about challenges growing up as a young 
boy. I look at the challenges that faced our own family. You 
know, those are things that you’d like to hide, and you don’t 
want anyone to know that there’s violence or anything like that 
going on in the home. You want to . . . As a kid you’re scared 
of it. You’re scared for your loved ones. 
 
And you see that type of activity going on. For young families 
to go through that, young children to have to see violence in the 
home, and violence — whether it’s family members, could be 
cousins, whatever — just seeing sometimes the violence that 
goes on and people get into, there’s many different reasons why 
it happens. And we know that we have to say, no more. We 
have to stop the violence that’s going on. It does not respect the 
individual. And it takes so much away from individuals when 
someone feels like they’re being attacked physically, whether 
it’s verbally. There’s many ways of abusing people, and it’s 
gone on, you know, too long. 
 
And I’m glad that people are saying, whether it’s students I 
watch and I talk to, whether you see the elders, whether you see 
different organizations and groups calling for an end to violence 
against women, violence against anyone in our country, in our 
province. And for that, well you hear people saying for the 
world, it’s too much. Too many people are being harmed and 
hurt by people who maybe are angry for whatever reason, not 
getting what they want. Whether they’re bullies, they hurt other 
people. They hurt other people not only with physical violence 
but with their words. And we’ve seen some changes coming 
forward in legislation that we agreed to today, you know, in this 
House, again, that moved forward. We had many people with 
the human rights bill. 
 
And I just see so much, sometimes frustration from people. And 
people caring and wanting to do change, whether it’s our 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], our city constables 
having to deal with violence. And they go into those situations 
and probably for them . . . I can’t speak for them because I’ve 
never had to deal with that in the sense as, you know, police 
officers have to go right there. And they’re the first ones on the 
scene, and they probably deal with children and, you know, 
many children sort of suffer. So when I think about violence 
overall and some of the changes that are needed. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to just talk a little 
bit about also, like, there are so many challenges that families 
face, and there’s reasons why. People go to doing addictions, if 
that’s what it is. Whether it’s living in poverty, many challenges 
out there, trying to provide for your family. We don’t know 
what the causes are, but we see the families that are suffering. 
And whether it’s overcrowding, like I said, whether it’s trying 
to make ends meet, trying to put food on the table to feed a 
family, husband and wife, and you’re seeing it. 
 
But this amendment gives not only that domestic, it also gives 
for those individuals who are caregivers, to make sure they’re 
doing right with someone. And you might be . . . And I think it 
goes further, and we’ll find out when we’re in committee. And I 
know we’re going to ask people.  
 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6307 

And this is a bill I think that will gain a lot of attention from 
people. I have talked to individuals who are concerned and want 
to bring forward some, I guess, questions, concerns they have. 
And I know we’re going to reach out to them. We’re going to 
talk to them. I’ve met with a couple already. And I know I will 
share that with my colleagues are going to hear from them. 
They’re going to put some information, and they have some 
data and some, I guess, alarming . . . And the need, what they 
need from our government, not only provincially but federally, 
to protect, you know, women and men and families, anyone 
that’s in the domestic, you know, situation or anyone that’s 
being, you know, abused in any way, there is provisions that 
need to be taken, and the government has to do that.  
 
And people rely on the government, the government to protect 
you, you know, introduce legislation that will protect the most 
vulnerable. And sometimes those could be caregivers that are in 
a home and someone speaks for them in decision-making, 
making some tough decisions. So we have to go a long way to 
look at what are the changes coming and to work through that, 
and what are the challenges. 
 
And there are many challenges, but it’s good that we see 
changes coming in, and we can have a discussion. We can go 
out to the community, to our province and ask people, you 
know, what is the best way? What can we do? We need to talk 
to a lot of our Aboriginal organizations who have a lot of 
information. And it’s not just the Aboriginal organizations. 
There’s many organizations that can bring light and shed some 
light and some meaningful change that will maybe lessen the 
challenge and abuse and the violence that’s against individuals 
in this province. Because I think for too long there has been 
way too much violence against women, against anyone, and it 
needs to change. 
 
And I think we, as legislative members and colleagues on both 
sides, need to take a stand saying, no more. We stand against 
this; we stand with those that need our support. And I hope all 
members will do that. And as an individual I know there has 
been different times where we wear ribbons. And back home 
we talk about ending violence against women and ending 
violence against our brothers and our sisters. 
 
And many organizations do a great thing to bring awareness, 
awareness about such issues that face so many challenges. And 
whether it’s verbal, like I said, whether it’s physical, there are 
many — mental. There’s many different ways one can do harm 
to another individual. And you know, words sometimes can be 
just as, as we see in this House, can be pretty vicious sometimes 
and can do some damage. But having said that, we hope at the 
end of the day we’ll work in a positive way. We’ll get the 
information we need, and we’ll get this right. And we’ll make 
sure that families and individuals, children, students, those that 
are being, you know, in a situation where they’re being abused 
or domestic violence that it ends the violence. 
 
You know, I think about missing Aboriginal women, you know, 
and murdered Aboriginal women. I think about that: whether 
it’s brothers, sisters, there are so many Aboriginal people and 
many citizens that go missing. And there’s groups that are 
raising that alarm bell. They’re calling for a commission, you 
know. They want to have a task force to look at this to find out 
and to sit down and find out what ways our governments can do 

better. And we need to stand together. We need to support those 
individuals. 
 
And I hope all members of this House and all citizens of our 
province see what’s going on with missing, murdered, and 
Aboriginal women. It is alarming. It is shameful. And our 
record, even in Saskatchewan, is not very . . . And I think I’ve 
heard different people say our record’s probably one of the 
worst ones. I hope that’s not, but I’ve heard people say that. 
And I kind of . . . You know, you don’t want to pay attention to 
it, in the sense of hopefully it isn’t, because we’ve got to work 
together. We have a population where it’s rural, urban, North. 
We have to work together. We have to make sure our most 
vulnerable are protected. 
 
And this government and this Legislative Assembly has a job to 
do. And we as individuals, as individual citizens and as 
individual persons have a job to do. And I know we need to do 
that, and we have to work in a very positive way. And I’m 
hoping at the end of the day, we can work together. If we have 
areas where we can improve things by suggestions by citizens 
coming forward, different groups, organizations, leaders who 
are calling the calls and saying it has to end, it has to stop. The 
violence has to stop. 
 
And, you know, I just want to say a big thank you, and I mean 
this from my heart, to all those individuals out there working 
hard to end violence against women, to end violence against 
citizens of our province. There’s so many different groups who 
are trying to bring the awareness and do a great job. And 
sometimes, you know, it probably isn’t a very thankful position 
they’re put in. But I just want to say to them, I thank you for 
raising the concerns for our children, whether they’re in school, 
whether they’re at home, for those that see the violence, the 
awareness. And then I think about the shelters, and you know, 
there’s many shelters out there that . . . 
 
You look at domestic violence, and you look at those issues that 
face those families. And when they’re terrified, the children are 
so terrified, I know what that’s like. I know what that’s like to 
be a child and you don’t have any control. You don’t know 
what’s going on, but you have to go through that. And you love 
your parents. And you love your caregivers, but you go through 
those challenges. And for any family and any child, it is so 
tough on those families and those children. 
 
So I hope we’re there and trying to support and putting an end 
to it, and we all make a stand when we see it going on in our 
communities. And you know, sometimes we don’t want to get 
involved because oh, oh, don’t get involved. Don’t get 
involved. Look the other way. Try to ignore it like you didn’t 
see it. And I think it’s time that we all have to stand together as 
a province, but also as citizens and say, no more. We will make 
a stand. I’m going to get involved. I will make a phone call. If it 
is to the authority, I will do that. I will make sure those kids, 
that person is protected. It doesn’t matter if it’s a senior. It 
doesn’t matter if it’s a, you know, a man, a woman, child, a 
senior. It doesn’t matter about their age. It just means we have 
to make a stand saying we have to protect and we have to say 
no. 
 
And you know, when I look at this, there’s some of the changes. 
And I know one of the changes that they’re going to talk about, 



6308 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

there’s a number of them, but they’re going to change it from 
domestic to interpersonal, individuals. And if that’s one of the 
changes they’re making, changing it from domestic, then that 
opens it up to a broader group of people and I guess there can 
be changes made. I’m hoping at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the government has it right. They’re willing to make 
changes if it need be, but to listen to the people. Who did they 
consult? 
 
It’s a good start, and we need to end it. There’s so much going 
on when it comes to violence, you know, violence for whatever 
reasons. We don’t understand it. There can be addictions, it can 
be under mental health issues. There’s so many different 
reasons why it happens. And you can point fingers at it and 
blame, but at the end of the day we need to stop it. We need to 
do the right thing. 
 
So at this point I know I’m going to reach out, and I’ve already 
got some individuals that are going to give us some information 
to our side of the House and to make sure we can share that 
with government. And we’ll share that with the government 
freely when we’re asking questions to get the information when 
it goes to committee, but we’ll do our part. 
 
So at this point, you know, I’m prepared to allow my colleagues 
to have other discussions on it, and I’m prepared to adjourn 
debate on this bill. I think it’s an important bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. There’s a lot of work to do, but we have to continue 
working to protect the most vulnerable. So with that, I adjourn 
debate on the bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 144, The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 152 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 152 — The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi 
intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on Bill 152, I just want to just add some . . . I know this is 
consequential amendments that they’re making and come 
forward. And just for the record I’ll read into the record exactly 
what it is so you can . . . The bill simply amends the bilingual 
Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 to update the reference to the Act 
from The Victims of Domestic Violence Act to the victim of 
interpersonal victims Act. So that’s the change, consequential 
change that’s coming forward. It’s a pretty straightforward 
amendment, the consequential amendment Act, going on the 
previous bill. 

So at this day, on this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hour, I’m 
prepared to adjourn debate on this consequential amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 152. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:30] 
 

Bill No. 141 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 141 — The 
Archives and Public Records Management Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to enter into discussion here this afternoon as it relates to Bill 
No. 141, the archives amendment Act.  
 
Certainly the archives play a very important role in our 
province, moving forward historically in weaving together our 
intricate story and our history and preserving that public record. 
And certainly we need to make sure that the changes that are 
being made here today serve the best interests of our province, 
that they reflect the modern pressures and challenges that 
archivists are facing to make sure they have the resources and 
tools required to them. And when you think of all the history 
that is told from archives, and a history that’s important to 
inform decisions into the future, there’s so many reasons why 
this is important. 
 
Certainly I know of the importance of the archives. I also know 
of the incredible wealth of history and information that’s in 
place. I remember going, just a few years back, to search a 
certain document, and I thought I’d be in and out. And then, 
Mr. Speaker, all of sudden I got into a whole wealth of 
resources that were there that provided such an unique history 
that I end up spending hours in the archives, and certainly 
appreciate the role they fulfill to members of the legislature like 
us, but most importantly to the public as a whole. 
 
I know that this . . . I understand that this will make, some of 
the changes, make rules more strict and will ensure more 
documents are preserved. That seems to be a good thing. 
 
There’s definitely questions that are important as to what 
consultation occurred to inform this process: who did they reach 
out to, they as in government, to make sure that they get this 
right and making sure that the system’s in place, not just to have 
a new rule around capturing more information, but then making 
sure that there’s adequate systems to maintain those records, 
make them accessible to the public. And certainly all these are 
important. 
 
I know, like any other bill, we’ll be scrutinizing this legislation, 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6309 

working directly with community partners and stakeholders 
who will certainly inform our dialogue as it relates to this bill. 
 
I know that the minister has put, you know, significant 
statements onto the record at the time that he introduced the 
bill. I appreciate that, everything from the fines that he’s laid 
out to the governance changes that are being introduced, and as 
well clarifying the role of the Provincial Archivist. I’m sure 
these are all helpful pieces. He speaks as well to the importance 
of the Provincial Archives, something that certainly we share. 
 
An important piece is keeping modern and making sure that you 
have the tools that you need, the resources that you need to 
meet the modern times. And then when you think of electronic 
records and the Internet, certainly there’s new questions that 
need to be answered on that front. And making sure new tools 
avail to make sure that archives can be relevant and strong and 
purposeful for many, many years to come to aid the future 
development of our province. And I know there’s also some 
changes that have been brought forward because of The Health 
Information Protection Act, the HIPA legislation. And so we’ll 
want to make sure we understand the full consequences of those 
decisions. 
 
But you know, I know in the coming months we’ll be engaging 
and listening to community stakeholders and partners to make 
sure this legislation captures the need. We’ll also be of course 
making sure that the resources that are required are in place. 
That’s a critical piece. And we’ll certainly look forward to 
bringing forward the consultation we hear and the questions that 
may emerge to the minister to seek clarity in the processes 
before us. At this point in time I’ll adjourn debate on Bill No. 
141, the archives amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 141. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 142 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 142 — The 
Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
these consequential amendments are in direct response to the 
bill that was introduced, Bill No. 141, the archives amendment 
Act. These are the consequential amendments to follow. 
Certainly it’s going to be important for us to make sure that 
government’s done its homework in making sure they have 
their legislation in order, making sure their consultation has 
been done to make sure that archives can serve our province 
and our community well into the future in the way that they 

have in the past, recognizing some of the modern pressures and 
realities that they’re facing. 
 
I know that there’s just an impressive wealth of information 
contained, of history contained by archives. As an example, the 
minister referenced that since April 1st of this year archives has 
retrieved 656 disposal requests involving 6,000 boxes of 
material, has authorized 1800 metres of public record for 
disposal, and has identified 146 metres of record for transfer to 
the archives for historical preservation. So these are the kinds of 
pressures that archives are dealing with. We need to make sure 
that this legislation is as strong as it can be to preserve our 
history, to guide our future, Mr. Speaker. And certainly it’ll be 
the aim of the official opposition to consult directly with 
stakeholders and make sure that that’s the case. 
 
We see far too often, on too many fronts, this government rams 
forward with their own agenda, not listening to direct 
stakeholders and bringing forward flawed legislation. I’m not 
suggesting that that’s the case with this legislation right here, 
but it’s an important reminder for us that we need to do the 
consultation, the listening, with community partners. 
 
We invite anyone who’s tracking this debate, who may have 
concerns or have opinions or who see strengths in this 
legislation, to connect directly with us as the official opposition, 
because that will certainly allow a constructive process that 
ensures the legislation to be as strong as it can be. 
 
So at this point in time, as it relates to Bill No. 142, the archives 
amendment Act, I adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 
has moved to adjourn debate on The Archives and Public 
Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 147 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 147 — The Class 
Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to enter into the debate on Bill No. 147, The Class 
Actions Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think before talking about this bill it’s important 
to talk about what exactly a class action lawsuit is, Mr. Speaker. 
And this existing Act, which will be amended, what does it do? 
Well, class actions, we’ve heard of many famous ones. I’m sure 
most of us can take our minds to whether it was a class action 
suit about silicone breast implants, about Maple Leaf listeriosis 
issue a few years ago. There are many famous class action suits, 
Mr. Speaker. 



6310 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

“The Class Actions Act sets out the rules for class actions in 
Saskatchewan.” This is from the ministry of Saskatchewan’s 
. . . Ministry of Justice’s website here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. So in order to have a class action suit, Mr. Speaker: 
 

An application must be made by a member of a class, on 
behalf of other members of the class, to the Chief Justice of 
the Court of Queen’s Bench to name a judge to conduct a 
hearing for certification as a class action. 

 
So the judge has to decide if: 
 

The cause of the action is appropriate subject matter for a 
class action; there are two or more potential claimants; the 
claims raise a common issue; a class action is the 
preferable procedure; and the representative plaintiff will 
adequately represent the interests of the class. 
 
The Court establishes [Mr. Speaker] the boundaries of the 
class action by determining: the class (i.e., by describing 
what constitutes a particular class); the nature of the claims 
and common issues; and how a member of the class can 
opt-out of the class. 
 
The Court determines the method of notice and the 
contents of the notice that must be given to members of the 
class. Notification is necessary to allow class members to 
opt-out and, once the action is resolved, to advise class 
members what they need to do to receive compensation. 
 
In appropriate instances, the Court may certify a 
multi-jurisdictional class action involving individuals who 
reside both within and outside of Saskatchewan. Where a 
multi-jurisdictional class action is certified, class members 
who reside outside of Saskatchewan do not have to take 
special steps to remain part of the class action but maintain 
the option to opt-out. 

 
The Act includes provisions respecting remedies that may 
be ordered by the Court. Damage awards can be assessed 
on an individual basis or the Court can grant aggregate 
awards of monetary relief and apportion among class 
members entitlement to the pool of money. 

 
This particular bill which is amending The Class Actions Act, 
Mr. Speaker, makes a few changes here. A particular change, 
and the minister lays this out in his second reading speech, that 
this particular bill: 
 

. . . will provide courts authority to award costs in class 
actions in appropriate circumstances. In allowing costs to 
be assessed, [the Minister talks about how] the bill will 
also provide the judge discretion to take into consideration 
the following factors when deciding whether [or not] to 
award costs. 

 
So the judge can think about “. . . the public interest; whether 
the action involved a novel point of law; whether the action was 
a test case; access to justice for members of the public using 
class action proceedings; any other factors that the court 
considers appropriate.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the minister points out that this Act “. . . will 

restore the discretion to the courts to control their own 
processes, as in regular litigation matters, while still addressing 
the unique access-to-justice concerns that arise with class action 
litigation.” 
 
When we think about class action, I think the minister described 
it very well, that “Class actions allow for more efficient use of 
the court resources by consolidating similar matters into a 
single claim,” Mr. Speaker. They “. . . also increase access to 
justice for groups of individuals who lack the means to pursue 
litigation on their own. And defendants also, Mr. Speaker, can 
benefit from class actions by defending multiple claims through 
a single set of proceedings. 
 
I think when we . . . It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that a more 
recent class action in the last couple of years here in Canada, 
which I think should be relevant or on the minds of MLAs here 
and legislators and people in general here in Saskatchewan, is a 
transvaginal mesh class action suit that commenced in Canada 
in 2012. A law firm in Ontario has launched a class action 
against Johnson & Johnson and related entities regarding their 
transvaginal mesh products, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve actually here in Saskatchewan, I believe about a year 
and a half ago, had several women come to the legislature to 
talk about the negative effects they’ve experienced from 
transvaginal mesh and the need to have a full mesh removal, 
Mr. Speaker, which they argue is not available here in Canada, 
and they’ve had to go to the States to have the mesh removed, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s an ongoing debate here. I continue to 
work with some of these women. And they’ve actually applied 
to the Ministry of Health and have been rejected on their 
appeals to have their surgery for full mesh removal funded, Mr. 
Speaker, because the government argues that it can be done 
here in Canada. But the women have disagreed. I’ve spoken to 
medical professionals who disagree. I’ve spoken to actually a 
physiotherapist who does pelvic floor work, Mr. Speaker, and 
she has seen women who have had partial mesh removals still 
experiencing mesh coming out of their bodies, Mr. Speaker. So 
there’s a debate going on whether or not the government should 
be funding out-of-country mesh removals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Manitoba actually has gone that direction. Its Health minister, 
who I’ll note is a female, a couple of years ago, well actually 
just over a year ago, probably about 14 or 15 months ago has 
supported ensuring that the Manitoba women who come 
forward with issues around transvaginal mesh have the 
opportunity to have that fully removed, Mr. Speaker, so they 
can begin getting a bit of their life back. 
 
But there is currently a lawsuit Mr. Speaker. I’ll explain a little 
bit about what transvaginal mesh products are. So this class 
action suit isn’t specific to mesh removal, Mr. Speaker, but 
about women saying that Johnson & Johnson has damaged 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Transvaginal mesh products are also referred to as pelvic mesh 
products. Vaginal mesh, a hammock or a sling, are used to treat 
stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women. 
These products are alleged to have high failure, injury, and 
complication rate which could result in frequent and often 
debilitating reoperations and potentially cause severe and 
irreversible injuries, conditions, and damage. So the statement 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6311 

of claim alleges that Johnson & Johnson failed to adequately 
warn patients and physicians of the magnitude of the risk of 
serious side effects when using one of their transvaginal mesh 
products compared to alternative treatments. Possible side 
effects include mesh erosion through the vaginal wall, infection, 
pain, bladder perforation, vaginal scarring, pain during sexual 
intercourse, and other problems which may lead to a significant 
decrease in quality of life due to discomfort and pain. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve met with many women here in Saskatchewan 
who have experienced this very issue. It doesn’t happen in 
every individual but there is enough women who’ve 
experienced this that it should be on the radar for legislators 
everywhere, Mr. Speaker. In fact actually Health Canada has a 
warning and they’ve recently issued an important safety 
information on surgical mesh for stress urinary incontinence 
and pelvic organ prolapse, Mr. Speaker. So Health Canada has a 
warning about these particular products in trying to ensure that 
medical practitioners are helping women have full informed 
consent when they decide to go through with some of these 
surgeries, Mr. Speaker. So I think anyway when we talk about 
class action lawsuits, this particular one, I think, should be on 
all our radar, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again it’s a very simple bill about the ability for judges to be 
able to award costs, Mr. Speaker. It’s fairly straightforward. I 
think the one thing that stands out about this bill, that this is 
retroactive. So I know in committee we’ll have some questions 
about why the need to have it retroactive. What was the 
thinking behind it? And there will also need to be some 
questions on how this will impact existing suits before the 
courts, Mr. Speaker. So we will have some questions in 
committee, but for now I would like to move to adjourn debate 
for Bill No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 143 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 143 — The 
Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into debate here this afternoon on Bill No. 143, 
The Degree Authorization Amendment Act. And I’ve read the 
minister’s comments here today and it lays out what he sees as 
the purpose of the bill and that seems reasonable, taking, you 
know, a first glance at the minister’s comments. Certainly it’s 
going to be important, when we’re talking about this piece of 
legislation, to make sure that the consultation has occurred with 

these incredibly important stakeholders that are vital to our 
province’s future success and the success of all young people in 
this province. 
 
I know that the minister has laid it out that this will provide 
greater accessibility. Certainly that in itself is a very important 
aim and one that should be worked towards. The question may 
be as to whether or not this is the best way forward, whether it 
can be improved, whether there’s other ways forward. I know 
accessibility is a very important aspect of our post-secondary 
education system so we’ll look at how these changes impact 
accessibility. I know some of the very practical accessibility 
challenges that many families face and they’re just not 
understood by the government, it seems, and that’s the cost of 
accessing a post-secondary education. And for far too many 
there’s a direct barrier by way of those impediments to be all 
they can be. And that’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because the 
way I see it, we need to extend opportunity to all Saskatchewan 
people that have the ability and the interest in being able to 
continue to learn to expand their credentials and to give back to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, whether that be socially, culturally, 
or economically, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when I hear about accessibility, certainly we’ll look to the 
specific measures in this bill that the minister is looking at. And 
they may be reasonable but we never want to take, of course, a 
focus off the very important aspects of accessibility which is the 
ability to rent a place to live, for example, Mr. Speaker, or the 
cost of tuition itself. We’re now, I understand, we’re the second 
highest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And for a province that’s 
booming, for a province that requires our young people to be all 
they can be and to give back to our province, we shouldn’t have 
these sorts of barriers in place. In many ways, I think that that’s 
an area that definitely requires focus. And it gets to that issue of 
affordability and the general cost of living that just is, I guess, a 
loss of this government in their understanding or the fact that 
this government just doesn’t get the financial pressures — the 
cost of living and affordability crunch that students are facing, 
that families are facing, and that seniors are facing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The bill itself also, I understand, as referenced by the minister 
. . . He suggests that it ensures a robust quality assurance 
process, a regulatory process, Mr. Speaker. That’s going to be 
important for us to fully understand what’s being presented by 
this minister, how it aligns with some of the stakeholders, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the concerns they may have, and that’ll be 
important for us on the side of consultation moving forward. 
 
The minister does state that this protects the U of R [University 
of Regina] and the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], and 
certainly that’s important. These are incredible institutions, 
incredible universities that have helped build who we are as a 
province, will continue to shape who we are as a province, but 
they’ve also contributed in so many ways to leadership in our 
country, in our world. And that needs to not only be continued 
but enabled to progress and grow and grow further, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I know in the coming days, weeks, and months on this front, 
this side of the Assembly, the official opposition, will be 
welcoming any submissions from the sector, from the 
universities, from the post-secondary partners as it relates to 



6312 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2014 

this bill, to make sure that this bill meets their needs, to make 
sure concerns are understood, to make sure that we do all we 
can to make sure this bill is as effective and as helpful as it can 
be. And if, as we see in so many other pieces of legislation, if 
this government has rammed forward with their own agenda, 
one that hasn’t understood some of the realities on the ground, 
the realities of stakeholders, then that consultation will be 
critically important to get this legislation on track and make 
sure that we can serve Saskatchewan students and our province 
as a whole in the way that we should be, in the way that we can 
be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So some of the aims laid out by the minister with this 
legislation seem very reasonable, ones that we would be 
supportive of. But whether or not this legislation is as effective 
as it could be, is expanding some of the legislation in a way that 
reflects the needs of post-secondary partners, is something that 
we’ll derive directly out of consultation and listening to 
post-secondary partners. 
 
At this point in time too, any institution, any university, any 
post-secondary partner that’s watching this legislation and 
observing this legislation that has an interest, we welcome their 
input, just the same we do for all Saskatchewan families and 
people and students to make sure we address it. But just again, 
just before I close, one of the aims of this legislation is to 
improve accessibility. Certainly that’s pretty rich, Mr. Speaker, 
from this government that just really doesn’t get the 
affordability pressures families are facing. And for students, 
those pressures are real. Those pressures are hard and for far too 
many, they’re an absolute barrier to the education that they 
deserve. And by limiting that education, we limit ourselves 
socially and economically, Mr. Speaker, and we can be better 
than that as a province at this place in time. 
 
So with that being said, we’ll engage with partners. We’ll 
engage with the minister in committee and in broader debate 
through this Assembly. But I move adjournment of Bill No. 
143, The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment 
Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 151 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 151 — The 
Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to speak to Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment 
Act, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve read some of the comments of the 
Health minister on this front. In fact his comments were very 
brief, so on this bill we’ve been left with very brief information 
as to what this bill is all about. But what we have been left with 

seems to be very reasonable goals. The question is whether or 
not this government’s consulted with the profession, with those 
delivering health care across Saskatchewan, and whether or not 
this bill is all it can be in improving health care for 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Certainly I’m a strong supporter of proper scope of practice, 
expanded scope of practice to allow us to be as effective as we 
can as a health care system. So certainly there’s a suggestion 
that this expands some of the scope of practice of pharmacists. 
And certainly that seems reasonable, particularly where the 
items that they’re expanding scope on seem reasonable. 
 
It’s worthy to note that the pharmacist is often the first point of 
contact for families across Saskatchewan. That might be 
particularly so the case in many parts of rural Saskatchewan. 
And so certainly they fulfill a very important role to the health 
of Saskatchewan people. 
 
This bill, I understand, will bring about changes that will allow 
prescription and administration of vaccines. We’re going to 
continue to listen to the health partners on this front to ensure 
that this legislation makes sense. Certainly that seems very 
reasonable in what’s being put forward. But as I have said on 
other bills, Mr. Speaker, far too often with this Sask Party 
government we’ve seen them ram forward with their own 
agenda and not listen to the direct stakeholders on the ground 
— which is why we’re going to be working directly with health 
care professions across Saskatchewan, with the pharmacists, 
with Saskatchewan patients, and listening to make sure that this 
bill is appropriate and in fact improves health care, which has to 
be the goal. 
 
I know certainly I support expansion of the scope of practice, 
and this is an important aspect around being as effective as we 
can be as a health care system, which certainly needs to be our 
goal. 
 
So at this point in time though, Mr. Speaker, I know the 
minister’s comments were very brief. We look forward to 
further debate around this bill and certainly having clarity from 
the minister through processes to have full expansion of who 
he’s consulted and what this bill enables. At this point in time, I 
adjourn debate for Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 
2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 150 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 150 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 



December 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6313 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
always, it’s a great honour to be able to rise in this Legislative 
Assembly and provide commentary on the legislative agenda of 
this government. In this case we see some amendments to The 
Residential Tenancies Act. A number of the changes that are 
being proposed are clerical in a sense. 
 
But I think before I get into the minister’s comments with 
respect to the bill and some of the technical aspects of the bill, I 
think we have to remember who is putting this bill on the Table. 
And we’re talking about a government that is willing to support 
developers over desperate homeless people, and in fact a 
government that even thinks that there aren’t desperate 
homeless people. 
 
So we know that housing is one of the single most important 
issues facing a number of, certainly, people in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker. And in fact I think that’s the single most important 
issue facing most people in urban areas these days is adequate 
housing and affordable housing, particularly for the folks that 
we know that are on fixed incomes. 
 
And in my riding that happens to be a lot of seniors and a lot of 
students where they’ve managed to find a place to live. They 
don’t own their own home. They have managed to figure out a 
way to live within their means, with the rent being a certain 
amount. And then the rent is put up $100 and that completely 
throws them for a loop and they find it very, very difficult. 
They’re choosing whether or not to take medications or to buy 
food. 
 
And we know that the cost of housing has sent seniors in record 
numbers to the food bank. And that’s something that, I think, in 
this day when we have a government that’s getting $14 billion 
in revenues and spending it as fast at they can, that there isn’t 
enough priority being given for people who are suffering, 
people who are on fixed incomes that cannot keep pace with the 
costs of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6281 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6281 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6281 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6281 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6281 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6281 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6282 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6282 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6282 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Christmas is a Time for Giving 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6282 
 Christmas Greetings 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6283 
 Trafalgar Day Gala 2014 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6283 
 La Ronge Family Members Honoured by Lieutenant Governor 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6283 
 North Battleford Resident Receives Hero of Play Award 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6283 
 Long Gun Registry 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6284 
 Keeping Saskatchewan Strong 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6284 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Fatality in Care Facility and Provision of Long-Term Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6284 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6284 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6286 
 Contract with Lean Initiative Consultant 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6287 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6287 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6287 
 Review of Smart Meter Program 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6288 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6288 
 Government Use of Consultants 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6288 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6288 
 Poverty Strategy and Inquest into Death 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6288 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6289 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Oilseed Producers Gain Access to Quebec Markets 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6289 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6289 
 Launch of Career Development Website 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6289 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6290 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6290 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 171 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6290 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6291 
 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6302 



 

 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6304 
 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6305 
 Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6306 
 Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6306 
 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 
 modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6308 
 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6308 
 Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 
 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6309 
 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6309 
 Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6311 
 Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6312 
 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6313 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 171 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014 ...................................................................... 6291 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 171 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6292 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 6292 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6293 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6293 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6294 
 Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6297 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6297 
 Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6298 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6298 
 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6299 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6302 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


