




















































Hansard: April 03, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 45A  THURSDAY, APRIL 3, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5059 

 April 3, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to introduce guests in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker. This morning I had the privilege of 

joining the Minister of Rural and Remote Health for an 

announcement regarding nurse practitioners, and we’re 

delighted that some of the participants from this morning are 

able to join us in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Lia Boxall is here, the president of the 

Saskatchewan Association of Nurse Practitioners. Lia practises 

in Tisdale. Leland Sommer is here, vice-president of the 

Saskatchewan Association of Nurse Practitioners, and he 

practises in Cupar, in Southey, and Regina Beach. Barb 

Warkentin is here, past president of the SANP [Saskatchewan 

Association of Nurse Practitioners] and a nurse practitioner in 

Spiritwood — she said she was going to do that; I said it was 

her legislature — Mary Ann Denton, an advocacy committee 

member and a nurse practitioner with the Home First project 

and home care in Saskatoon. And they’re joined by Lynn 

Digney-Davies, the chief nursing officer for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

members of a very, very important profession that contribute 

mightily to enhanced health services right across the province. I 

ask all members to join me in welcoming all of them to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege on 

behalf of the opposition to join the minister in welcoming the 

guests from the Association of Nurse Practitioners. I know 

you’ve got meetings and a banquet tonight, and I’m sure you’re 

looking forward to that as well. And I just want to thank you for 

all the work that you do as a really important part of the primary 

health care teams across Saskatchewan. 

 

So on behalf of the official opposition, thank you so much for 

all the work that you do and the leadership that you provide. 

And with that, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these folks to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you, 

seated in the west gallery, I’m pleased to introduce a couple of 

people that are very special to me. My brother Larry and his 

wife Linda are here visiting from the beautiful town of 

Killarney, Manitoba. 

 

Larry and Linda have just both recently retired: Larry from the 

Westoba Credit Union system in Manitoba; Linda’s been an 

educator for many years and still substitutes somewhat. But 

they’re enjoying travelling and enjoying curling and looking 

forward to getting out on that beautiful Killarney golf course 

this summer. 

 

But I think more importantly, Mr. Speaker, along with myself 

and my Linda, they became grandparents for the first time six 

days after I did, so they’re very much looking forward to 

spending some time with Easton. And I would like to ask all my 

colleagues to welcome them to a much nicer legislature than 

they have back home. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west gallery 

today, we have 10 grade 7, 8, 9 students from the Wheatland 

Christian School in Neilburg in the great constituency of Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. And they’re accompanied by their teacher, 

Ms. Kim Adams, and along with a good bunch of chaperones 

here: Rob and Shannon Wiebe, Evan and Bonita Loetkeman, 

Lowell and Audrey Dueck, Lorne and Sonya Wiebe, Eileen 

Schmidt, Irene Loewen. And I would like everybody to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly I’d like to say a 

special hi to Barb Warkentin. Her and I worked together in the 

west side of the Prince Albert Parkland Health Region when I 

was working in community dietetics, so I got to see first-hand 

the value of nurse practitioners. So please everyone, join me in 

welcoming Barb Warkentin to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, in your gallery is a young man that I guess works 

with a lot of . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not that young. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well he says he’s pretty young. But anyhow 

I just want to acknowledge him. He’s my CA [constituency 

assistant]. He’s here just seeing how the procedures go and 

meeting individuals that he has contact with and just doing 

some interesting things that he wanted to learn and see how our 

staff work, how the system works here. And he’s here to get a 

little bit of a PD [professional development], and he had a little 

fun last night as well. It was good to have and laughter and 

everything. 

 

So I just want to say to him, thank you for all you do back 

home. He does an excellent job dealing with the individuals. So 

to Devin Bernatchez, I just want to say to you, thank you so 

much. You do an awesome job, and you care about the people. 

It’s in your heart, and you serve northern Saskatchewan well. 

So welcome to your Legislative Assembly. Keep up the good 



5060 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

work. Tēniki. 

 

The Speaker: — I hope the commentary in introductions does 

not cause any border incidents with Manitoba, as I live on the 

border. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for greater support for education. And we 

know that education is one of the most vital services that 

government provides to its citizens and that this government has 

failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision and the necessary 

resources to prioritize the delivery of educational excellence. 

And we know that this government has failed to deliver a real 

plan that would close the Aboriginal education gap, support 

English as an additional language students, support community 

schools and their communities and their students. And we know 

that we must build the best education system for today and for 

Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 

long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 

provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan, that 

reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 

changes, that is based on proven educational best 

practices, that is developed in consultation with the 

education sector, and that builds strong educational 

infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 

the future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents here in Regina as it relates to 

the unsafe conditions on Dewdney Avenue and the need to 

ensure safety and the need to reroute the heavy-haul truck 

traffic that’s inundated Dewdney Avenue. The petitioners note 

that this is an issue that was created by that government and any 

further delays to address it are entirely unacceptable. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by good people of Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 

ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled it, 

the RPO. That means that the dream of home ownership is 

destroyed for many families in the North. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

Signed by many people of this province. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

once again pleased to stand in my place today to present a 

petition on highway improvements necessary for northern 

Saskatchewan. We’ve presented petitions for a number of 

communities. In this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, the 

petition is for Highway 908, the highway that serves the 

Ile-a-la-Crosse community. And, Mr. Speaker, the people that 

have signed this petition are primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

provincial government to commit to repairing and 

upgrading Highway 908. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to present this petition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to present a 

petition to the Assembly today for real action on climate 

change. It’s signed by a number of residents from 

Saskatchewan who wish to bring to our attention the following: 

that Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse gas 

emissions per capita in all of Canada; that Saskatchewan’s 

emissions have continued to grow to 74 million megatonnes as 

reported by Environment Canada in October 2013 and show no 

signs of decreasing; that the Saskatchewan government has 

failed to tackle climate change, reduce emissions to the 

province’s own targets, or put in a real plan to protect the 

natural environment; that slashing programs such as the Go 

Green Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses energy efficiency 

program set the province on a backwards course; and that since 

2009 the Government of Saskatchewan has reduced climate 

change funding by 83 per cent: 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5061 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

enact a real plan and allocate appropriate funding in the 

provincial budget to tackle climate change by reducing 

greenhouse gas emissions, helping families transition to 

energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 

province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is submitted by citizens from Vanscoy 

and Saskatoon and Meadow Lake. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Community Resource Provides Connection and Support 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 

a moment to recognize an important program in Saskatoon. 

OASIS, which stands for opportunity, acceptance, support, 

invitation, safe, recently celebrated its third anniversary. 

 

Based out of the Westside Community Clinic, OASIS provides 

its participants a chance to connect and support one another 

while providing learning opportunities, knowledge about 

community resources, and fun along the way. OASIS shows the 

spirit of collaboration. Saskatoon Health Region’s mental health 

and addiction services, KidsFirst, and the Westside Community 

Clinic have all helped to make this important resource a 

possibility. 

 

I am proud to say the OASIS group was recently awarded the 

SHEA award, the Saskatchewan Healthcare Excellence Award 

in the health of the population category. One of the group 

members had this to say about her experience with OASIS: 

 

Since OASIS has started, the women and men have grown, 

overcome many obstacles, learned to trust, love, and 

forgive ourselves and others. Our self-esteem has returned 

to us to where we are proud of who we are. The OASIS 

program is possible because of people caring and showing 

their support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the participants in the OASIS group, the staff at 

the Westside Community Clinic, and all their partners who have 

made this valuable community resource a possibility. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Daffodil Month 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

April is Daffodil Month, when the Canadian Cancer Society 

raises money for research, prevention, and support for people 

affected by cancer. In Saskatchewan during 2013, an estimated 

6,410 people were diagnosed with a form of cancer. The disease 

claimed the lives of 2,300 people. 

 

However there is reason to hope. The Canadian Cancer Society 

reports that people diagnosed with cancer today have a better 

chance of surviving five years after their diagnosis than they 

had just a decade ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget our government increased 

funding to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency by 4.9 million, up 

3.3 per cent from last year. Since 2007-2008, funding has 

increased 98 per cent for their work in cancer research, 

prevention, and treatment. We are committed to providing 

effective, timely treatment. Our government has announced 

funding for a new linear accelerator at Regina’s Allan Blair 

Cancer Centre to enhance the precision of radiation therapy. 

 

We can all take steps, Mr. Speaker, to model healthy habits 

such as maintaining healthy weights and getting proper 

exercise. These do not guarantee a clean bill of health, but they 

reduce the likelihood of developing a wide range of health 

conditions and disease, including cancer. I ask my fellow 

members to join me in proudly wearing a daffodil this month as 

a symbol of the fight against cancer. I wear it for my mother 

and my sister. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Asbestos Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

week is Asbestos Awareness Week, marked globally by the 

Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization. This week is a time 

to raise awareness about asbestos-related diseases. This is also a 

time to remember those who have lost their courageous battles 

and to collectively work towards the day when no one is lost to 

those diseases. We cannot ignore our grief from those lost, but 

there is comfort in our memories. 

 

It is important to be reminded that we can make a difference 

and we have a very special role here in the legislature. And it 

was incredibly encouraging to have members from both sides of 

the House co-operate in the creation of Howard’s law, a 

mandatory registry of public buildings. This system is the first 

of its kind in Canada and allows individuals to make their own 

choices that might affect their health and their futures. 

 

Over 100,000 workers across the globe die of asbestos-related 

disease each year. In fact, Howard’s law was brought forward 

on behalf of Howard Willems, a Saskatoon man who was lost to 

a rare form of cancer caused by inhaling asbestos fibres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no greater priority than the health and 

safety of Saskatchewan people. I call on all members to 

recognize this week as a time to raise awareness about 

asbestos-related diseases, to remember those lost, and to remain 

vigilant in the protection of workers in their workplaces. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

2013 Grey Cup Festival Receives Sport Tourism Award 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



5062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

Speaker, Saskatchewan is quickly becoming recognized as one 

of the best places to hold sporting events in the nation. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m proud to say that the Celebration in Rider Nation 

yesterday received national-wide attention as a memorable 

party held last November. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Sport Tourism Alliance has 

announced the 2014 PRESTIGE [Program Recognizing 

Exceptional Sport Tourism Initiatives, Games & Events] Award 

for Sport Event of the Year has been given to our very own 

101st Grey Cup Festival. 

 

The PRESTIGE Awards celebrate the people, places, and 

events that make the Canadian sport tourism industry so 

dynamic and important to the economic fabric of our 

communities. The hardware was presented at the 8th annual 

PRESTIGE Awards luncheon yesterday in Edmonton. 

 

Neil Donnelly, executive director of the 101st Grey Cup 

Festival, summed up the success by saying: 

 

After more than two years of planning and five days of the 

biggest celebration that Saskatchewan has ever hosted, the 

101st Grey Cup Festival left a tremendous imprint on the 

entire province and experienced a Celebration in Rider 

Nation — the passion of the CFL, football, sport, special 

events, and entertainment in true Saskatchewan style. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should be very proud of our city and the 

province’s ability of hosting such a first-class event, one that 

was very deserving of this award. 

 

I’ll ask all members to join me in thanking everyone who made 

this award possible, including the 2013 Grey Cup Festival 

organizing committee, the over 2,400 volunteers that gave their 

time, sponsors, partners, and of course our Saskatchewan 

Roughriders. Our province is once again very proud of the 

whole organization. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Celebrate Success Business Awards Presented in Yorkton 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, last night I had the 

opportunity to attend the Yorkton Chamber of Commerce 

Celebrate Success Business Awards, which has been 

celebrating success of Yorkton businesses and community 

organizations since 1998. SaskPower is a proud sponsor of the 

Celebrate Success Business Awards by donating $3,500 to help 

recognize business excellence in the Yorkton area. 

 

Businesses that won in their categories were: diversity 

leadership, Tim Hortons; work and family balance, Fedorowich 

Construction; community merit was Yail Harbor, Yorkton 

Skateboard Park, and Yorkton Sno Riders; new business 

venture, Mr. Mike’s Steakhouse Casual; property restoration, 

Logan Stevens Construction; community involvement, Painted 

Hand Casino; business growth and expansion, Royal Auto 

Group; customer service, Dustin Nehring and Taylor Lang of 

NL Construction; and Award of Excellence, Bailey’s Funeral 

Home and Cremation Centre, LR Future Investments and 

Insurance, and Penguin Refrigeration. 

 

On behalf of SaskPower and the government, I was honoured to 

be able to present the awards for Large and Small Businesses of 

the Year, which were awarded to R.H. Electric and Wagner’s 

Flooring respectively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to all business people for their investment 

and commitment to our province. Without their investment, 

Saskatchewan would not be as economically strong as it is 

today. I invite all members to join with me in thanking the 

Yorkton Chamber of Commerce for hosting, SaskPower for 

sponsoring Celebrate Success Business Awards, and 

congratulate all winners and nominees. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

University of Saskatchewan Anniversary 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to wish a happy anniversary 

to the University of Saskatchewan today, which is celebrating 

its 107th year since its foundation as an agriculture college in 

1907. 

 

After Saskatoon was chosen as the city to host the university, 

300 acres were set aside for the university buildings and 1,000 

acres for the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] farm and 

agriculture fields. Only two years junior to the Legislative 

Building, the University of Saskatchewan has a long history 

deeply embedded within our province. Mr. Speaker, the 

University of Saskatchewan was the first Canadian university to 

combine both arts and agriculture. It was very involved in 

serving the province’s major industries. 

 

The University of Saskatchewan has come a long way since 

1907, Mr. Speaker. Over the years it has grown from its 

beginnings as an agriculture university to include a wide array 

of academic offerings, providing our hometown Saskatchewan 

students a place to expand their knowledge right here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We are proud to support the University of Saskatchewan and 

have this year committed an additional $13.2 million, an 

increase of 3.7 per cent in funding, Mr. Speaker. We will 

continue to support the University of Saskatchewan, and once 

again wish the institution a happy 107th anniversary. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Executive Finalist for Generation Next Award 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

Assembly today to recognize Doug Campbell, the director of 

business development for Mosaic Place in Moose Jaw. 

 

With events like ZZ Top, the Backstreet Boys, the Telus Cup 

coming right up, and the Scotties coming in 2015, it’s not a 

surprise that Doug has been honoured as one of the best in the 

business. He has been named as one of the 30 finalists for a 

prestigious industry award as one of the brightest young 

executives in North American entertainment business. The 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5063 

industry-leading publication, Venues Today, is recognizing 

management aged 35 or younger with its Generation Next 

Award. 

 

Doug is proud of the shows and events they’ve held so far, 

admitting that it’s taken a lot of work to attract the very best. He 

works diligently to form relationships with promoters and 

agents and prove Moose Jaw and area is a very viable location. 

Prior to his current role, Doug worked in events and sports 

marketing in Lethbridge before jumping at the opportunity to 

come work for a brand new facility. 

 

Doug will find out how he fared over the next couple of 

months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Doug Campbell on this award and all he has done for the 

success of Mosaic Place. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Social Services Expenditures and Responsibilities 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Minister of Social Services said she stayed with a friend while 

in Ghana. To the minister: why does her expense claim show 

$326.08 for accommodations if she was staying with a friend, 

and will she pay that back to taxpayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — There was one night that I stayed in a 

hotel room when I was in Ghana. The rest of the time, I stayed 

with a friend. I will not pay that one back because I definitely 

was working at the convention. I was asked to speak as one of 

the guest speakers at this conference. 

 

I am proud of the work that we’re doing as a government on 

fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t make 

apologies for helping people that need our support in this area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Social 

Services also said she didn’t go out for any meals while in 

Ghana. To the minister: why did she bill taxpayers $389.54 for 

meals when she says she didn’t go out for any meals while she 

was in Ghana, and will she pay that back to taxpayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I claimed the per diems 

when I was over there. I had a chance to pay the person that I 

was staying with. They made the meals. And I had a per diem 

and I gave it to that individual so that they would . . . 

[inaudible] . . . for the food when we were over there. I don’t 

expect my friends to feed me for nothing. And at the same time, 

I would try and save taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is the answer to the questions. The 

members opposite can continue on this line if you want to. I am 

proud of the work that we are doing in this area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said she had five or 

six meetings during the four-day layover she had in London. 

Despite having just 1.5 meetings per day, she billed the 

taxpayers to have a limo service at her beck and call. To the 

minister: did she use that limo service for any sightseeing or 

shopping with her friend? Is that why she finally agreed to pay 

back that part of this very expensive trip? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the expense with respect to 

the car service was not a part of the ministry’s expenses. It was 

part of an official’s expenses that was attending with the 

minister, and the minister was unaware of the amount. So what 

she has done is looked at the amount, Mr. Speaker, overnight, 

looked at the schedule she had, and she’s made the 

determination that another mode of transportation would have 

been possible. And rather than simply reimburse the difference 

of what those two modes of transportation might have been, 

what one was and what one could have been, she just paid all 

the money back to taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other important point here is that on the way to 

Ghana, the minister would have had the option, because it’s 

government policy when flights last a certain period of time, to 

fly business class. She chose to fly economy. She did choose in 

Ghana to stay with friends, Mr. Speaker. Moreover, last year 

her travel expenses as a minister, in terms of ministerial travel, 

were $28,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last year of the New Democrats in office, 

she would have had a lower travel bill than 15 New Democratic 

ministers. Mr. Speaker, this is a minister who is well reputed in 

her file and one who has always taken the utmost care with 

taxpayers’ dollars. That’s why she has the support of members 

on this side and people right across the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — The minister determined yesterday that nothing 

personal was paid for by taxpayers, but we know that taxpayers 

did cover a $200 lunch with a friend. And now we know that 

the minister admits that the $3,600 limo service was also 

inappropriate. To the minister: how can we trust that taxpayers 

didn’t cover any other personal expenses on this trip? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the lunch, it 

was noted yesterday that this particular invoice or receipt for 

lunch was at the official’s level, not by the minister, incorrectly 

included with the expenses to be reimbursed and also has since 

been reimbursed. Mr. Speaker, this was an office mistake that 

was made. 

 

Again with respect to this particular minister and her own 

budget for travel, we would happily compare what she has spent 

in all of her years as a minister of the Crown versus the majority 

of ministers from the other side of the House, even unadjusted 



5064 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

for inflation, Mr. Speaker. What we have seen from this 

minister is a review overnight of the incident, a review of the 

facts of the case, and a reimbursement to the taxpayers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And with respect to the minister’s question, which really goes 

to the integrity of the minister and the veracity of what she is 

now presenting today and what she also said yesterday in the 

House and outside on the rotunda and on the public record, Mr. 

Speaker, again members on this side of the House, colleagues 

of this minister know the kind of person this is. This is a woman 

of character. This is a woman of integrity that has served this 

province in ways that are hard to measure in terms of her 

professionalism and her contribution. And we stand with the 

minister today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we did not get an answer to the 

question. Did she use the limo service for any sightseeing or 

shopping with her friend? Is that why she finally agreed to pay 

back that part of the very expensive trip? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, travel by ministers of the 

Saskatchewan Party government is down 50 per cent over travel 

by NDP [New Democratic Party] ministers in their last year in 

office. And of course we as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] also have expenses. 

 

And so I wonder if the hon. member is prepared, the one who is 

asking the questions is prepared to compare the record of 

members opposite with how they do their travel. I wonder if he 

is prepared to claim in this Assembly that every per diem he has 

taken, there was actually a meal attached to it that he paid for. I 

don’t know the answer, but Mr. Speaker, if this is the questions 

he’s asking of the minister, these are the questions he should be 

prepared to answer himself. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Again, Mr. Speaker, did she use that limo 

service for any sightseeing or shopping with her friend? Is that 

why she finally agreed to pay back the money? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The money has been paid back already. The 

minister has agreed to pay back the money, and it’s happened 

with respect to the car service in question. 

 

Let us remember again and put on the record again that this 

minister had the choice, because of government policy, of 

flying business class to Ghana. She chose to fly economy. This 

minister had the option to be in a hotel for the entire duration of 

the conference at which she was a guest speaker. She chose to 

stay with acquaintances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This minister had a total travel budget last year of $28,000, less 

than 15 of the NDP ministers from their last year in office. This 

minister looks after the taxpayers’ dollars as though they were 

her children’s dollars, as though they were the dollars of her 

family members because, Mr. Speaker, frankly that’s been her 

approach to public life. And it is why today I note, interestingly 

not just in the Assembly, the people of the province and many 

of those who have dealt with her in her files in the disability 

sector, in the area of social services, are today supporting the 

minister because they know the kind of person that she is. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister 

table her complete itinerary and all the receipts for her trip, 

today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the minister, I 

believe in the scrum, indicated the meetings that she was having 

while in London with respect to the Social Services file around 

the disability question, around housing, Mr. Speaker, public 

housing. And of course the members will know that the minister 

is also responsible for Sask Housing. She also took a meeting 

for the Minister of Finance related to financial matters, and I 

expect a summary of those meetings will be presented today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Will she table her complete itinerary and all the 

receipts in the House today? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would expect that the 

response to the FOI [freedom of information] has offered up the 

expenses involved in the trip. That is the genesis of the nature 

of these questions and the ones from yesterday in the first place. 

Moreover I just said to the member and all members in the 

House that the meetings the minister was attending to on her 

behalf, in terms of her file and also on behalf of the Minister of 

Finance, will provided to the public. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister struggled yesterday 

to explain what she actually learned on this costly trip that is of 

benefit to Saskatchewan people. What policy changes have 

occurred or will occur as a result of this minister’s trip? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, many, many policies of 

the Government of Saskatchewan in the area of social services 

have changed because of that minister, Mr. Speaker. Many, 

many policies of the government have changed with respect to 

housing in this province, as also has been her responsibility 

over the last number of years, Mr. Speaker, as we have seen a 

build-out just in public housing, incentives for new home 

ownership that is related to FIP [Family Income Plan] as we’ve 

discussed in this House before, and are seeing new home starts 

in this province and new home ownership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, changes that have occurred under this minister 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5065 

include SAID, the Saskatchewan assured income for disability, 

Mr. Speaker, an historic program that recognizes disabilities for 

what they are, led and championed by this minister and then 

backs it up with extra resources. Mr. Speaker, because while the 

social democrats were in office they did a lot of talking about 

these things. They did a lot of talking about those with 

disabilities and the supports they needed but they left it at talk, 

Mr. Speaker. The changes this minister has made is the talk is 

now action. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Simply, Mr. Speaker, what changed because of 

this trip? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I understand the hon. member 

attended the International Labour Conference in Geneva. I 

expect he spent taxpayers’ dollars to do it. What changed in 

NDP policy and the policy of the opposition as a result of that 

trip? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, why are there no reports for any 

of her meetings in London or Ghana? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Will the member table all of his receipts 

related to the trip to Geneva for the labour conference as well as 

table all the reports from his attendance at that meeting at 

taxpayers’ expense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Again, why are there no reports from her 

meetings from London or Ghana? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, why are there no reports from 

this minister’s attendance at that very important International 

Labour Conference in Geneva, Mr. Speaker? Or maybe there 

are, in which case we should have a look at those.  

 

I know that there were notes taken at some of the meetings. I 

believe some of them were attached to the FOI, notes that were 

taken at the meeting and as a result of the conference. The 

minister was actually a speaker at the conference in Africa, Mr. 

Speaker, a keynote speaker. She was asked to present because 

of the work that she has led here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Sometimes we go to conferences and attend them or go to trade 

missions with objectives. Sometimes we’re asked to present on 

what we’ve done in Saskatchewan. The Minister of Finance 

may well be asked by the federal government or by those 

involved in the Ukrainian community in this country to be 

involved in reconstruction, basically, in Ukraine. And if he’s 

asked, we’re going to support that he would go, Mr. Speaker, 

because that’s also what we do in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And that was also a big part of this particular 

trip. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister table her 

presentation at Ghana and the agenda of that convention with 

her name in it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I hope the minister does share her remarks 

on FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] that she made there 

and that she’s made around the province so that members 

opposite might learn a little bit about acting instead of talking 

about an issue. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the hon. member to also table his 

presentation to the International Labour Conference he went to 

in Geneva at taxpayers’ expense, but I bet he wasn’t asked to 

make a presentation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this sounds more and more like it 

was mostly a personal trip to visit friends in Ghana and spend 

some time in London. Will the minister repay the full expenses 

to taxpayers today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this minister has taken one 

international trip in her seven years in cabinet. And again I 

would point out, I believe the total amount for travel, 

ministerial travel, was $28,000 last year. 

 

Fifteen NDP ministers in the dying days of that government, if 

you want to talk about entitlement, spent much more than that. 

In fact it was about a $1 million bill a year we got in terms of 

ministerial travel from the NDP. That number’s now cut in half, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s been cut in half. 

 

And part of that success story, by the way, is that we have 

people like the Minister of Social Services at the cabinet table 

and at our caucus table reminding us always that we are not 

spending our money. We’re spending the money of the 

taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. It’s why, it’s why 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, these are apples . . . We hear 

them heckling now, that isn’t a fair comparison. It is precisely 

the same comparison. Fifty per cent more under the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker — it’s why their travel bills were up in office and why 

they’re down to nine members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Social Services said that she billed 

over $3,600 for a limo service because “I did what everybody 

was doing.” My question is for the Premier: who else in 

government is billing over $3,600 for limo service? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



5066 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, at times when we travel on 

trade missions there is the use of a car service. Certainly it 

depends on the nature of the program and the meetings we’ve 

set up. I’ve certainly used a car service in the past, Mr. Speaker, 

in relation to our deal with embassies around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there are successive meetings, hour on hour, in 

different parts of large centres in other countries, we will in fact 

utilize a car service. If the programs don’t warrant one, then 

we’ll cab it, and sometimes we’ll walk. But frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ll do whatever we can do to optimize the use of tax 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the future, although there has been always an 

informal contact with embassies with high commissions around 

the world to determine what is the best way to achieve the 

logistics of transportation issues for these trade missions, while 

there has been an informal contact, we’re going to formalize 

that as a policy of the Government of Saskatchewan, that 

ministers when they’re travelling, or myself will contact the 

embassy and the high commission and get their 

recommendation as to when it is wise to use a car service, based 

on the program and when it’s wise to use a taxi. 

 

Mr. Speaker, though I would put this forward to members on 

both sides of the aisle today, I would expect that car services 

have been a fact in trade missions, in the travel of ministers, 

through successive governments. We need to make sure we’re 

optimizing the value for taxpayers. We are going to continue to 

do that on this side of House. And we’ll formalize the process 

with DFAIT [Department of Foreign Affairs and International 

Trade], the Department of Foreign Affairs embassies and high 

commissions around the world, and we’ll get their advice in 

terms of what’s the appropriate ground transportation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this was not a DFAIT trip, and 

the Premier said the car services and limo services are used in 

instances where there are consecutive meetings stacked on top 

of each other. As the member from Centre clearly said, there 

was an average of 1.5 meetings a day in this instance. 

 

While in London, Mr. Speaker, over $200 was billed to 

taxpayers for a lunch the Minister of Social Services had in 

London with her friend from Saskatchewan. The government 

claims, Mr. Speaker, their claim is that was a mistake. My 

question is for the Premier: who designated this lunch as an 

official debrief meeting and who signed off on that expense 

claim? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the amount that the hon. 

member is referring to with respect to ground transportation has 

been repaid. This particular invoice, this $200 bill has also been 

repaid. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 

 

Mr. Broten: — The question, Mr. Speaker, was who deemed 

this lunch to be an official debrief? Who did that, and who 

signed off on that claim? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I don’t know the specific answer to that 

question, Mr. Speaker. I see the minister now nodding, and I 

don’t want to get this wrong, but she did not approve that 

particular expenditure, is my understanding today. Neither was 

it approved that there would be ground transportation to the 

extent that’s happened. That’s why this minister has taken the 

appropriate steps and taken them immediately, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the ground transportation and the bill in question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, no answer on who signed off. My 

question: if it’s not the minister, who is it that deemed this trip 

to be an official debrief, official government work? And then 

who signed off on that expense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We’ll get that information to the member. I 

do not know the answer to that question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the cabinet secretary has a very 

senior role within government. The job description is to support 

the Premier in his role as President of Executive Council, 

provide administrative support to cabinet and cabinet 

committees, and maintain a public record of all cabinet 

decisions. My question to the Premier: why would the cabinet 

secretary be accompanying the minister on such a trip? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the cabinet secretary is 

involved in a number of different issues in government, 

including the Ukraine file, Mr. Speaker, which has been very 

active of late. It’s due to the many contacts and networks he has 

with respect to the Ukrainian community here in the country, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s the simple answer to the question. The 

cabinet secretary is involved in a number of things. He delivers 

on the job description as read by the Leader of the Opposition, 

and there are a number of other duties as assigned. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Okay, Mr. Speaker, that was a response as to 

why the cabinet secretary may be in Ukraine. But my question, 

Mr. Speaker, is why the cabinet secretary would accompany 

this minister on this particular trip. I assume the minister has 

ministerial assistants and a chief of staff like all the ministers on 

the front benches. It seems peculiar that the cabinet secretary, 

who I would think has a lot of work to do here in 

Saskatchewan, would be on such a trip. Why is that? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Whether, Mr. Speaker, the cabinet secretary 

attends with the minister or her chief of staff or another staff 

person on her file, I don’t understand the great difference here, 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5067 

especially if the cabinet secretary is, as a result of that particular 

trip, going on to work on the Ukraine file. That’s my 

understanding in this case. And so instead of you having 

multiple flights with different staff, some staff going to the 

Ghana portion and then a longer flight for the cabinet secretary 

on the Ukraine file, these were brought under one trip, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s my understanding. 

 

Moreover, let’s re-emphasize some of the facts here. The 

Minister of Social Services had the opportunity, and certainly 

the option by government policy, to fly business class to Ghana. 

She chose to fly economy. Mr. Speaker, she had the option to 

stay in a hotel for the entire duration of the conference. She 

chose to stay at a friend’s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line here is, we have a minister, and 

frankly we have a government, that takes the matter of the 

taxpayers’ dollars very, very seriously. We work hard to be 

good stewards of those dollars, and we will continue to do that 

as long as we have the honour of serving in government in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister had the option of not 

going to Ghana. It’s interesting also, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting in listening to the Premier’s spin as to how savings 

are achieved, Mr. Speaker, as a rationalization for this trip and 

who’s attended it and who is in fact billing business class 

tickets and regular tickets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A different question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, and the 

member from Centre touched on this earlier on: will the 

Premier ensure that all of the detailed receipts from this trip will 

be tabled today in the Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s a problem. 

I think the information’s been forthcoming in the FOI. I don’t 

see why there would be any issues with respect to receipts or 

with respect to the meetings that were held. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition’s right. I guess 

the minister had the option not to go. Other ministers and 

members of the legislature, by the way, in terms of CPA 

[Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] trips — maybe my 

friend’s been on one — have the option of not going. The critic 

who asked the question had the option of not going to the 

International Labour Conference in Geneva. He chose to go. So, 

Mr. Speaker, fair questions to this side apply also to that side of 

the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the FOI did not contain the 

receipts from the trip. I believe I heard the Premier reference 

that there wouldn’t be a problem. Just to be perfectly clear, Mr. 

Speaker: will the government today submit, table in the 

Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, the detailed receipts from the 

minister’s trip to Ghana and London? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I just don’t see a problem in 

terms of the receipts. And I guess the same would go for the 

member for Riversdale, who chose to go to Germany using 

taxpayers’ dollars. And I expect the Leader of the Opposition 

went on a few CPA trips during his time in the legislature. I’m 

sure he’ll do the proper thing in terms of receipts. Or maybe he 

wants to just answer the question, why didn’t he simply in those 

times that he’s gone on these trips, why did he choose not to 

go? 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Rural and Remote Nurse Practitioner Recruitment Agency 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

is fortunate to have highly skilled nurse practitioners who serve 

as key members of primary health care teams. Nurse 

practitioners are registered nurses with advanced education. 

This allows them to perform physical assessments, order 

diagnostic tests, diagnose and treat common medical conditions, 

prescribe medications, and perform minor surgical procedures. 

 

Today I am pleased to advise that our government has launched 

a new strategy to help bring more nurse practitioners to rural 

and remote areas of the province. Earlier this morning, I 

announced the Rural and Remote Nurse Practitioner 

Recruitment Agency aimed at encouraging nurse practitioners 

to work in communities with a population of 10,000 people or 

less. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are four initiatives in this strategy. The first 

one is the grow your own initiative. This is for registered nurses 

who are interested in becoming nurse practitioners. Registered 

nurses will receive wages and benefits for up to two years while 

they receive full-time nurse practitioner training. In return, they 

agree to work in their sponsoring health region for five years. 

 

We are also establishing a locum pool of rural nurse 

practitioners. This team of nurse practitioners will provide 

itinerate service on a temporary basis in communities that are 

without nurse practitioner services. The program will provide 

relief for vacation, sick leave, and maternity leave. 

 

The third piece of the strategy addresses position transfers. 

Health regions will be able to move vacant, hard-to-fill nursing 

positions within health regions to communities where no 

positions exist. 

 

The last piece of the strategy which will support rural nurse 

practitioner recruitment is the introduction of relocation grants. 

Nurse practitioners will be eligible for incentive grants of up to 

$40,000 over five years for practising in hard-to-recruit 

positions or locations. The funding for this strategy is being 

drawn from this year’s ministry and RHA [Regional Health 

Authority] budgets, using existing funds already towards 

recruitment initiatives. We expect the annual costs of the 

strategy to be about $250,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to sincerely thank the Saskatchewan 

Association of Nurse Practitioners for the major role they’ve 



5068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

played in developing this strategy. Without their leadership and 

guidance, this would not be possible. 

 

As this strategy is still in its introductory stages, it will require 

ongoing consultation and negotiation with SANP as well as the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, the Saskatchewan Registered 

Nurses Association, and our regional health authorities. We 

value the input of these stakeholder groups and will continue to 

work with them as we implement the various pieces of this 

strategy. 

 

This nurse practitioner recruitment strategy supports our growth 

plan goal of ensuring that health services are available to all 

Saskatchewan residents regardless of where they live. It 

provides a variety of incentives that will help us attract and 

keep more nurse practitioners in rural and remote communities. 

We look forward to seeing the results. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, thank 

you to the minister for sending his remarks over a little bit ago. 

I appreciate that. 

 

With respect to the nurse practitioner recruitment strategy, this 

is definitely a welcome program, Mr. Speaker. Coincidentally 

enough, I had an opportunity just this week to speak to some 

councillors in Regina Beach who spoke of Leland, actually, and 

the work that he does there, and some of the stresses that 

they’re concerned about Leland needing another nurse 

practitioner, or their community needing a second nurse 

practitioner because they’re worried about losing the services of 

their nurse practitioner and him burning out. 

 

So this I know will be a welcome strategy or initiative from 

people living throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Nurse 

practitioners are an incredibly important part of the primary 

health care team and in providing services to people both in 

rural and urban Saskatchewan. 

 

And I do have a couple of questions. I know that the minister 

has mentioned the close consultation with the Association of 

Nurse Practitioners and that because this is in the beginning 

stages of that process, it will require ongoing consultation. So I 

look forward to seeing how this rolls out and hearing from the 

Association of Nurse Practitioners that it is in fact doing the 

work, that this initiative is doing the work that it needs to do. 

 

I did have one question, and perhaps I’ll have an opportunity to 

chat with the nurse practitioners and the minister about this, 

where it says health regions will, the minister had mentioned 

that health regions will be able to move vacant, hard-to-fill 

nursing positions within health regions to communities where 

no positions exist. I do have a few questions or thoughts about 

that. Does that mean that because . . . I’m wondering if when a 

position is hard to fill, instead of moving that position, how you 

figure out how you in fact fill that position. 

 

But again we need to ensure that people in Saskatchewan have 

good quality health care, and this is a step in the right direction, 

Mr. Speaker. So thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Patient Care and the Lean Initiative 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’ll be my privilege 

in just a few minutes to move a motion that will . . . that this 

Assembly call on the government to cancel the lean John Black 

and Associates contract with the Ministry of Health and 

condemn the government’s waste of public dollars. So in the 

next . . . At the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

moving that motion. 

 

And what this is essentially about, Mr. Speaker, this, Mr. 

Speaker, is in fact a debate about priorities. We’ve heard story 

after story, Mr. Speaker, about health and seniors’ care in this 

province getting worse in recent years under this government, 

not getting better. We have some concerns that the reality is this 

government should be fixing the basics and achieving real 

improvement in health care and in seniors’ care. And instead 

this government is choosing to enter into a $40 million contract 

with an American consultant, Mr. Speaker, with an American 

consultant, and spending untold millions on top of that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Health regions are also spending money. There’s money being 

spent on, as I said, untold millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve asked many questions and the ministry has not provided 

many of those answers, so we in fact still don’t know what the 

total is. It is a running total, Mr. Speaker, and we do have some 

serious concerns about that. The clock is still ticking. 

 

The reality is, what is needed right now, Mr. Speaker, is good 

listening to front-line health care workers, commitment to 

actually listen to them and learn from both health care workers, 

patients, their families. What are the issues, and how can they 

be fixed? 

 

I know one of the things that my dad always has said about 

consultants: we hire someone to look at our watch and tell us 

what time it is, Mr. Speaker. I think that that’s what we’ve done 

with John Black and Associates. We have someone from the 

United States with a very different health care system coming in 

and telling us what to do, Mr. Speaker, when in fact we should 

be listening to those who work in our health care system like 

the nurse practitioners here and other health practitioners and 

families who continue to have story after story, who have 

flagged the lack of staffing in our acute care facilities, in our 

long-term care facilities. The core of the health care crisis, Mr. 

Speaker, is a lack of staffing in all our facilities. People are 

working under-staffed on a regular basis. 

 

We had last year, we flagged about this time last year, a little bit 

earlier when we, in March of last year started bringing forward 

stories about challenges in long-term care facilities again 

around staffing ratios 1 to 30, really not acceptable 

staffing-to-resident ratios, Mr. Speaker. And initially that was 

dismissed by the minister: oh no, no, we don’t have a problem 

in long-term care, in seniors’ care; nothing to see here. And 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5069 

then the stories continued to emerge, Mr. Speaker, and at that 

point the minister finally agreed that he needed to do 

something. And so he sent his CEOs [chief executive officer] 

out to tour long-term care facilities in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And they eventually reported back that yes, in fact 

there is some serious concern in long-term and seniors’ care, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this again is a debate about priorities. Is it about $40 

million-plus as the tally rises, Mr. Speaker, or is this about 

investing in the care of our seniors who really need more than 

they’re getting, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So some of the issues that emerge, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

identify some of the care homes with major issues identified in 

the CEO tour. We had, at the Spruce Manor Special Care Home 

in Dalmeny, staffing levels are inadequate to meet the needs of 

residents due to the increased level of acuity. We have, at 

Stensrud Lodge in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, they can hear 

people crying for help in the evening because of staffing 

shortages — a 1 to 25 care aid ratio on evenings. We have, at 

the Central Parkland Lodge, staff members commented they 

sometimes struggle with priorities. For example, when feeding 

one resident and another rings to be toileted, they don’t know if 

they should interrupt the meal which in turns get cold for that 

resident, or if they should go toilet the person who may soil 

themselves, end quote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reality is this is about priorities. So in the fall, after a 

freedom of information request and the extended, and the 

extended . . . You get 30 days, the government gets 30 days to 

respond to a freedom of information request, and the possibility 

of an extension. The government asked for an extension. When 

we asked for the CEO tour report, we wanted to see what was in 

it, Mr. Speaker. And the day that the report was due, this 

government had a news conference and made public some of 

the very, the awful things that are going on in some of our 

seniors’ care homes, Mr. Speaker, because of a lack of staffing. 

 

So the minister came forward and put together a fund that he 

asked health regions for what some of their priorities were, and 

he denied $8.5 million. So he wanted urgent requests. Like what 

do health regions really need to meet the needs of their seniors, 

Mr. Speaker? So these weren’t extras, Mr. Speaker. These were 

call bells that didn’t work, the bare minimum that people should 

be getting in seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker, call bells. The lack of 

that infrastructure, the lack of staff, over and over and over 

people identified the lack of staff. 

 

[11:00] 

 

In Saskatoon alone actually, the Saskatoon Health Region, the 

largest health region in the province, Mr. Speaker, asked for . . . 

Or they need; they didn’t ask for it. The Saskatoon Health 

Region identified the need for 1,700 lifts, Mr. Speaker. They 

only asked for 100 in their urgent action request, Mr. Speaker. 

So they pared the urgent action. At the request of the 

government they pared back their urgent request and they only 

received 56 lifts, Mr. Speaker. They needed, they have 

identified a need in the Saskatoon Health Region for 450 more 

special care aids, Mr. Speaker, 450 more. They only asked for 

38 and they received 19, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again this debate about lean is a debate about priorities, Mr. 

Speaker — $40 million-plus for John Black, an American 

consultant, to come in and look at our watch and tell us what 

time it is instead of having our very competent, well-paid CEOs 

and other managers think about how do you engage front-line 

staff, Mr. Speaker. Because that is one of the things that needs 

to be done, engaging front-line staff. There’s no doubt about 

that, Mr. Speaker. And the deputy minister responsible for lean 

actually has said that all the positives that have come out from 

the lean work have been because they have in fact listened to 

front-line health care workers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Front-line health care workers right now are saying there are in 

fact some very real concerns with lean. And it’s not just 

front-line health care workers, Mr. Speaker. It is also people 

who are going through the lean training process who are 

identifying problems. I know I’ve had an opportunity to have 

conversations with people in the Saskatoon Health Region who 

have done some of the travelling and training, and they have 

some very real issues with how lean is rolling out. In fact the 

comment that I’ve had is that the Saskatoon Health Region is 

holding their breath waiting for the John Black contract to be 

finished, Mr. Speaker. And that’s coming from management. 

 

But some of the comments from front-line workers, one needs 

only to either check out the Saskatoon Health Region website or 

the SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] website or the SUN 

Facebook page, Mr. Speaker. There’s comments from nurses 

who . . . One nurse, Denise, says: 

 

We have never been so short of supplies since this started, 

everything from IV solutions, suction tubing, syringes, 

alcohol swabs, and clean linens. This process only takes us 

away from the bedside, running all over the hospital 

looking for supplies. 

 

We are taken away from the bedside to porter patients and 

run lab specimens to the lab. Our ward clerks often helped 

with these tasks, allowing us to remain on the floor to care 

for the patients, but since lean we have lost two ward clerk 

positions, leaving us nurses to do those duties. I spend far 

too much time answering phones and running around the 

hospital instead of providing direct patient care. This 

leaves me to wonder how secure my job is and to seriously 

consider the safety of the patients during this process. 

 

Another nurse, Rory, on the SUN web page says: 

 

They are comparing patient care to a Toyota 

manufacturing line. Cut and dry not okay. I hope Brad 

Wall is my patient some day. 

 

Donna has this to say: 

 

Many of us had serious doubts from the onset, especially 

when lean classes involved having us make paper 

airplanes more efficiently. Not a single word revolved 

around safe, effective, professional care of patients. Can 

we put a halt to this massive, costly government-driven 

directive? I fear not, at least not until the next election. In 

the meantime, I will continue to be hopeful there is 

someone out there in authority with eyes to see and the 

will to listen. 



5070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

Linda, another nurse, had this to say: 

 

I had the opportunity to attend my first ever paid 

educational kaizen day on Monday. You could feel the 

frustration in the room from not only nurses but from other 

departments. Other staff were very vocal with their 

concerns as well. 

 

Concern regarding the lean concept is the variability of the 

human factor and how a patient’s status can change. And 

how can we compare this to a Toyota factory? A light lit 

up on a board if there was a problem with the factory 

assembly line. Our patients’ bodies do not light up if 

something is going wrong. Can we truly compare patient 

groups and have them follow standard work outlined by 

lean? 

 

And she goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have managers flagging concerns about the John Black 

contract, Mr. Speaker. We have front-line workers who are not 

feeling engaged. 

 

One of the hallmarks, Mr. Speaker, if you read any literature 

about lean, is in fact the engagement of front-line workers in the 

process. And clearly that is not the case. You don’t have 

engagement or buy-in. This government, despite the fact I think 

people were very hopeful and optimistic in the beginning, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government has lost their way and has 

completely bought it all, hook, line, and sinker, Mr. Speaker, 

that this is . . . and have blinders on and in fact have blinders on, 

Mr. Speaker, and can’t see that people are saying that there is a 

problem that needs to be corrected here. 

 

So we have the $40-million-plus contract. We have kaizen 

promotion offices popping up all across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. And it was interesting, the minister has made the 

comment that the kaizen promotion offices were just previously 

existing offices, that they weren’t, these aren’t new offices, Mr. 

Speaker. They were policy offices who’ve had their names 

changed. And I believe the minister said something to the effect 

that it’s not additional positions within the ministry or within 

the regions, it’s really reorganizing how the ministry works. 

 

But it’s interesting because I have a health region, a Saskatoon 

Health Region posting, Mr. Speaker, for three kaizen specialists 

in the kaizen promotion office; three permanent full-time 

positions which clearly isn’t just about reorganizing and 

redeployment of staff, Mr. Speaker. The position is: 

 

KPO specialist will be proficient in leading and supporting 

replication and standard work, RPIWs, 3P events, kanban, 

and the Saskatoon Health Region 5S campaign, as well as 

training within. The KPO specialist will rotate among 

these roles as directed by the kaizen promotion office to 

meet the changing needs of the organization. 

 

So when the minister talks about this isn’t new money or the 

kaizen promotion offices are just basically renames and 

redistribution of staff, Mr. Speaker, that is not the case. I have a 

Saskatchewan ad . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, 

the members opposite are talking about keeping it classy. I 

actually have no idea . . . I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker, I am 

talking about, Mr. Speaker, kaizen promotion offices that, 

kaizen promotion offices that the minister said were just 

reorganizations. With the job posting, clearly that is not the 

case. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, again the reality is this debate is about 

priorities. Is this about a $40 million contract with an American 

consultant, or should we be putting our money into front-line 

services for our seniors, Mr. Speaker, and for people who are in 

acute care facilities? And we think that the latter is where we 

should be putting our money, Mr. Speaker. The number of 

special care aids, licensed practical nurses, registered nurses 

that could be afforded, Mr. Speaker, if we cut this $40 million 

John Black contract is something that we should . . . this 

government should be looking at. So I would like to move a 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemns this government for 

neglecting the basics in health care and seniors’ care and 

failing to listen to front-line health care workers, while 

wasting millions of dollars on its massive lean project in 

health care, including $40 million for one US consultant, 

over $17 million for kaizen promotion offices, and $3,500 

per day for Japanese senseis. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the government for 

neglecting the basics in health care and seniors care and 

failing to listen to front-line health care workers, while 

wasting millions of dollars on its massive lean project in 

health care, including $40 million for one US consultant, 

over $17 million for kaizen promotion offices, and $3,500 

per day for Japanese senseis. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased 

to stand here today in the Assembly to talk about our 

government’s commitment to provide good quality health care 

to the people of Saskatchewan — the people who are our 

mothers, our fathers, our sisters, our brothers, our sons, and our 

daughters and, in my case, grandchildren. 

 

This budget’s investment in health care demonstrates an 

investment in people. This budget invests in infrastructure such 

as the new children’s hospital in Saskatoon or the 237 million 

committed to replace 13 outdated long-term care facilities or, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the planning for more long-term care beds 

in La Ronge. 

 

Just this very hour the Minister of Rural and Remote Health 

care made a great announcement regarding the nurse 

practitioner strategy. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a great 

investment in people, an investment in Saskatchewan, here. 

This government’s commitment to health care hits very close to 

my home in the Prince Albert area and region north of the city. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is investing the 2 million 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5071 

into Prince Albert’s Victoria Hospital to begin planning the 

renewal of it. It’s a great, significant announcement for the area 

of Saskatchewan. 6.5 million for continued construction of the 

Health Sciences facility at the U of S is also investing in people. 

 

One of my family members, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was just 

recently at the University Hospital in Saskatoon and the care 

there was wonderful. The quality of the surgeon who performed 

the surgery and all the rest of the health care providers was 

great, and I am very grateful to these people, the quality of the 

care that these men and women give. Some of our colleagues 

have spouses who are in the health care field as well, and they 

realize the commitment and the care given to the residents of 

Saskatchewan. So I would just like to say thank you to these 

people who look after the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a 25 per cent increase in 

specialists under our government. Some of my children have 

chosen the health care field for careers. Our daughter and 

son-in-law combined have degrees in social work, nursing, and 

medicine. Chris has a practice in the city and also in the rural 

area. He drives out to a health facility once a week to deliver 

health care in a town with a population of approximately 800 

people. It’s good to see these young professionals investing in 

Saskatchewan, believing in Saskatchewan’s vision. 

 

Our government’s budget increased 2.6 million to support rural 

physicians such as this rural physician’s locum pool. Also our 

government is forgiving up to 120,000 in students loans for new 

rural doctors. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is our government in 

action. Our government is investing in rural health professions, 

investing in Saskatchewan people. 

 

One of my daughters, Lacey received her master’s in speech 

pathology, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She had a job option of either 

California or Yorkton, Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Well, and I didn’t say where she went. But she 

did, she did go to Yorkton, Saskatchewan. She came back to 

invest in Saskatchewan. So in choosing Saskatchewan, our 

government was able to invest in another Saskatchewan 

resident helping Saskatchewan grow. 

 

Our daughter Lacey grew up on the farm. She’s a 4-H member, 

a great volunteer in Saskatchewan. She’s typical of our 

grassroots rural residents. Describing her, she would be 

big-hearted, sensitive, empathetic. And Lacey currently works 

with stroke victims and seniors. So I am very grateful, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, for Lacey planning her life in Saskatchewan. 

I’m grateful that these young people that I’ve described are 

living in Saskatchewan, raising their families, and working for 

us in Saskatchewan. They are contributing to the economy, the 

health, and fabric of our great province. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government recognizes the vital role 

that the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency in our province has. 

Cancer of course is very near and dear to me because I lost my 

mother to cancer. So I’m very proud to say that our government 

budgeted over 155 million in total funding. This budget will 

evaluate cancer care throughout Saskatchewan and it will help 

save lives and families from heartache and loss. And thank you 

to the workers in the Cancer Agency for their caring and 

support. 

 

I also have a friend who is recovering from breast cancer, and 

I’m grateful our government is providing timely care for those 

around us. Our government has invested in people by increasing 

funding by 98 per cent over the last seven years for the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Investing in added medical training seats and medical residency 

positions will help us all, rural and urban. And I’m very grateful 

to the qualified men and women working in these front lines in 

health care in our province. Their presence in Saskatchewan 

benefits us all. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spoke up about World 

Autism Awareness Day. And to mark this day, we raised the 

autism awareness flag in front of the Legislative Building. I 

belong to adopt-an-MLA program where a nice young man, 

Brian, has adopted me into his family. And he has taught me 

very much about autism. This is a very valuable opportunity for 

all of us to learn more about the autism spectrum disorder and 

to build a better understanding of this complex condition that 

has an impact on so many Saskatchewan families. 

 

It’s estimated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one out of 93 children in 

Canada is affected by ASD [autism spectrum disorder]. And 

that is why our government supports a comprehensive approach 

and responsive system for individuals and families affected by 

autism. Our government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is very proud to 

provide funding for support-enhanced autism interventions. In 

2014-15 we are investing over $7 million towards targeted 

autism supports, and that is a 1,400 per cent increase since 

2007-08. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this investment will go towards 

education, training, specialists, support workers, and diagnostic 

assessment. 

 

I’m very proud of our government, and our government and 

health regions work very closely with other interested parties to 

build comprehensive autism services in Saskatchewan. This is 

investing in people and families. I am grateful for all the 

qualified men and women working in this field of service, 

helping the children of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you would like to compare health 

regions, we have a very long list. I know there’s some more 

colleagues on my side that would like to discuss them. But in 

Saskatchewan Party, we have 300 more doctors practising in 

Saskatchewan now than six years ago. On the NDP side, they 

lost 173 doctors in the last five full years in government. So I 

do believe our government is making headway. 

 

I would like to talk about the announcement of the nurse 

practitioner strategy, which is a great initiative throughout 

Saskatchewan, especially in the rural area that I represent of 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am so proud of all our government’s 

achievements. I would like to stand behind our record. We can 

compare our health records any day. And I would also like to 

put on record I do not support the motion. Thank you very 



5072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

much, sir. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m glad to join the debate today on the motion. I guess it’s . . . 

This is Saskatchewan. This is a debate about health care. This is 

a debate about priorities, so obviously there are a lot of different 

ways that each of us in this Assembly connect and interact with 

the health care system and with the question of health care in 

this province. 

 

And I guess the thing I’d state off the bat, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of . . . This is very specifically about the contract with the 

United States consultant, John Black and Associates, for $40 

million. It’s about the fact that this government has apparently 

not just drank the Kool-Aid when it comes to lean but are now 

buying it wholesale at $40 million a crack. They’re putting up 

the money to bring in the senseis for I think $2,000 flights and 

$3,500 a day retainer. And this, Mr. Speaker, is against a 

backdrop of what’s happening more broadly in our health care 

system today. 

 

And in terms of whether or not there are good things that have 

happened in recent history in terms of nurse hires or even the 

announcement we saw today around nurse practitioners and the 

way that they bring value to the continuum of care in health 

care, Mr. Speaker, I guess it is about that. But it’s not to say, in 

terms of the problems that we have with the way that this 

government has gone so far overboard with lean, that it takes 

away from those other good things. 

 

And I guess to turn that question on its head a bit, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the question would be, you know, how many nurse 

practitioners have been hired as a result of this $40 million 

contract with John Black and Associates from the United 

States? I would submit none, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll look to the Deputy Speaker, if he’s . . . Give me the high 

sign, so I’ll just keep going. Anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

terms of the contract that this government has signed with the 

lean consultant out of the United States, John Black and 

Associates, their penchant for sensei, their penchant for kaizen 

exercises, their penchant for all the different sort of panoply of 

lean exercises that come with that, I would submit, is an 

example of a government that’s gone way overboard. 

 

And it’s funny, Mr. Speaker, in terms of lean itself, you know, 

and questions of process engineering, that they’re as old as 

assembly lines themselves, Mr. Speaker. You go back to the 

earlier sort of stop time studies of the late 1800s and the way 

that that has moved forward to immediately after post World 

War II and the work that the Toyota motor company introduced 

around what has now come to be regarded as lean, the way that 

that has moved through different sort of fads and ebbs and 

flows as regards performance management. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, lean is not all bad. This may surprise some 

members to hear me say this, but it’s not all bad. And there are 

some lessons that we can learn from this, Mr. Speaker. And 

before members opposite get into, you know, quoting me out of 

context as we’ve seen, as we’ve seen demonstrated from the top 

down over there, Mr. Speaker, with the Premier yesterday being 

called to account for pulling out of context quotes from the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses on this very question, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the good that is there to be drawn from 

lean management, lean processes, I will say this: in terms of the 

health care professionals I talk to, in terms of nurses that I come 

into contact with, they do say that their supply cabinets have 

never been better organized. They do say that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

But they also say that in terms of the work that you need to do 

with human beings and remembering that health care is not an 

assembly line, is not, you know, building widgets but dealing 

with patients, it would seem that again with the way that this 

government has gotten into a $40 million contract with a United 

States consultant, the way that they’ve gotten into flying in the 

senseis for that special attention and consultation, it seems that 

they’ve gotten away from what is I think a common sense 

Saskatchewan value in terms of, you know, you’ve got to be 

reasonable about these things. You’ve got to make sure that it 

all adds up. 

 

And in terms of the $40 million that that government says has 

already paid for itself in terms of lean savings, that are 

supposedly attributed to the work with the senseis and with 

John Black and Associates and on, well, Mr. Speaker, it’s sort 

of like a faith-based system where if you repeat it enough and 

you believe hard enough, then of course these things are true, 

and you can’t understand why that would be brought into 

question. 

 

But I think, you know, and maybe that’s because they’ve just 

gone so far overboard in terms of this slavish devotion to lean 

as witnessed by the $40 million contract and the flying in of the 

senseis and the urgent paper airplane exercises and on but, you 

know, whatever good lean may have had to offer to the system 

as a whole, Mr. Speaker, you stack that up alongside the fact 

that you’ve still got emergency rooms that are vastly 

overcrowded and where people are waiting too long to get to 

those emergent services. 

 

You’ve got good work that was done in terms of health care 

recruitment, and I’ll say that very clearly on the record here, 

Mr. Speaker. In terms of taking those health care professionals 

and hiving them off into lean exercises instead of making sure 

that their practice of care and their credentialing is better 

attended to, and we’ve heard those concerns brought forward by 

nurses on the floor of this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see the work that again holds out some promise in terms of 

hot spotting or in terms of home care initiatives where 

alongside that, the very hopeful story that is spun in the press 

releases and in the rhetoric doesn’t match up with the resources 

being brought to bear on the shop floor, or on the gemba, Mr. 

Speaker, to use a lean expression, where we see health care 

professionals saying, you know, is this about doing a more 

effective, efficient job of delivering health care services which 

serves patients first? Or is this about the things that are known 

euphemistically right now around voluntary management, 

where it’s about doing away with positions and downgrading 

the services that people should be looking to their health care 

system to provide? 

 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5073 

And I guess lastly, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, you know, how far 

this government has gotten away from the basics in this system, 

I mean, you know, my colleague from Riversdale who has 

brought this motion forward has been a very tireless champion 

in terms of what’s happening around long-term care and 

seniors’ care in this province and again the way that you see a 

$10 million urgent action fund, which in and of itself was pared 

back in terms of what health regions could or could not apply 

for. And then the way that that translates, Mr. Speaker, into the 

way that care is not being delivered in the manner that our 

seniors so richly deserve in terms of what’s happening on the 

floor. And that $10 million urgent action fund and the kind of, 

you know, some of it doing some good, no doubt, but not 

meeting the need that is there in the system. 

 

But alongside that you’ve got the $40 million for a United 

States consultant to fly in Japanese senseis to do the various sort 

of exercises associated with lean. And people look at that and 

they wonder, you know, what the heck is this government 

thinking, Mr. Speaker? And if I was seated in those benches, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be wondering the same thing because there is 

some good work that has taken place in the health care system 

on this government’s watch. 

 

But there are things like this that erode that progress, that erode 

that good work that people look and say, you know, how is it 

they’ve got $40 million for a consultant with a United States 

corporation? How is it that they’ve got to spend the time flying 

in the senseis? How is it that they’ve got to roll everything into 

this lean approach to management? How is it that we’ve got, 

you know, lean black belts from right here in Saskatchewan that 

say that, you know, this government’s bought a bill of goods, 

hook, line, and sinker? How do all those things add up, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And you put that alongside the other good initiatives that are in 

the system, and you can’t help but think that those are being 

poorly served and that it’s not about patient first, but it’s about a 

government that has lost its way. 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I am pleased to enter into the debate today, but I’d like to start 

by saying I reject the premise of this motion. This motion states 

that we are neglecting the basics of health care and senior care 

in this province. This government has in fact done anything but. 

We have a Health minister that has instructed CEOs to roll up 

their sleeves and go into facilities to ensure that health care is 

being delivered in the most efficient way possible, but also to 

ensure that nothing is left behind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of being the legislative secretary 

to a minister of Health in this province. And one of my roles 

was to look at nurse recruitment and retention for this province. 

This government was not afraid to set targets; previous 

government, very afraid to set targets. We’re not afraid to set 

targets. We set a target of hiring 800 nurses. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we had to roll up our sleeves and go out and 

encourage young nurses to continue to stay here, to not leave 

the province. We also did international recruitment, and I had 

the opportunity to participate in that. And we brought over 200 

nurses from the Philippines who have been a wonderful 

addition to our health care system here in the province. But we 

didn’t just hire 800 nurses, Mr. Speaker; we hired 1,000 nurses. 

And, Mr. Speaker, so this is a really good indication of a 

government that is not neglecting the basics of health care or 

neglecting seniors’ care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also had the opportunity to spend time talking to 

all level of health care providers when I was doing the nurse 

recruitment and retention strategy. So I had the opportunity to 

meet them face to face and listen to the front-line workers. And 

we are paying attention to them. We have today a very good 

announcement for nurse practitioners. We are meeting the 

challenges of health care head-on. 

 

I also had the opportunity as legislative secretary to the minister 

of Health to work on a senior care strategy. And the motion 

indicates that in fact we are neglecting senior care in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, we are doing anything but neglecting 

senior care health care in this province. This is a government 

that takes the continuum of care of seniors very, very seriously. 

 

When I went throughout the province doing consultations with 

seniors, with caregivers, with family members to put together 

some information on a senior care strategy, we went across the 

whole province, from north to south to east to west. And it was 

interesting because the residents of this province said, you 

know what, this is the first time in a long time that someone has 

ever come out and asked us what we think. This is the first time 

in a long time that anyone has asked us, how can we help? 

What suggestions can we make to help make health care better 

in this province? And we took those suggestions very seriously, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the continuum of care of seniors, one of the things they 

brought forward to us was that most seniors would like to stay 

within their own home, but sometimes they just can’t. And so 

because of that, they would like to be able to maybe move into 

a personal care home. Well one of the things, a lot of our 

seniors in the province felt that they just didn’t have the 

financial wherewithal to be able to move into a personal care 

home. And so what our government did was put forward a 

personal care home benefit, and that was $1,875. And now 

within this last budget, that has been increased to $1,950. 

That’ll be increased in July. So, Mr. Speaker, this was one of 

the suggestions that people in Saskatchewan made to us. And 

we took it very seriously and we put it into practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another thing that seniors, their family members, 

and caregivers conveyed to us was the concern they had for 

vulnerable people in this province, not just seniors but 

vulnerable people. So this session the Ministry of Justice is 

bringing forward legislation in fact to help with decision makers 

for legislation for vulnerable people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite to state in their 

motion that we are not listening to front-line workers, that we 

are not listening to the people of Saskatchewan, couldn’t be 

further from the truth, because whenever we’ve had the 

opportunity to go out, meet with people, we take their 



5074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

suggestions very seriously and we put them into practice. 

 

We have also gone forward with a very aggressive recruitment 

for physicians. And to date, we have over 200 more or 300 — 

whoa, I short-changed ourselves there — 300 more doctors 

practising today than when we took office. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that in fact makes health 

care a priority. But we don’t just speak about it; we in fact have 

put this into practice. We do not . . . You know, I think that one 

of the things we always hear the opposition tout that, you know, 

this is the home of medicare. But you know, Mr. Speaker, it 

takes action. It takes rolling up your sleeves and getting to work 

to ensure that health care is sustainable. We can’t just keep 

shovelling money into the health care budget and think that 

taxpayers are going to feel that that’s a good use of their money. 

They want to know that in fact we are living within our means; 

we’re spending within our means. And that’s what our health 

care budget is doing. It’s making sure that people’s concerns are 

being heard and that we are dealing with them in a very prudent 

manner. 

 

One of the problems that the opposition has, and I think that all 

of us can attest to that, is that they keep looking backwards to 

the good old days. Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? People 

in Saskatchewan want to keep moving forward. They’ve had 

enough of their old days. They are supportive of a 

Saskatchewan Party government that believes in moving the 

ball forward. They believe, Saskatchewan people believe that 

this is a government that puts people top. People are our priority 

— listening to the people in the province, going across, having 

conversations, and then putting their concerns into practice. Mr. 

Speaker, that is the whole objective of our government is to 

ensure that we are listening and that we are acting upon their 

concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have paid attention to the wait times. We are 

not letting ideology get in the way of ensuring that health care 

is being delivered to the people of the province. People of 

Saskatchewan deserve timely health care, and that’s a priority 

of this government. So for the members opposite to bring 

forward a motion that says we’re not listening to the people of 

this province, couldn’t be further from the truth. Mr. Speaker. 

People are our number one priority. 

 

And that is why our government has made record investments 

in long-term care facilities, in surgical wait times, in nurse 

practitioners, nurse recruitment and retention, physician 

recruitment and retention. Mr. Speaker, this is a government 

that gets it. This is a government that puts health care . . . I’ll 

put our record of health care up against the NDP’s record any 

day. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We’re coming out on 

top. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

my pleasure to rise in this debate today. I really appreciate the 

fact that my colleague has brought forth this motion, and I think 

it’s an important debate that we are continuing to have here in 

the legislature as well as in the province. And I know a number 

of folks are talking about this issue in the province as well 

because obviously, as my colleague from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre said, this is about health care and this is 

Saskatchewan and this is an important issue to everyone in this 

province and has a strong, rich history here in this province. 

 

I’ve listened to the comments of the speakers earlier, and I have 

to say I am in agreement with a lot of what’s been said, 

particularly about the quality of care and the quality of work 

that our health care workers are putting in every day in hospitals 

and care homes across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

witnessed that first-hand last night. My father is in the hospital 

in Moose Jaw. He’s getting excellent, excellent care. He’s a 

very sick man, but he’s getting excellent care. And it’s 

something I think that’s really important for us to acknowledge 

the work that the workers are doing. And I know my colleague 

from Saskatchewan Rivers talked about her family and the good 

work that they do in the health system in Saskatchewan. Many 

of my constituents are workers in the health care system, and I 

think we can be very, very proud of the work they do and in the 

importance of the work they do here in Saskatchewan. 

 

What we’re talking about today though is the choices this 

government has made and how to improve the quality of that 

care. And we’re looking at choices about how to implement 

systems that will make things work better. And certainly that 

intention is good. 

 

And it’s not something new. It’s not an idea that started in 

2007. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would be willing to bet that if we 

go back in the history of this province, regardless of which 

party is in power and what kind of partisan politics are at play, 

people in the health care system have always wanted to find 

efficiencies. We know that’s true for any government 

department. We know that’s true for the education system, and 

we know that’s true for pretty much every bureaucracy that’s 

ever been created. Of course we want to find efficiencies. Of 

course we want to have savings. And of course we want to have 

our people in the trenches doing the work supported as best as 

they can be and also being able to help their clients as best as 

can be. 

 

I think the questions we’re asking right now is the choices this 

government has made. And one of the speakers talked about 

shovelling buckets of money into the health care system and 

how they’re not going to do that. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 

whole point. By contracting with a consultant from the United 

States — which implies that people here don’t have the good 

common sense to be able to figure out these efficiencies if 

they’d just sit down and listen to front-line workers — we are 

shovelling millions of dollars into a consultancy. And I mean 

you’ve heard all my colleagues speak about this, and certainly 

people in the public are talking about some of the crazy 

expenses that are involved in this particular consultancy. It’s 

not about finding efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. It’s about the 

choices and the type of services that this government is 

engaging to find those efficiencies. 

 

And we’ve set out time and time again and I know the health 

care workers, and as I said, it’s not just health care, but we have 

a number of health care workers that are coming forward and 

saying that they feel a lot of this imposed-upon framework is 

actually very contrary to the type of work we’re doing. And 

remember this is a system that’s designed, as one of my 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5075 

colleagues said, to improve efficiencies in a factory where you 

are creating cars. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you create thousands of cars, they’re 

all identical and you can use identical systems to treat them. But 

as everybody knows, human beings don’t quite act that way. 

And when you’re talking about someone like my dad who’s 

now got, you know, various tubes coming out of parts of his 

body when I go visit him in the hospital, he is an individual that 

has a very specific need and a very specific health concern. And 

we have a lot of really good people helping him right now. Dr. 

Miller and some of the nurses are treating him wonderfully, and 

they’re doing their absolute very best. And so that kind of 

treatment you can’t widgetize, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 

problem when you use a Toyota factory approach to dealing 

with actual human issues. 

 

We see that in the seniors’ homes. We know that there’s a lot of 

need for good quality delivery of services in seniors’ homes. 

And indeed, you know, if my dad gets through this health issue 

he has — you know, he’s 87 years old — and the next reality 

for our family is looking at where is he going to spend the rest 

of his time if he doesn’t get through this and isn’t able to go 

home. So there’s a lot of questions about things like that. 

 

But one of the things we’ve heard this government talk about a 

lot, and I want to raise this, Mr. Speaker, is the claim, and 

we’ve heard our Premier repeatedly claim that this $40,000 

consultancy is resulting in millions and millions of dollars of 

savings. And he’s claimed that several times here in the House, 

Mr. Speaker. He’s also claimed it out in the rotunda. And we 

aren’t able to really understand what the basis of those claims 

are. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And I’d like to talk a little bit this morning about an article in 

The StarPhoenix by a health professional named Mr. Mark 

Lemstra. And Mr. Lemstra makes a pretty good case that what 

the Premier is claiming is actually unsustainable. And what we 

hear from Mr. Lemstra is a report of a meeting he had, and this 

is with members of the Health Quality Council. And he has 

great regard for these individuals as do I. I know these people 

work very hard and believe very strongly in what they’re doing 

in health quality. To improve health quality is the goal of 

everyone in this province. It’s not something that only certain 

people are interested in. 

 

But he had a meeting with them, and the problem with the 

Health Quality Council is their repeated claims that lean 

management has begun to make care safer and increase patient 

satisfaction and save money. So Mr. Lemstra then said, well 

let’s have a look at this. He went in to the Health Quality 

Council’s website. And he says, yes, if they’re make these 

claims, then let’s have a look at what the Health Quality 

Council website has to say. 

 

So he tested their claim. And in his article in The StarPhoenix 

this morning, he gives a whole bunch of different indicators that 

are reported on the Health Quality Council’s website talking 

about all the different measurements that they have. And we see 

that for example adverse events are actually somewhat higher, 

going up in the health region. Also they have data on patient 

satisfaction, and in there we see that patient satisfaction is 

actually declining. He’s talking about patient health outcomes, 

and also the self-reported health is actually down over the last 

few years. The five-day in-hospital mortality rate is going up. 

 

And then he has a number of other statistics that he reports, and 

I would encourage all members to have a look at these numbers 

because I think they’re pretty relevant to the discussion that’s 

going on here today. And he also looks at, he says advocacy is 

another claim that he looks at. And he said there’s numerous yet 

unreferenced statements on the Health Quality Council’s 

website that says that lean increases patient’s safety, patient 

satisfaction, reduces costs, and improves health outcomes. And 

he said none, Mr. Speaker, “. . . none of the indicators available 

on the Health Quality Council website support these 

conclusions.” 

 

So you have to really wonder where the Premier is getting his 

information. In fact Mr. Lemstra goes on to say: 

 

. . . the opposite is true. This despite the fact that their 

survey data shows [I’m quoting this] the aboriginal 

population is severely under-sampled. It is likely that the 

results would be much worse if this discriminated against 

population is fully represented in the sample. 

 

And then he goes on to talk about an interview with Thomas 

Rotter who was, in the University of Saskatchewan, Chair in 

health quality improvement. And what he says is, Mr. Rotter 

said in April 2013, so a year ago, “ . . . little hard data is 

available.” And I’m going to quote this as well, Mr. Speaker. 

This is a quote: 

 

. . . little hard data is available on how, or even if, 

processes such as lean contribute to health care quality 

improvement. If Health Quality Council must advocate for 

lean, it would be more accurate to state that the council is 

hopeful that positive outcomes will be realized one day, 

but that data collected to date has shown no impact 

whatsoever. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is something that the Premier 

needs to actually take a look at. And if at all possible, I think 

Mr. Lemstra and all of us in the House here and indeed the 

people of Saskatchewan would like to understand how it is he 

continues to reiterate that there is millions of dollars of savings 

in lean when our own Health Quality Council website cannot 

demonstrate any improvements at all. So we hope there’s 

improvements. Certainly with $40 million to an outside 

consultant, one would hope that there were improvements. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid that the evidence just isn’t there. 

 

So I think it’s important that we support this motion. I’m very 

pleased that my colleague brought this motion today. And I 

think it’s important that we all pay attention to it, and I would 

like to see the Assembly support the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m proud to rise in the House today to speak to a 

motion that I certainly won’t be supporting. 



5076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

I’m very, very proud of our health care system, and I’m 

certainly proud of the number of initiatives that we’ve certainly 

undertaken. And I will always defend any actions that are going 

to try to improve our health system, which brings me . . . After 

reading the motion, I was a little bit stumped. I was trying to 

figure out what the members opposite are scared about. Or was 

it just fear? I’m not exactly sure. Maybe it’s fear of change. 

 

So I thought I’d go through an exercise of trying to explain, you 

know, what change is, and just maybe to alleviate some of their 

fears. I mean you do have to be innovative. Maybe they also 

were scared of P3s [public-private partnership]. And I can 

understand why they’d be scared of P3s because they have no 

plan, no policy, and no platform. So they should be scared of 

those as well. I mean I can understand that. I mean the 

naysayers opposite. I mean we’re talking about Turkey Lurkey 

and Chicken Little and Henny Penny, you know, maybe 

Pinocchio sometimes, and Geppetto. But, you know, they can 

self-see it. They can figure it out for themselves. But apparently 

the sky is falling and it’s falling all the time. But, no, no, it’s 

certainly not, certainly not, certainly not, certainly not falling. 

 

But on this side of the House, we believe in the people of this 

province. We believe in serving the public. We believe that 12 

words in Japanese does not constitute a dictionary for instance. 

But you know, I’ll help you through that. There’s 91 words in 

the lean, well, let’s call it a glossary. That’s probably a more 

accurate description. It’s a glossary. And there’s 12 words in 

Japanese. I’ll also help you understand what a dictionary is. It’s 

a book that lists the words of a language in alphabetical order 

and gives their meaning. It’s a book. A glossary is an 

alphabetical list of terms and words found in it relating to a 

specific subject. So just so we know, let’s be very accurate. The 

lean dictionary is actually a lean glossary. So let’s be very clear 

about that. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity in many years of government to work 

in the health system. I was actually an employee of . . . I’ve 

worked for SUN. I’ve worked for the health region, and I 

worked for Health. So I have a little understanding of the health 

system in an awful lot of ways. 

 

During my time, before this government was elected, I saw a 

massive exodus of my co-workers out of this province, a 

massive exodus off to, you know, Alberta. It was absolutely 

shameful. I mean for instance we lost over 1,160 health care 

workers and the members opposite when they were in 

government in their last five years, 1,160 health care workers, 

173 doctors in the last five full years in government, 455 nurses 

in the last five years of government, 155 pharmacists in the last 

five full years of government, 95 physiotherapists in the last 

five full years of government. I mean I find that to be shameful 

and rather sad. 

 

I also tried to figure out what the NDP’s lean plan would be and 

I’m left with this. Their lean plan was, they promised to cut 

surgical wait lists by 30 per cent in 1999, but they actually 

increased wait lists by 61 per cent. So leaned it out, I don’t 

know, backwards? Maybe the vacuum hose was reversed. I’m 

not sure. But they eliminated 52 hospitals. Fifty of those 

hospitals were closed in one year alone, 50, 50 hospitals 

completely closed. I mean that’s a lean plan. That’s a lean plan. 

Absolutely. Eliminated 19 long-term care facilities. At the same 

time, we built or are building 15 new long-term care facilities. 

Okay, you eliminate; we build. Eliminated, as I said, those 52 

hospitals. 

 

Okay. Well we’re building a new hospital in Moose Jaw, a new 

psychiatric hospital in North Battleford, new children’s 

hospital, where? Saskatoon. Again, amazing. 

 

As I said, in terms of their cutting the surgical wait times, in 

1999 they’ve increased by 61 per cent. Well the number of 

people waiting since we’ve been a government, more than 18 

months, they’re waiting for more than 18 months, that’s down 

97 per cent. More than one year? That’s down 93 per cent. 

More than six months? Down 83 per cent. More than three 

months? Down 70 per cent. The total number of people waiting, 

down 40 per cent since November 2007.  

 

An Hon. Member: — Do we take advice from them? 

 

Mr. Docherty: — I don’t think we’re going to take any advice 

from the members opposite. So better health care under the 

Sask Party. Well here’s some more examples. The government 

investment in health care is up 45 per cent in seven years, all 

within a balanced budget; 70 per cent increase in transfers to 

regional health authorities over the last seven years, 98 per cent 

increase in funding over the last seven years; and to the Sask 

Cancer Agency, 17 per cent more doctors in Saskatchewan 

since 2007; a 25 per cent increase in specialists in seven years. I 

mean, I can keep going on and on. 

 

But I found something particularly interesting in today’s paper 

and it might be of a particular interest to the Leader of the 

Opposition as a former employee of the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association. But here’s a letter to the editor that was in The 

StarPhoenix from the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 

Association] president, Clare Kozroski, who said: 

 

Recent media focus on lean has centred around the public 

expenditures devoted to its startup and early 

implementation across Saskatchewan. This discussion is 

important. The Saskatchewan Medical Association last 

year passed a resolution that called for an audit of lean to 

measure its effectiveness and impact so far. Physicians are 

proponents of appropriateness and accountability in heath 

care. We also support much-needed health care 

transformation. Lean is one proven tool among many used 

for transformation. 

 

Wow, that’s quite an assertion there. 

 

Another SMA resolution from November 2013 urged 

every physician in Saskatchewan to do basic lean training. 

Many have also committed to lean leadership programs. 

As the population ages and demand for complex health 

services climbs, current funding and operating models are 

inadequate and unsustainable. Recognizing inefficiencies 

and poor resource use in health care is essential, and a 

provincial process to reduce waste and increase 

productivity is overdue. 

 

As physicians, we want to ensure that our patients’ needs 

are being met, and that they get the care needed to 

maintain and improve their health. Continual change is 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5077 

needed to improve the care system, wait times, and health 

outcomes. 

 

The SMA has dedicated millions of dollars to quality 

initiatives such as multi-level Chronic Disease 

Management. To ensure that our health system can meet 

the needs of people requires a major investment in quality 

improvement. 

 

This is more than spending on consultants [she goes on]. It 

also includes time invested in quality improvement 

initiatives by doctors, nurses, therapists and other care 

providers. It includes time invested by patients and 

families who are involved with planning and 

implementation, experiencing the results and providing 

feedback on our efforts. 

 

The costs down the road, both in terms of our health and 

our budget, will surely be much higher if we don’t make 

the correct investments now. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who was that from again? 

 

Mr. Docherty: — That’s from the president of the SMA. 

 

An Hon. Member: — SMA. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Yes. You betcha. I also spent some time 

teaching nurses, LPNs [licensed practical nurse], when I 

worked at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology]. I taught, well, I didn’t actually teach them the 

theory of nursing, but I certainly taught them in their electives 

for five years. And I’ll just reiterate in terms of the NDP record. 

Due to the NDP nurse training program cutbacks throughout the 

’90s, 385 nursing training seats were eliminated. Absolutely 

shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wrap up my comments for now, but I 

won’t be supporting the motion. And with that, I’ll wrap up my 

comments. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Sixty-five minutes has elapsed. Questions. I 

recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think the 

record of this government speaks very well of its commitment 

to health care and the priorities of meeting the needs of seniors 

in this province. The opposition opposite seems to think that 

they have the inside track on how well we look after seniors, 

and yet they forget about the 19 long-term care facilities and 

1,200 long-term care beds that were taken out of the system 

under their term in government. This budget is putting $27 

million into the continued construction of long-term care 

facilities in Biggar, Kelvington, Kipling, Maple Creek, and 

Prince Albert. And it is now also committing to new long-term 

care facilities in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region and La 

Ronge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after listening to the member from Cumberland 

present multiple petitions for La Ronge to receive long-term 

care beds, how can the member from Saskatoon Riversdale 

ignore the people of northern Saskatchewan and vote against 

this government’s budget that actually puts the money in place 

to meet the needs of the long-term care, long-term care needs in 

La Ronge? 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a debate 

about priorities, and this government is choosing a $40 million 

contract with an American consultant over providing the bare 

basics, Mr. Speaker, in seniors’ care: call buttons, front-line 

staff. This government is priorizing a $40 million contract with 

an American consultant and $3,500-a-day senseis over seniors’ 

care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 

lot of interest in what nurses have to say in this debate. And 

I’ve got a question from Donna, a nurse in Saskatchewan here, 

via the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses’ Facebook site, stating: 

 

Many of us had serious doubts from the . . . [outset], 

especially when lean classes involved having us make 

paper airplanes more efficiently. Not a single word 

revolved around safe, effective, professional care of 

patients. Can we put a halt to this massive costly 

government-driven directive? 

 

My question to the member from Coronation Park who talks 

about his interest in what nurses have to say: does he agree with 

that nurse, or does he agree with his government about the 

value of $40 million contracts with US [United States] 

consultants and Japanese senseis? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — I’d like to thank the member for the 

question. I absolutely, completely back our nurses and have 

complete faith in them, so I won’t be, certainly won’t be 

criticizing nurses because they’re one of the backbones of our 

health care system. So I’d like to actually thank nurses for the 

work that they do. 

 

But again we didn’t . . . [inaudible] . . . this government. This 

government didn’t eliminate 19 long-term care facilities — the 

members opposite did — which is nurses’ jobs apparently, 

didn’t eliminate 1,200 long-term care beds. And I certainly 

won’t be taking any lessons from the members opposite in 

terms of how they treated nurses, since we’ve hired at least 

1,000. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Mr. Speaker, health care has been a priority of 

this government since day one. Our government has announced 

funding for new hospitals in Moose Jaw, a new psychiatric 

hospital in North Battleford, and a new children’s hospital in 

my city of Saskatoon. We have invested $1 billion in health 

care capital in our first six years in government, which is three 



5078 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

times as much as the NDP spent in their last six years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead the NDP chose to close 52 hospitals. To 

the member from Saskatoon Nutana: The people of 

Saskatchewan know that your party likes to talk the talk, but 

with your party’s record of chronically underfunding health 

care, why should the people of Saskatchewan see your 

new-found interest in health care as anything but empty 

promises? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, you know, I have a lot of health 

care workers in my riding. In fact Saskatoon Nutana I think has 

a lot of health care professionals per capita. And what I’m 

hearing and what I know is that these people work really, really 

hard, and they want to provide the best service they can for their 

clients. And I think we’re all in agreement on that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we don’t want to see is a $40 million consultancy from 

the United States coming into Saskatchewan, paying senseis 

$3,500 a day to be here to teach these intelligent, hard-working 

people how to make paper airplanes. That doesn’t make any 

sense at all, particularly when this Premier continues to tout the 

fact that there are savings but he cannot give any actual 

evidence of savings. And we know the Health Quality Council, 

who is supporting this program, cannot give any empirical data 

to prove that there’s any savings at all. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, 

from a nurse, Denise, here in Saskatchewan: 

 

Our ward clerks often helped with these tasks allowing us 

to remain on the floor to care for the patients, but since 

lean we have lost two ward clerk positions, leaving us 

nurses to do those duties. I spend far too much time 

answering phones and running around the hospital instead 

of providing direct patient care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, this is a nurse out there on the front line, the 

people that these folks say they’d listened to, across the way. 

This government is clearly not listening to the front-line care 

workers. So to the member from Coronation Park: does he 

agree with this nurse, who he claims to have an interest in her 

opinion, or does he disagree and instead goes to support his 

government in the $40 million contract for US consultants and 

Japanese senseis? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thanks for the member opposite’s question. 

I absolutely support nurses. And as I’ve said, I’ve worked with 

SUN and I’ve also taught LPNs for a number of years. So my 

support for nurses and the nursing profession is absolute. So I 

absolutely think that lean itself is a step in the right direction, 

and the nurses that I’ve talked to have been fully supportive of 

this process. So my information from nurses and the feedback I 

get is they’re totally supportive of this process. And thank you 

for the question. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite, our 

government has not forgotten about health care in rural 

Saskatchewan. In fact we have invested an increase of $3.4 

million in this budget to build three collaborative emergency 

centres in Spiritwood, Canora, and Wakaw and to support the 

existing centres in Maidstone and Shaunavon. Also an increase 

of 2.6 million will be invested to continue incentives that 

encourage physicians to work in rural communities and provide 

support for the rural physician locum pool. 

 

To the member from Regina Elphinstone: how could your party 

abandon the health care needs of residents living in rural 

Saskatchewan by closing 52 hospitals when you were in 

government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In terms 

of what the member’s asking — the question — you’ll note that 

it bears no resemblance in the slightest to the topic of the 

motion. And the topic of the motion is of course $40 million 

that this government is putting forward for a United States 

consultant, Japanese senseis, and for paper airplane exercises, 

Mr. Speaker. In terms of what this member’s putting forward, I 

know . . . I get the picture. I realize they don’t want to talk 

about this $40 million fat cash cow contract with an American 

consultant, but we see this in the questions and we certainly see 

it in the speeches, that this government . . . You know, I don’t 

know if they’re quite to being embarrassed but they should be 

embarrassed about this contract, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it very 

interesting in this debate that we’ve had for 75 minutes now . . . 

I think what we should call it is the EBL debate because these 

guys, it’s everything but lean. They won’t discuss it. They 

won’t acknowledge it. They don’t want to talk about it, and you 

have to wonder why. And when we see articles like this from 

Mark Lemstra telling us there are no tangible savings that are 

provable by this contract, I’d like to hear from the member for 

Coronation Park and ask him if he thinks he can demonstrate 

there’s any tangible savings from this program at all — $40 

million. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — I thank the member opposite for the 

question. I’ve been very fortunate to have been engaged in lean 

training myself as a public servant and I’ve got nothing but 

positive things to say in regards to lean. And we certainly didn’t 

sit around making paper airplanes as certainly one of the 

exercises — I’d like to call that an icebreaker. And if any of you 

have actually participated in training, you certainly understand 

what an icebreaking exercise is. So please, so let’s make it very 

clear. But I am totally supportive of lean, and the health care 

professionals that I’ve been in contact with are totally, totally 

happy and satisfied with the process as well. So I’m going to 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5079 

not, certainly won’t be . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Plans for New Schools 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Marchuk.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

once again very pleased to rejoin into this debate about what’s 

going on within our school system in Saskatoon, Regina, and 

surrounding the rest of Saskatchewan. The good news is, Mr. 

Speaker, things are going well in our school. Our teachers are 

very, very pleased at some of the announcements that we’ve 

done. 

 

We’ve done some capital announcements that I’ll talk about, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve done some investment in nine joint-use 

schools throughout Saskatchewan to meet an emergent need of 

a population growth — something that maybe the members 

opposite couldn’t understand. And I think they’re having, 

frankly, a very difficult time understanding anything to do with 

growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In our vision 2020 plan, Mr. Speaker, this government is 

continuing to look forward. It’s looking forward beyond 

political terms, Mr. Speaker. It’s trying to show what is 

happening in Saskatchewan, and the best part it is, it’s showing 

the potential that Saskatchewan has, something that hasn’t been 

developed and hasn’t been nurtured. We are very excited about 

what Saskatchewan has on the horizon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I’m here in the legislature. I’ve 

mentioned this several times when I get up and to speak, is I’m 

here for my children. Those children are actually attending 

schools in Saskatoon. I have a stepdaughter and a daughter at 

Holy Cross. They’re going through some renovations right now, 

which we’re very proud to say that this government supported, 

and I have a son that is at St. Luke School. So I would like to be 

able to say hello to them. And again I’m thanking them for 

being able to support me while I’m down here and 

understanding that I have to miss some hockey games and I 

have to miss some events up there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what is important is when I go into the school systems now, 

Mr. Speaker, when I go to pick them up from school and I go 

and talk to the teachers, I talk to the front-line workers. They 

are very well aware that I’m an elected member with the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. They are happy. They are 

very excited about what is going on with the new schools. 

They’re excited about the development of these joint new 

schools and they’re very excited about where the schools are 

going. 

They’re going into key areas in Saskatoon, and we are working 

with the stakeholders to make sure that those are meeting the 

emergent needs of the growth in Saskatoon and in Regina. And 

I’m sure when my colleagues on this side of the House go in 

and talk to the schools and talk to the parents when they’re out 

knocking on doors, Mr. Speaker, they’re hearing the exact same 

thing. They’re hearing thank you. Thank you for getting these 

schools out there. Thank you very much for the renovations. 

 

And I’ll talk a little bit more about the specific dollars amount 

and the percentage increase of what we’ve been able to do 

within the school systems because, Mr. Speaker, it’s very 

shameful what we inherited, Mr. Speaker. It is very . . . when 

we go into schools and there was mould in 2007. The teachers 

were very upset with the size of the classroom. They had 

heating issues. All they kept saying is, how can you help us? 

 

The ministers of Education, all of the ministers of Education 

since forming government have worked very closely with the 

school boards, very closely with the trustees, with the parents, 

with the students to make sure that they are able to meet the 

needs of what is a growing economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on why the economy is 

growing. It is, as the Premier said many times, it’s good . . . 

some of it is good fortune. Some of it is policy that the 

government is . But for the first time in Saskatchewan’s history, 

Saskatchewan people feel the potential of growth. They 

understand that Saskatchewan doesn’t have to be the place that 

you are from. It is the place that you want to be now, Mr. 

Speaker, and it is very exciting to have that type of enthusiasm 

no matter where you go in this province. 

 

Travelling around on vacation with my wife this past winter, we 

bump into people at the airport and everybody seems to know 

where Saskatchewan is, what’s happening there. They want to 

know, Mr. Speaker, frankly, what’s our secret? What is it that 

we’ve done to be able to weather the storm of the international 

recession? What is it that we are able to do? And I simply tell 

them that we’re allowed to develop our natural resources and 

we work with local businesses and local stakeholders to see 

how we can help them grow. Because it’s not a matter of the 

government growing. We’re not growing Saskatchewan for the 

sake of growth. We’re making sure that Saskatchewan is 

growing for the right reasons and that the businesses and the 

industries and all of the sectors within our province are starting 

to grow at a nice, steady pace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to step back in time. And I know the 

opposition doesn’t like this, but I want to step back in time and 

talk about some of the quotes when we said, as an opposition 

we said, we can grow the province by 100,000 people. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely shameful that the government at 

the time in 2003 had no optimism about the potential for this 

province. They were completely satisfied with the status quo, 

but even on top of that, they could explain decline. They were 

talking about stemming decline and this is actually . . . We’ve 

slowed down the reduction of out-migration out of the province. 

They were proud of that, Mr. Speaker. How could you be proud 

about temporarily slowing down a leak, Mr. Speaker? And this 



5080 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

isn’t just a small leak. This is a 100-year leak that we’ve had in 

this province. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, while the dark days of the NDP, 

the greatest export that we had throughout our whole province 

was our children. Our children were getting luggage as 

graduation set from high school. If we could actually keep them 

here for university, as soon as they got their university degree, 

they were gone. This side of government, this side of 

government we’ve actually put in programs like the graduate 

retention program with the Minister of Advanced Education is 

where we have had 40,000 people access the graduate retention 

program . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 50,000, just . . . Thank 

you very much. I just got an update. It is now up to 50,000 

people that we were able to hold in Saskatchewan and this 

number again is growing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But here’s a couple of quotes of what the NDP said back in the 

day: “The Saskatchewan Party’s plan to increase our population 

by 100,000 in 10 years is more wishful thinking that statistically 

attainable.” That was the NDP MLA, Doreen Hamilton, on 

February 11th, 2003. 

 

This is my personal favourite and I think this is one that we’ve 

used quite a bit but it has to go back into the record because it is 

so accurate of their mindset at the time, Mr. Speaker: 

 

They propose to increase the population of Saskatchewan 

by 100,000 over . . . I forget what number of years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well it’s so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, that 

it flies in the face of reality. 

 

That was NDP MLA Harry Mulligen in Hansard, March 24th 

2003. 

 

That just goes to show their mindset, Mr. Speaker. They were 

so boxed in in trying to save their own skins, Mr. Speaker, that 

they could not look forward to be able to say, what could we do 

in Saskatchewan? How can we grow? All they wanted was the 

status quo. 

 

Well I don’t know if any of them over there actually have run a 

business. I’ve run a business myself, and my wife has a small 

business. And for the business people that are out there 

listening, if you’re standing still, you’re dead. And that’s what 

was happening with Saskatchewan for 16 years under the NDP, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit more about the mess we 

inherited. It wasn’t just within the schools, Mr. Speaker. The 

schools was one of the primary eyesores in 2007 when we 

stepped into government, Mr. Speaker. We saw infrastructure 

holds in the highways. We saw infrastructure problems within 

the health care system. And what did we . . . How would the 

NDP have solved those problems? They simply would have 

locked the doors and chained the doors and say, oh, problem 

solved. Closed another school down, closed another long-term 

care facility, closed another rural hospital. They didn’t solve 

problems. They just eliminated them. They just put them out of 

sight, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t actually try to solve anything. 

This side of the government is. 

We’re investing in our schools by announcing nine new joint 

schools. And you know what? When you go out and talk to the 

general public, Mr. Speaker, they’re not very concerned about 

how . . . They understand the financing of the public-private 

partnership. They understand this. They understand there is a 

certain way, there is a few ways that we could do this. 

 

We could do the traditional build, Mr. Speaker. We could do 

that. But do you know what the difference is, Mr. Speaker? It 

would take 10 to 15 years to be able to get that traditional build 

done. So when those schools are built in the next 10 to 15 years, 

I’d like some recommendations from the members opposite as 

to which ones should go where. Who should be first if we’re 

going to do the traditional build? And which school is going to 

be the one that’s going to be done 12 years from now? 

 

This is an emergent need we have, Mr. Speaker. We need to be 

able to, we need to be able to fill this problem, and we need to 

make sure that our classroom sizes are manageable in the 

growing cities of Saskatoon, Regina, and Martensville. This is 

where the growth is happening, a lot of the growth. Growth is 

happening across the province in all areas of the province, but a 

lot of the people that are choosing Saskatchewan home are now 

moving into the major centres. That puts pressure on our school 

system. 

 

We have to react very quickly and we have to be nimble. And 

sometimes government, it’s difficult for us to be nimble. But 

this is one of those opportunities that we have to be able to 

solve a large problem, and we can solve it quickly. And why 

we’re going through this model of the P3 model is because of 

the economy of scale. Everybody knows if you build one thing, 

whatever it is, it’s going to take you more time and you have to 

go through the process. But if you’re building more of multiples 

in the same time, you can make efficiencies. You can put it in 

with contracts. 

 

And this isn’t just outside contracts. There is a huge component 

in here for local contractors as well to help have their input on 

(a) how the schools are built, and (b) supplying either the 

material or the labour to be able to build those schools, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s critically important because these schools aren’t 

just being picked up and transported and dropped in from some 

other place. They are actually going to have a local component, 

a local maintenance component to be able to make sure that the 

schools are maintained in a proper way so 10 to 15 years from 

now, we don’t have the same problem that we inherited, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re setting up some proactive measures to make 

sure that these schools are going to be able to meet their full 

lifespan and they’re going to be able to meet the needs of all the 

kids in Saskatoon. 

 

That’s why it’s important again to me, Mr. Speaker, is because 

my kids are in these schools. And it’s very, very important that 

when talking to the parents and when talking to all of the people 

that are in and around the school . . . Because as everybody 

knows who has kids or has been to a school, the school is the 

heartbeat of the community. And what we’ve done in Saskatoon 

and Regina and Martensville is we’ve created some more 

heartbeats in the community to be able to go out there and talk 

to people and be able to bring them into the school system no 

matter where these people have decided to come from. Mr. 

Speaker, it is one of those where we want to make sure that the 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5081 

school system is able to meet the needs of the community. 

 

And what was even more depressing, Mr. Speaker, was when 

we announced these 52 schools . . . The Leader of the 

Opposition stood up in this Chamber for every day, 51 times 

talked about a school in his constituency. It was very, very sad 

to see that this member, when we announced a school in his 

constituency, he wasn’t there. He wasn’t there, Mr. Speaker. He 

didn’t even show up. I’d like to ask him, when was the last time 

a new school came into his constituency? And I understand 

maybe he hasn’t been around quite as long as the member from 

Lakeview in the Chamber. But, Mr. Speaker, his community 

has a school now. We are in the process of building that school, 

not just from the top down from government. We’re working 

with all the community stakeholders to be able to build that 

school in his community. The Leader of the Opposition didn’t 

even show up. It was very sad. 

 

We had a very important vote yesterday also on P3s, talking 

about bridges in Saskatoon. And I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

not sure if I’m allowed to say this, but I think it’s on record: he 

wasn’t here for the vote for that either. That’s very sad, Mr. 

Speaker, that he is not going to be involved in what’s going on 

within Saskatoon’s community. I’m out talking to people. They 

don’t see him at events. They don’t see their leader at the 

groundbreaking of certain events. He’s a mystery, Mr. Speaker. 

And then when something so critical like having a school in his 

backyard, he doesn’t even go. As a father I would think that 

that’s extremely important to him, that he would be able to 

register his children in a new school. And I think he should be 

very proud that that school is . . . But the difference is, Mr. 

Speaker, he’s stuck on ideology. It has nothing to do with the 

new school. It has nothing to do with how we’re financing the 

school. It is strictly about old politics. It has nothing to do with 

what we’re doing. He’s just against anything we’re doing over 

there, Mr. Speaker. That’s sad. 

 

It was great to hear within the 75-minute debate that some of 

the members opposite say that there are things going well in the 

lean programs within our hospital system. I don’t understand 

why they can’t say the schools are a good thing. It’s a very 

simple thing, Mr. Speaker. They need to understand and get out 

and actually talk to people in the community and talk to some 

of their other NDP counterparts across Canada. We’ve got their 

federal leader saying P3s are a good thing. We’ve got the leader 

. . . or we’ve got people, the Finance minister from Manitoba 

saying, you know what? In certain circumstances, P3 models 

can work. What we’ve done is the economy of scale, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ve had that threshold of in and around $100 

million, Mr. Speaker. That seems to be the point where all of a 

sudden things can change, and we can show some generated 

savings. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about, Mr. Speaker, about the 

investment that we have done within our school system. The 

NDP, in the last six years of their office, they spent $165 

million on school systems. We spent $450 million in our first 

six years, Mr. Speaker. The government needed to come up 

with a solution to be able to meet the needs of our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what they have put out in the media and what 

they’re putting out to their base is that P3s cost more. Quality is 

compromised. P3s hurt local construction sector. This is what 

the rhetoric is that they’re putting out so people don’t 

understand the process. All they’re doing again over there, 

which I’ve seen since I would say probably the mid-’90s when 

they formed government, all they have is a fear factor. Let’s 

scare everybody. Let’s scare everybody of any type of change. 

Anything that isn’t created by the NDP is a bad thing, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is wearing really thin on the Saskatchewan 

people. People are not going to be living . . . The new 

Saskatchewan does not live in fear, Mr. Speaker. The new 

Saskatchewan lives in the world of optimism, the world of 

looking forward, looking into the future, and growing, and 

growing in all areas of our economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to talk a little about the SaskBuilds, about what they’ve 

done in some other areas in Canada because we’re not the first 

ones that . . . We didn’t create this P3 process. We understand 

that there were some difficulties with P3. Like when you start 

any new project, there’s going to be a learning curve. The good 

news is, Mr. Speaker, is that we didn’t have to go through any 

of those troubled times. We’ve learned from other jurisdictions. 

We’ve talked to them. We’ve consulted with them and say, how 

does this work? How is this going to make sure that we can do 

it in the best scale of economy and that we can find efficiencies 

out there? What are the things that went wrong with you, and 

how can we improve on that? 

 

Ontario, Quebec, Alberta, British Columbia, and New 

Brunswick have all used P3 programs. There are over 204 

projects built or under way in Canada since the early ’90s using 

a P3 model. From 2009 to 2011, P3 deals that were worth $21.7 

billion were finalized within Canada. There is a municipal P3 

project in Calgary, Winnipeg, Saskatoon, Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the new way of financing. I discussed this 

yesterday again when we were talking about the bridges, Mr. 

Speaker. This is the way that we as a government are being very 

fiscally responsible and making sure that we will get the best 

bang for our dollar. 

 

But we’re also solving a problem because I really don’t think 

that this government would be able to do a traditional build on 

this. And the minister has looked at this. We looked at all 

options. Unfortunately on that side of the House, they only want 

to look at one option. That’s all they’re going to look at, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re going to do the same thing over and over and 

over again. Mr. Speaker, doing the same thing and expecting a 

different result, I’ve been told that’s the unofficial definition of 

insanity. 

 

[12:30] 

 

We need to look at things in a different way, Mr. Speaker. We 

need to make sure that we’re looking at all options on the table 

about every project that we do because we as a government and 

as MLAs are responsible to the people of Saskatchewan. When 

we walk out of this Chamber and we go back to our houses and 

we meet people in the grocery store or at the park or at the 

hockey rink, we need to be able to look them in the eye and say, 

we did the best job with your money. Because this isn’t our 

money, Mr. Speaker. This is their money. And we need to be 

able to make sure that we can honestly hold our head up high 

and say, yes, on these P3 projects with the school, we are going 

to save millions of dollars. And I think that’s very significant, 



5082 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, that we can actually do that, hold our heads high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about . . . Because the 

NDP claims that they’ve never actually touched P3s. They’ve 

never actually looked at P3s. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? 

Between 2000 and 2005, they actually had a P3 office. And I 

think it might be under the member from Lakeview when he 

was there at the time. The NDP government opened a 

public-private partnership corporate development division from 

2000 to 2005. Oh, my apologies. It wasn’t the member from 

Lakeview. It was under Maynard Sonntag and Pat Atkinson. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What was the title again? That was a 

good title. What was it called again? 

 

Mr. Merriman: — It was called the corporate development 

division of public-private partnerships. It sounds like it was a 

great place. I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker. I’d have to check back in 

the records to see if actually anything came out of that office or 

if it was just a really nice office with some nice furniture and 

some . . . But even on top of that, when they did come out and 

say, we actually have a public-private partnership — and I 

know this side of the House is very familiar with it, and I know 

that side of the House doesn’t want to talk about it — but it’s 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company], Mr. Speaker. They said that they were actually 

invested with another external company. They finally admitted 

after six years that they had put $9 million while their partner, 

which would be a private industry, so that would be a 

public-private partnership, they only invested $153, $153. 

That’s their version of a public-private partnership: $9 million 

of government money and $153. They admitted this. That’s in 

essence a public-private partnership. An extremely bad 

example, Mr. Speaker, of a public-private partnership, but that’s 

exactly what they did, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They also had . . . Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I just had to take a sip of 

water. My wife will be very happy tonight that I’ve talked for 

45 minutes and got it all out of my system. I’d like to talk about 

. . . Because this isn’t just us saying this about the schools, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s the community. It’s community leaders. It’s 

people that are on the front ground, the school boards, all of 

that. Here’s a quote: “We have heard from students and staff 

over the past few years, and the growth pressures in some areas 

of the province have caused overcrowded classrooms,” said 

association president, Janet Foord. “Thankfully announcements 

such as this will alleviate those concerns.” That was October 

22nd, 2013. Janet Foord, president, Saskatchewan School 

Boards Association, is saying that this is a positive move, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Here’s a quote from Ray Morrison, The StarPhoenix, October 

23rd, 2013: “To say that I’m pleased to be here today for this 

announcement would be a serious, serious understatement.” 

These are the leaders that are out there that are listening to the 

school board directors. They are listening to the teachers. They 

are listening to the students. And they’re listening to the 

community. They’re happy with what’s going on with this, with 

these new schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t understand why they’re not talking to the people over on 

the opposition side, or why the opposition isn’t engaging these 

people and say, how is this working for you? I think again, Mr. 

Speaker, it comes back to the ideology that they’re stuck in. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just us. I’ve talked a little bit 

about how I’ve talked to the teachers. I’ve talked to the students 

when I go into the schools. And one of the things that I did 

under the advice and guidance of the previous minister of 

Education, the MLA for Regina . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Douglas Park, thank you. Was every time 

after session, Mr. Speaker, I go to each school in my 

constituency. I go to talk to them. I go and make an 

appointment with the principal. I make an appointment with the 

council, whoever would like to speak to me, and I go directly to 

the source. I go and talk to them about, how’s things going in 

your school? This is a direct link for them to the minister 

through me. It’s a very simple process. And there are quite a 

few schools in Saskatoon Sutherland. My best guess is there’s 

about 12 to 14 schools, including the high school. I go and 

touch base with them. Every year I talk to the principals and I 

talk to whoever wants to talk to me about what’s going on 

within the school system. 

 

Because I would rather hear it directly from them as a opposed 

to the torque and rhetoric when it comes from the opposition, 

when they pull something out of nowhere and say, this is what 

the schools are saying. Well they’re not saying that in my area. 

 

When I would have had that thing, I would put all of the 

information down, and I would give it to the minister and say, 

here’s a snapshot of what’s happening in Saskatoon Sutherland. 

Here’s what’s absolutely going on at the ground level. 

 

Now in saying that, Mr. Speaker, the teachers were a little 

hesitant as to why an elected official was coming in to talk to 

them about that. I said, I have no agenda; the floor is yours. I 

have an hour and a half of time, please tell me what’s going on. 

And I would get some extremely valuable information from 

that, Mr. Speaker, on to actually what’s happening. 

 

Even on top of that, they take me on a tour of the school. 

They’d be proud of the programs that they’ve got going on. 

They would show the pride of their school spirit, their staff, 

their students, and the projects that are going on in those 

schools, Mr. Speaker. It was absolutely fabulous. I highly 

recommend it to everybody to go to a school in their 

constituency and just sit down and talk. Mr. Speaker, it’s a great 

experience and you will actually hear . . . [inaudible]. Because 

what I was hearing from the opposition was all this doom and 

gloom, Mr. Speaker — oh, the schools are this. 

 

Well you know what? Instead of actually . . . We really don’t, 

we don’t listen to what exactly is going on over there. And I 

thought, you know what, Mr. Speaker, as a rookie MLA I better 

go check this out with the schools within my community. So I 

went and talked to them. And I just didn’t stick in my 

community, not just in the borders of Saskatoon Sutherland. I 

was over in the west side visiting St. Mary’s, a fabulous school 

that has a community clinic in it. It has a theatre in it. It has a 

. . . and it’s open to the community. 

 

And that school is there, is because of this government, Mr. 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5083 

Speaker. It was not there before. It was on their list; again, one 

of their lists. My guess is if we look back in the records, they 

probably made three or four announcements about it. But they 

never actually did anything. 

 

When this government came into power, that was one of the 

first things that they did, was put up St. Mary’s School and 

make sure that it was a community school. The facility in there 

is absolutely fabulous. They’re working with the city of 

Saskatoon to be able to open it up, to be able to talk about how 

the community can access it. They’ve got a gym in there. 

They’ve got training facilities, something that the west side of 

Saskatoon, and I don’t think anywhere in Saskatoon, has seen 

such a quality facility.  

 

And absolutely, the shared services that are going on within 

there, within the community, within the civic area, within 

education, within health, dentistry. They have a studio in there 

for aesthetics as well, Mr. Speaker. It is absolutely fabulous, 

and the students are doing this. And again of course including 

our elder community; we’ve got something very special going 

on in that school. And it is set up, when you come into the 

reception it is set up in the round. Just like what the elders 

recommend, that this is very welcoming for the community. 

 

So again a demonstration of how we’re listening to what’s 

going on. But we’re taking the step past that, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re not just listening, we’re acting. I can’t say if they listened 

over there, Mr. Speaker, but I know they didn’t act. I know that 

they did not do anything within the school systems, other than 

just completely let them crumble. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve invested money in this side of the government and have 

renovated over 65 per cent of the schools in Saskatchewan. 

 

Here’s another quote about a positive impact of the results 

within the school, is from Diane Boyko, the Greater Saskatoon 

Catholic Board of Education Chair, on October 23rd, 2013: 

 

We know we need space for the education for our kids and 

the extracurricular is also part of that education . . . we 

hopefully will be able to come to some good terms on how 

we deal with that in this new venture that we are all 

experiencing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely fabulous that we have both systems 

within Saskatoon all saying the same thing: the Chair from the 

Public School, the Chair from the Separate School. 

 

But on top of that, Mr. Speaker, on top of the schools that we’re 

using the P3 model, we’re also continuing the traditional builds. 

In this budget, I’m very happy that our Finance minister, 

working with the Minister of Education, was able to stand up 

and meet two emergent needs right here in our capital city, of 

Connaught School and Sacred Heart, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I might be stepping on toes, but after 

the budget announcement . . . I’m not sure if this is inside 

politics or what, but I saw the member from across come and 

over and shake our Minister of Education’s hand and thank him 

for that, Mr. Speaker, which I thought was a very honourable 

thing because he knew how important it was into the 

community and how we could help Sacred Heart School and 

Connaught School because those schools again were left 

crumbling. And now unfortunately, they’re at a point of 

non-repair, so we have to build an entire new school, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And this is something again, we need to do this for the kids. We 

have multiple programs going on to address the growing student 

base within our province. We have to make sure that we can do 

a traditional build in some areas, a very quick . . . But on a 

grander scale, we have to be able to make sure that we can have 

some joint-use schools that are going to meet the needs of our 

growing cities, our larger areas in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in response to the P3s, there’s one more quote that 

I think is very important. The quote is: 

 

I think that it offers more exciting opportunities for our 

school divisions to look at, whether we address 

efficiencies, that’s a great thing. Holding someone to 

account to timelines, that’s a good thing. We are excited to 

see what this looks like. 

 

And that is from Katherine Gagne, chairperson of the Regina 

Public School, scrum in October 22nd right out here in the 

rotunda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the bigger picture, 

about building for growth. Our province has committed to 

invest over $2.5 billion over the next three years in growth. The 

government has been increasing the capital budget each year for 

investment within the schools going forward. The province is 

committed to exploring, as I’ve said, public-private 

partnerships, something that the NDP obviously again looked 

at, Mr. Speaker, but didn’t actually do. It’s one of those things, 

it’s like a Seinfeld reference, they know how to take the 

reservation but they didn’t know what to actually do with the 

reservation, Mr. Speaker. They could take the information in, 

but that’s as far as it got. So there was a lot of people that are 

sitting there going, you have my reservation but you didn’t do 

anything with it. 

 

Here’s my issue again, did you do anything with it? No, had to 

wait till our government came into power in 2007, and then the 

rubber actually started hitting the road, Mr. Speaker. We were 

actually starting to move forward with St. Mary’s, with now 

building nine joint new schools with traditional builds and, on 

top of that, investing in the existing school infrastructure to 

make sure that we had millions of dollars flowing in there to be 

able to help out the schools that are in need, that needed a fix 

up, the schools that were just to left to shame.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the province has committed to exploring 

public-private partnerships for a vast majority of 80 to 90 per 

cent of projects, but will still proceed through traditional 

channels. I think that’s important because the opposition over 

there has everybody so focused on this P3s that they don’t 

actually, the public doesn’t know there are traditional builds 

going on, Mr. Speaker. There’s builds going on around this 

province as we speak. 

 

The high school that my daughter and my stepdaughter are 

going to at Holy Cross, they have been in renovation mode for a 

long time. And they’re coming along, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 

difficult to do renovations while the school year is in, but they 



5084 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

seem to be doing rather well. And my daughter, who’s in a 

modified class program, she’s been shuffled around quite a few 

times. The good news is that she thinks this is exciting because 

she gets to see different areas of the school. She gets to move 

around. The students are interacting with what’s going on with 

the construction people. They’re actually talking about what’s 

going on and they’re making . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I do have one other thing that I would like to talk about. I’d like 

to talk about the opportunities for local businesses within our 

P3s. These are some quotes of some projects that are P3s that 

have been happening around the country. The experience for 

local trades has been very positive in other jurisdictions, Mr. 

Speaker. Patrick Waunch, president and CEO of Rambow 

Mechanical in Kelowna, BC [British Columbia] said, the P3 

experience has been generally very positive for construction 

within British Columbia. And I think that’s important that our 

local contractors hear that, that we are going to be working with 

them. 

 

[12:45] 

 

This isn’t an exclusive out-of-province bill. We’re going to 

work with them because we know that those contractors are not 

just working within our school systems, but they’re working in 

and around our community. Those are the contractors that are 

donating the time to be able to help with the hockey rink ice. 

They’re the contractors that are going out and doing stuff in the 

baseball diamonds of their own free will. Those are the 

contractors around Saskatchewan that this government wants to 

be able to support and wants to be able to make sure that they’re 

involved in this process. And they don’t buy into the 

fearmongering that the NDP are continually cranking out over 

there with their propaganda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another quote from John Schubert, past Chair of 

the Canadian Construction Association: “Across Canada, P3s 

have been a stable method of alternate delivery. In some 

jurisdictions local contractors have been able to participate . . . 

[extremely] successfully.” 

 

Now how is that that happening, Mr. Speaker? Why are there 

some local contractors that are able to participate and some 

won’t? I can’t comment on that, but I can tell you exactly what 

we’re doing. We’re making sure that local contractors are 

included in the process from the word go so they understand 

what we’re doing, why we’re doing it, what we’re trying to 

achieve, and how can they . . . [inaudible] . . . their local 

expertise into helping us be able to achieve our needs for the 

growing population within the students across Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Alberta and BC where the two provinces have 

undertaken more than 50 P3 projects . . . And again, Mr. 

Speaker, this is what we’re able to do. We’re able to go to these 

people who have done these P3 projects — whether they’re on 

bridges, schools, whatever the facility is — and learn from 

them. We’re not trying to recreate the wheel here, Mr. Speaker. 

We are trying to learn from them, glean from their expertise, be 

able to bring them in and be able to talk to them and the 

stakeholders and say, how did it work? What worked best for 

you? What didn’t work for you? How can we improve? We 

want to make this efficient because again we have to answer to 

the taxpayers within Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to talk about a couple of the projects that are actually 

going on in Alberta. The Alberta government has built 40 

schools, so I would say they kind of know what they’re doing, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re not the new kid on the block. In over 

three phases — this is the interesting stat — 40 schools have 

saved $245 million by doing these through a P3 and bundling 

these schools, Mr. Speaker. It is absolutely . . . Where do you 

think that that $245 million from the Alberta government that 

they saved, that probably went back into other infrastructure 

projects, and it freed up some money so they could do some 

other things. 

 

And that’s exactly what we’re doing here with our bundling and 

our P3. We will be able to save money with this model and be 

able to take that and put it into other infrastructure projects, 

whether it’s twinning of highways, whether it’s into the health 

care system, whether it’s into social services. We can take the 

money that we’ve saved directly from this and we can prove it 

to the people of Saskatchewan and say, here’s exactly where the 

savings were and here’s what we did with those savings. We 

can show a direct line of how we’re going to improve the cost 

efficiencies of building these schools, which again, Mr. 

Speaker, is an emergent need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to touch base on a couple of things on what 

the member opposite has talked about. I’ve heard the member 

from Saskatoon Centre get up and say his petition — this is on a 

daily basis, this is out of yesterday’s Hansard, Mr. Speaker — 

he continually talks about how we are neglecting the school 

system. It absolutely boggles my mind and the many . . . all the 

members on this House is . . . How can they say that when we 

are investing in nine joint-use schools? We’re building new 

schools as fast as we possibly can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve been able to work with the teachers, we’ve been able to 

work with administrators to make sure that their needs are being 

met because we want to make sure — and this is a big thing, 

Mr. Speaker — we want to make sure that things are working 

well not from the government’s perspective, not from the 

teachers’ perspective, not from the administrators’ perspective, 

but from the students’ perspective because that’s the most 

important thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When the member from Saskatoon city centre got up and he did 

his petition again today, I couldn’t but shake my head because I 

knew I was going to be talking about this, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like them to maybe, instead of complaining about what we’re 

constantly doing over there, I’d like them to come up with a 

plan. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how difficult it is. The Leader 

of the Opposition has been in there for over a year. He’s been in 

this. This isn’t something new. 

 

When is his plan going to come out and talk about how he 

would do things? He’s just complaining about what we’re 

doing, but he actually doesn’t have a plan. If he has, maybe 

they’re keeping it secret over there because I don’t understand. 

Nobody else has seen it. I don’t think that the general public 

knows what’s going on. I haven’t checked their website lately 

because there’s really nothing interesting on there. So I don’t 

think that there’s anything in there. What I have noticed is, they 

have removed a few things off of their website like they did 



April 3, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5085 

back in there. I believe they removed the Regina Manifesto. I 

think that’s gone, which seems to be something that was on 

there forever. 

 

So they seem to be trying to change their image over there, 

trying to go from the old NDP to the new NDP, but the thing is 

they don’t have any new ideas. They have nothing, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re waiting for it. We want to hear. Come up with a 

good idea. Talk to us about it. We’re still waiting. I’ve been 

elected over two and a half years, Mr. Speaker. I haven’t heard 

them come up with anything as of yet. Same thing, same 

questions every period, same questions every day. They’re not 

doing anything original. And you know what? The new 

Saskatchewan sees through that, Mr. Speaker. They see through 

that because they’re expecting more out of their politicians. 

They have seen the bar be raised by this government over here 

on how a responsible government should act, and they don’t 

have a clue on what to do. They don’t have anything to 

understand on how a government should be run, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is very, very different times from when they were in 

government, in those 16 dark years back in the NDP when we 

all saw friends, family, children, grandchildren leave this 

province, Mr. Speaker. It is very, very sad state back then. 

 

But the good news is, is finally . . . When I moved here from 

1988 from Toronto with my family, I saw the potential in this 

province. You could see it from the people, and you could see 

exactly that they had the drive to be able to become the great 

province. 

 

But what they needed, Mr. Speaker, was they needed to get rid 

of the old skeletons in the closet. And those old skeletons over 

there, they’re gone, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been reduced. They 

were cut down in 2007. They were cut down again in 2011. 

Why? Because they have no ideas, and people in Saskatchewan 

will not be intimidated by simply fear. Our Premier said it after 

the election in 2007. He came out, and it was one of the best 

lines I’ve heard from a politician is, hope beat fear. It’s been 

used several times before, Mr. Speaker, on lots of different 

occasions, but that’s what happened in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we’ve caught that hope bug. We have got it. We’ve got 

potential. We’ve got planned . . . We have a vision 2020 plan, 

something that’s very bold for governments to do. It’s very bold 

for a government to say, we’re going to start planning beyond 

the next election term. That’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why we have this vision 2020 plan, and we want to make 

sure that this plan is understood by everybody. 

 

That’s why we’re having to do the new schools, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why we’re having to build new hospitals in Moose Jaw. 

That’s why we’re building the children’s hospital in Saskatoon, 

again something they talked about for years and years and 

years. But again, Mr. Speaker, the rubber actually never hit the 

road with them. Again, talk versus action. 

 

Those members over there would be very good at talking and 

scaring people. I remember knocking doors way back in 

2002-2003 in by-elections, and people were just scared. Why 

would a government need to scare people into voting for them? 

That’s not democracy, Mr. Speaker. That’s fearmongering. 

That’s all it is, Mr. Speaker, is you’re intimidating people. They 

were so . . . They had everybody so wound up. And now 

everybody sees what the Saskatchewan Party government is 

doing. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? They’re really happy 

about it. They’re very excited about what we’re doing and 

they’re very excited about where this party is going in the 

future. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk just about one more thing, 

about Saskatchewan builds. I want to talk about the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association and what they have 

said on a positive thing about Saskatchewan builds: It says, 

“We do not . . .” This is the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association, Mark Cooper, on October 29, 2013: 

 

We do not oppose P3s. We believe that they are viable and 

legitimate procurement options. Working in partnership, I 

am confident we can address the concerns of the 

construction industry and move forward with the P3 

schools. 

 

That’s from the Construction Association. We have the 

Construction Association on board. 

 

We have the school boards on board. We have the trustees on 

board. We have the teachers wanting new schools. We have the 

parents wanting new schools. Everybody in the continuum 

seems to be understanding this process except for one 

component. That is Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. They don’t understand this. They can’t wrap their 

heads around a new idea. They fear new ideas. They fear 

progress. They fear growth. 

 

They do not understand why the people of Saskatchewan are so 

behind this Saskatchewan Party and so behind our Premier. 

They can’t understand it. They keep thinking that there’s 

something wrong in the world. The alignment of the stars are 

off. They blame snowstorms. They blame this. Oh, it must be 

something wrong. They don’t fundamentally understand that 

they have made a mistake with the Saskatchewan people and 

the biggest mistake that they ever made with the Saskatchewan 

people is they underestimated them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when they underestimate the Saskatchewan people, we see 

the potential of the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

exactly why we have 49 members over there . They have nine 

members over there, Mr. Speaker. It is because they don’t 

understand and they’re not prepared to . . . it’s like the Fonz 

saying, “I was wr-wr-wr-wrong.” It was also like Otto from A 

Fish Called Wanda. And I won’t exactly quote it but it was . . . 

oh I have to say it, Mr. Speaker: “Don’t call me stupid.” That’s 

what Otto from A Fish Called Wanda would continuously say. 

The NDP will not look at themselves and say, we made a 

mistake. I couldn’t be wrong. How could I be wrong? We’re the 

New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. How could they 

possibly be wrong? Well they are wrong. They won’t admit that 

they’re wrong. But they keep going on and on about excuses 

why they’re plummeting in popularity. 

 

They’re going on in excuses about these P3 projects. They don’t 

understand that the people of Saskatchewan have certainly 

moved past them. And you know what? They’ve moved past 

them at light speed. Almost up to ludicrous speed, Mr. Speaker, 

they’ve gone that fast past them. And you know what? They 



5086 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2014 

someday, someday maybe the members opposite will able to 

look back and say, you know what? Maybe Mr. Mulcair in 

Ottawa was right and P3s can be used. Maybe the Minister of 

Finance in Manitoba was right and P3s can actually be used. 

 

Maybe we should back up on this. But no, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 

got their heads down and they’re just plowing forward, Mr. 

Speaker. They cannot see any of the light. They cannot see 

exactly why these models don’t work, when everybody else 

sees it. Everybody in the spectrum from the students to the 

administrators, all points in between. The communities want 

this. 

 

And the most ironic thing is, the Leader of the Opposition, he 

wanted it. He wanted a school in his area. And wow, look what 

happened. We made an announcement of a school in his area. 

And where was he? He wasn’t there. He wasn’t there, Mr. 

Speaker. He was nowhere to be seen. Again, nowhere to be 

seen on the P3 vote yesterday when we were talking about a 

bridge in Saskatoon. Wasn’t present for the vote. I guess 

maybe, Mr. Speaker, I’m giving too much credit. Maybe they 

just don’t understand it over there. Maybe if they had a briefing 

note or they read one of our news releases or actually talked to 

people that have been through the P3 process, they might now 

understand exactly why these models are working and why we 

have to do them. We have to do them because our population is 

growing. 

 

We have to make sure that we’re meeting the needs of the 

students. And that’s why I applaud the Minister of Education, 

his predecessor, and his predecessor in being able to say, we’re 

going to look at this from the students’ perspective. 

 

The Speaker: — It being near the hour of adjournment, it is my 

duty pursuant to rule 27(4) to advise the Assembly that this item 

of business has been previously adjourned three times and that 

every question necessary to dispose of the motion will now be 

put. 

 

The motion before the Assembly is the one moved by the 

member for Regina Douglas Park: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s plan to 

build nine new schools in order to help meet the 

challenges of a growing province. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 13:00 until 13:03.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 40] 

 

Wall Stewart Krawetz 

Eagles McMorris Harpauer 

Toth Huyghebaert Doherty 

Norris Reiter Heppner 

Harrison Wyant Tell 

Weekes Elhard Hart 

Bradshaw Bjornerud Hutchinson 

Makowsky Ottenbreit Wilson 

Marchuk Ross Kirsch 

Michelson Doke Cox 

Merriman Jurgens Steinley 

Hickie Lawrence Tochor 

Moe Parent Phillips 

Docherty   

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 2] 

 

McCall Nilson  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 40; those 

opposed, 2. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. It now being after the 

hour of 1 o’clock, this House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:05.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5059 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5059 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5059 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5059 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5059 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5059 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5060 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5060 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5060 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5060 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5060 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Community Resource Provides Connection and Support 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5061 

 Daffodil Month 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5061 

 Asbestos Awareness Week 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5061 

 2013 Grey Cup Festival Receives Sport Tourism Award 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5061 

 Celebrate Success Business Awards Presented in Yorkton 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5062 

 University of Saskatchewan Anniversary 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5062 

 Moose Jaw Executive Finalist for Generation Next Award 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5062 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Social Services Expenditures and Responsibilities 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5063 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5063 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5063 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5065 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Rural and Remote Nurse Practitioner Recruitment Agency 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5067 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5068 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Patient Care and the Lean Initiative 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5068, 5077 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5070 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5072, 5077 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5073 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5074, 5078 

  Docherty ........................................................................................................................................................................ 5075, 5077 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5077 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5077 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5078 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Plans for New Schools 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5079 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 5086 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


