
























































Hansard: March 06, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 29A  THURSDAY, MARCH 6, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4579 
 March 6, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
Clerk: — Members, I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker is not present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I rise today to present a petition in support of education. 
And we know that education is one of the most vital services 
that government provides its citizens. And we know that this 
government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision 
and the necessary resources to prioritize the delivery of 
educational excellence. It’s failed to deliver a real plan to close 
the Aboriginal education gap, support English as an additional 
language students, support community schools and their 
communities and students. And we also know that this 
government has cut more than 350 full-time equivalent 
educational assistants from our growing schools since 2007. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that . . . [inaudible] . . . the best 
education system for today and for Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan for the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographics and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best 
practices, that is developed through consultation with 
education sector, and that builds strong educational 
infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 
the future. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents of our 
province as it relates to the improper reporting of our finances 
by this government and the management of our finances by this 
government. They are certainly concerned with the I guess first 
in Canadian history, being this failed audit of this government 
and the fact that the Provincial Auditor, the independent 
Provincial Auditor, has called the reporting of this government 
misleading, materially wrong, and not trustworthy, Mr. 
Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 
government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 
summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 
with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 
accounting standards, and following the independent 
Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 
to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 
financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 
people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 
taxpayers, and businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to present a petition in support of replacing the gym 
at Sacred Heart Community School. The undersigned residents 
of the province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention 
the following: that the gym at Sacred Heart Community School 
in north central Regina is now quite literally falling apart, has 
been closed indefinitely, and is no longer safe for students or 
staff. They point out that the school and community have raised 
this issue with the Sask Party provincial government since 2007 
without resolution. 
 
They point out that any school needs a gym as a place for the 
school and the community to gather together to engage in 
cultural and educational activities and to promote physical 
activity, which is good for the mind, body, and spirit of all 
children. They point out that the gym at Sacred Heart has 
played an important role in the school’s efforts to become a 
literacy leader, having served as a gathering place for the very 
successful reading assemblies and reading nights. They point 
out that Sacred Heart Community School is the largest school in 
north central Regina with 450-plus students, 75 per cent of 
whom are First Nations and Métis. They point out that 
enrolment has increased by 100 students and more over the last 
four years and that attendance and learning outcomes are 
steadily improving. And they point out that, as a matter of basic 
fairness and common sense, Sacred Heart Community School 
needs a gym. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the Sask Party provincial government to 
immediately commit to the replacement of the gymnasium 
of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from North 
Battleford, Rapid View, and Tisdale. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



4580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

International Women’s Day 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, March 8th is International 
Women’s Day. It’s a day to celebrate the many milestones that 
have been achieved on the road to women’s equality. And it’s a 
day to recommit ourselves to pushing forward for the rights and 
opportunities that women and girls around the world deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the dad of two young daughters, I’m passionate 
about this. I want my daughters to grow up in a world in which 
the rights and equality of women are never questioned, a world 
in which all glass ceilings have long been shattered, a world in 
which women and girls can fully participate in all aspects of our 
society and our economy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have much work left to do to make that 
happen, and we must accelerate our progress. It’s not good 
enough that just 11 of 58 MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] are women. We can do better than that. It’s 
unacceptable that we top the list of provinces when it comes to 
women living in shelters because of spousal abuse and that we 
are the only province to have more children than women living 
in shelters. And it’s completely unacceptable that we have still 
not had an inquiry into the missing and murdered Aboriginal 
women in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much progress has been made, but there is so 
much left to do. On International Women’s Day, let’s recommit 
ourselves to that work. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Though 
names like Scott, Douglas, and Diefenbaker distinguish the 
history of our province, today, Mr. Speaker, I would submit to 
you that there are others — names such as Hilda Neatby, 
historian and Companion of the Order of Canada; Sarah 
Ramsland, Saskatchewan’s first MLA; Sylvia Fedoruk, cancer 
researcher, curler, and lieutenant governor; and Ethel 
Catherwood, Canada’s only female gold winner in individual 
track and field — that deserve the same recognition and 
renown. These names belong to pioneering women of 
Saskatchewan's history, individuals of humbling fortitude and 
achievement whose contributions are felt by those of all 
genders. 
 
March 8th is International Women’s Day, a day to celebrate the 
empowerment of women while acknowledging that women 
continue to face unique obstacles. We do this not out of 
sentiment but because we understand, in the words of Ban 
Ki-Moon, that equality for women means progress for all. 
 
Fifty years ago, in 1964, Saskatchewan proudly established the 
women’s division, one of the first government units in the 
country dedicated to the advancement of women. Today the 
Status of Women office continues. Our 2014 theme is 
Communities in Action: Ending Violence Against Women and 
Girls, recognizing that issues like interpersonal violence, sexual 
assault, and cyberbullying continue to threaten their well-being. 
 
The aforementioned names are only a very small sampling of 
the extraordinary women who have called this province home. 
So to the women across Saskatchewan and Canada and around 

the world, I invite all members to join me in sending our very 
best on Saturday, the 39th International Women’s Day. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Performing Artist Named Woman of the Year 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Today is International Women’s Day and to 
celebrate, the Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television, and 
Radio Artists has honoured Saskatchewan’s own Jean Freeman 
with ACTRA’s [Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television, and 
Radio Artists] 2014 Woman of the Year Award. 
 
Jean now joins previous distinguished recipients such as Shirley 
Jones and Mary Walsh. Jean is an accomplished actor, writer, 
communicator, and pioneer in the now decimated Saskatchewan 
film and television industry. 
 
Jean was born in Weyburn and was the first actor to join the 
Saskatchewan branch of ACTRA in 1967. She was also one of 
the first employees of CKCK TV and later became a CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] radio on-air personality 
on Matinee Comment in Winnipeg and Regina. She has 
received numerous honours, including a Lifetime Achievement 
Award in the Mayor’s Arts and Business Awards, Woman of 
Distinction from the Regina YWCA [Young Women’s 
Christian Association], and Trimark Canadian Women’s 
Mentor Arts and Culture Award. 
 
Some of you will remember Jean as the mayor’s grandmother, a 
role she played on Corner Gas, a show that put Saskatchewan 
and our film industry on the map. During last year’s 
dismantling of the film and television tax credit by the 
Saskatchewan government, Jean fought back and was 
applauded for the vision and strength she provided to her union 
and Saskatchewan’s entertainment industry. Unfortunately for 
Jean, the families of the Saskatchewan film industry, and the 
people of the province, the cuts were still made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to please join me in 
congratulating Jean Freeman for receiving the 2014 ACTRA 
National Woman of the Year Award. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Yorkton. 
 

Equipment Dealers Association 
Donates to Parkland College 

 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last week 
the Canada West Equipment Dealers Association announced a 
$250,000 donation in support of Parkland College's Trades and 
Technology Centre in Yorkton. The contribution will support 
the delivery of 24 students per year at the centre in the field of 
agricultural mechanics as well as allow the college to provide 
and educate a qualified labour pool market which will in part 
support agricultural equipment dealers in the region, province, 
and Western Canada. 
 
The centre brings a significant expansion of services and 
programs to the Parkland region and will provide the space to 
train more than 350 skilled graduates per year as well as 



March 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4581 

upgrade the skills of 2,000 workers annually in a variety of 
fields that are experiencing a labour shortage throughout the 
province. Backed by a $10 million investment from our 
government and the capital campaign support from dozens of 
community groups and businesses, the Parkland College is 
moving quickly to build the new centre. Construction is set to 
begin early this spring and the facility is scheduled to open in 
September of 2015. 
 
At the event, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the pleasure to meet 
with John Schmeiser and Cameron Bode from Canada West 
Equipment Dealers Association. Canada West is one of the 
largest equipment dealer associations in North America, and 
represents approximately 400 farm, industrial, and outdoor 
equipment dealers throughout Western Canada. 
 
I ask that all members join me in thanking the Canada West 
Equipment Dealers Association for their generous contribution 
to ensure our province’s agriculture industry will have properly 
trained employees now and in the future. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 
Battlefords. 
 

Potash Company Strengthens First Nations and Métis 
Engagement 

 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise before you today to highlight some of the work being done 
by BHP Billiton to strengthen engagement of First Nations and 
Métis people and businesses throughout our province. I had the 
privilege to attend a luncheon yesterday and hear from Mr. Alex 
Archila, asset president of BHP Billiton’s potash options in 
Saskatoon. 
 
BHP is working hard to develop approaches that reflect local 
community circumstances as well as their business aspirations. 
BHP’s strategy is to understand community values as they 
relate to the environment, to health, safety, and cultural 
concerns and then align those concerns and values with 
corporate approaches to sustainable development. Mr. Speaker, 
this strategy is particularly important when developing resource 
projects here in Saskatchewan and throughout Canada. 
 
Late last year BHP and the Kawacatoose, Day Star, and 
Muskowekwan First Nations signed an opportunities agreement 
for the Jansen potash project. The agreement will increase 
community-based economic development, create jobs, and 
manage local environmental issues. It also includes mutual 
management on the environmental impact of the potash mine as 
well as initiatives for training, education, and labour force 
development. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking 
BHP Billiton for working to develop Aboriginal business 
strategies that are mutually beneficial to both Aboriginal 
communities and Saskatchewan corporations. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Cougars Win Track and Field Championship 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a privilege for me to rise in the House today to honour some 
of our hard-working U of R [University of Regina] athletes 
once again. 
 
On February 23rd, the University of Regina Cougars men won 
the Canada West track and field championship in Edmonton. 
The Cougars secured nine medals in total and finished with 83 
points in the team standing, which was 16 points ahead of their 
closest competitor, the Victoria Vikes. This was the men’s third 
Can West title after their back-to-back championship wins in 
2010 and 2011. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was high jumper Jeremy Eckert that started the 
victory for the Cougars. Eckert easily cleared the bar at 2.16 
metres and broke the Can West record that stood since 1979. 
 
It wasn’t just the athletes winning. The team’s head coach and a 
good friend of mine, Bruce McCannel, was named Can West 
Male Coach of the Year. And Bruce was a very impressive 
athlete in his own right, winning many CIS [Canadian 
Interuniversity Sport] championships for the Cougars when he 
was a university athlete. 
 
Next up for this all-star team is the Canadian Interuniversity 
Sport championships that starts in Edmonton today and runs till 
the 8th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of our student athletes here in 
Regina and the coaches that lead them to excel. I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating the University of Regina 
Cougars on their impressive Can West championship win, and 
wish them all the best this week in Edmonton at the CIS 
championships. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Carlton. 
 

Spending Priorities 
 
Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Leader of 
the Opposition keeps calling on the government to spend more 
taxpayers’ money with no plan of how he would oversee this 
spending and no plan of how he would pay for it. Today’s 
StarPhoenix editorial makes this very point: 
 

It’s difficult to reconcile NDP Leader Cam Broten’s 
criticism of the government for not granting every penny 
requested by . . . health regions to address urgent issues in 
nursing homes with the need for responsible budgeting 
and spending of taxpayers’ money. 

 
It goes on to say that the job of opposition requires: “. . . 
presenting options that stay within the means of the taxpayers to 
support them.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, one year into his leadership, the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] leader is failing at this job. By our account, 
the NDP leader and his caucus have called for $1.6 billion of 



4582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

new government spending with no idea how they would pay for 
it. That means higher taxes, huge deficits, or both. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Saskatchewan voters soundly rejected Dwain 
Lingenfelter and his reckless $5 billion spending spree. Today’s 
editorial suggests the new NDP leader has not learned anything: 
“. . . he demonstrates a reckless approach to spending public 
money that raises questions about how the NDP would run the 
province if he’s given the reins.” 
 
Reckless spending by the old NDP leader, reckless spending by 
the new NDP leader. That may be a different leader, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but it’s the same old NDP. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Provision of Nursing Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In November because 
of patient safety concerns, this government put a moratorium on 
the abolishment, replacement, and vacancy management of 
registered nurse positions, but this government has now lifted 
that moratorium. Our province’s nurses, Mr. Speaker, say, 
“This decision is deeply troubling . . . [because] concerns 
around patient safety, which were the reason for the pause, have 
not been addressed.” 
 
My question for the Premier is: why is his government lifting 
the moratorium on getting rid of nursing positions? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, quality of care and patient safety is of the utmost 
importance to this government. Certainly that is something that 
is shared by our RHAs [regional health authority] as well as 
organizations like SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] and 
our other providers. We are equally committed to ensuring that 
we have a strong nursing workforce in Saskatchewan in our 
health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the members opposite will know, we came into 
government in 2007. And we knew and recognized something 
that the members opposite clearly would not recognize, that we 
had a lack of RNs [registered nurse] within the health care 
system and that was having a negative impact on the system, 
Mr. Speaker. At that time we committed to 800 additional RN 
positions. Mr. Speaker, today we have exceeded that 800 
positions by 200, bringing us to over 1,000 RNs within the 
system, Mr. Speaker, and putting us in a position to have 18 per 
cent more RNs, Mr. Speaker, 18 per cent more nurses per capita 
than the national average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spoken with the president of SUN. I did by 
phone on Friday. I met with her Monday morning. She is 
meeting, has a meeting with the deputy minister of Health 
today. We look forward to bringing together, I hope, a 
resolution to a new partnership and to a new CBA [collective 
bargaining agreement]. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister needs to listen to 
what the nurses are saying today, what nurses are saying as 
their concerns are related to patient safety. A few months ago 
we heard from Tracy Zambory, the president of SUN, as the 
minister referenced. She said that staffing levels are 
“dangerously low” and that nurses are “very fearful for patient 
safety.” Those are her words. 
 
Our province’s nurses, Mr. Speaker, say those concerns about 
patient safety have still not been addressed. Yet this 
government’s saying it’s okay for health regions to get rid of 
nursing positions or simply not to fill nursing position 
vacancies. That doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker, 
especially when we keep hearing concerns about patient safety, 
and especially when we hear concerns about a quality of care 
that’s concerning for many patients as a result of short-staffing 
problems. 
 
My question is for the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Why does this 
government think it’s okay to get rid of nursing positions or 
simply not fill nursing vacancies? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, just to correct the Leader of the Opposition or perhaps 
pose a question to him. Mr. Speaker, we believe, as well as 
RHAs and as well as SUN and other provider groups, Mr. 
Speaker, that we need the right provider in the right place for 
the right patient, Mr. Speaker. That may very well be an RN, 
Mr. Speaker, but it may be another provider group, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we indicated to the SUN president, Mr. 
Speaker, that as we work our way towards a, I would hope a 
successful renewal of a partnership agreement — a first of its 
kind in Canada, very successful agreement, Mr. Speaker — that 
we would indicate to the regions that while this takes place that 
there would be no loss of employment for SUN members, Mr. 
Speaker. Maybe that SUN members may be working in 
different areas because of changes to the workplace, Mr. 
Speaker, but we want to ensure, as do SUN and our other 
providers, that all of our providers are working to the top of 
their scope, Mr. Speaker, in ensuring that we do have that right 
provider in the right place for the right patient. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the moratorium on abolishing 
nursing positions was supposed to be in place until a thorough 
review of patient safety data, evidence, and research was 
completed. The government, Mr. Speaker, promised to do that. 
But now the government has broken that promise, and this is 
the concern that nurses have because it ties in directly to patient 
safety. 
 
The patient safety review has not been completed, but the 
moratorium on abolishing nursing positions is being lifted. Mr. 
Speaker, my question for the Premier is this: why is the 
government pulling the plug on the patient safety review? 



March 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4583 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, over the last three months, we did take part, as did the 
regions and the Ministry of Health in a data review. There were 
two surveys that were sent out to the RHAs. The first survey 
was information that was requested by SUN, Mr. Speaker, of 
nine RHAs that they had concerns about in terms of a change in 
practice that was being contemplated. That information was 
provided, Mr. Speaker. A second survey was requested, Mr. 
Speaker, and that information was publicly available through 
information that regions already have to send to CIHI 
[Canadian Institute of Health Information], Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we felt was that rather than a broad look at a data review, 
Mr. Speaker, that we would engage with SUN and with 
front-line workers on specific areas of changes in practice, Mr. 
Speaker, that they did raise concerns about. That offer still 
stands, Mr. Speaker. And the ministry is talking to SUN today 
to have a further discussion about how we proceed with that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government will go through 
the motions of listening. This government will go through the 
motions of saying that there’ll be a patient safety review, but 
it’s . . . The test, Mr. Speaker, is how it’s lived out in the 
actions. And when nurses are concerned about the patient safety 
review coming to an end, when the nurses are concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, about the moratorium being lifted, I think people in 
the province will listen to what nurses are saying with respect to 
patient safety over the spin coming from this minister. 
 
We keep hearing concerns about patient safety. We keep 
hearing concerns about a quality of care that is concerning. Just 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale brought 
forward the concerns of Kerrie Anderson who spent a lot of 
time in Royal University Hospital because of her MS [multiple 
sclerosis], endured a lot of unnecessary pain because of what 
she identified as shortages in front-line staffing. 
 
We saw, Mr. Speaker, yesterday how this government 
completely dismissed her concerns. So unfortunately, it’s not 
surprising that they’re also dismissing the concerns that the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses are raising around patient 
safety. My question for the Premier is this: what will it take for 
his government to start listening to patients, start listening to 
front-line health care providers and start listening to the nurses 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what it will take for 
government to start listening to patients and nurses and other 
providers, Mr. Speaker, already took place, and that was the 
2007 election, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what nurses were saying, 
Mr. Speaker: “It’s frustrating to see a profession you love so 
much in the communities you care for be disrespected by your 
own government.” Mr. Speaker, that was SUN in 2006. 
 
What did we do, Mr. Speaker? We committed to hiring more 
RNs in the system, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we today have 

over 1,000 RN positions within the system that didn’t exist 
under the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. In fact we are home 
to 20 per cent more nurses than just six years ago. That’s an 18 
per cent increase in RNs, a 37 per cent increase in LPNs 
[licensed practical nurse], and 58 per cent more nurse 
practitioners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as negotiations with SUN, certainly I’m not 
going to conduct that on the floor of the Assembly. We look 
forward though to resuming a discussion about a partnership 
that has been very successful, that the members opposite never 
accomplished, Mr. Speaker, and a collective bargaining 
agreement with SUN, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we do have 
the proper complement of health providers within the system, 
whether they be RNs, whether they be LPNs, whether they be 
physicians, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

Standards in Care Facilities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week we’ve 
heard many concerning details about this government’s 
approach to seniors’ care. We heard that the boiler at St. Mary’s 
Villa was on the list of needed repairs, but it was ignored and 
three seniors died due to tragic carbon monoxide poisoning. We 
learned that this government forced health regions to pare back 
their urgent requests for much needed staff, equipment, and 
repairs. And we learned about the consequences of this 
government’s decision to get rid of the province-wide minimum 
care standard. It means the standard of care for seniors is both 
uneven and inadequate. 
 
To the minister: has he heard enough to recognize the need for 
province-wide minimum care standards? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the government’s record when it comes to 
investing in the life safety and emergency of our health capital 
within this province, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated while 
there certainly is much more work that needs to be done, this 
government has invested $145.5 million in the last six years, 
compared to only $22 million, Mr. Speaker, including in the 
year that the member references. 
 
And yes, we couldn’t get to all of the projects. In 2008-2009, 
$100 million of which Saskatoon Health Region received $30 
million. Mr. Speaker, the year before that, the year before 
Saskatoon Health Region received $30 million for life safety 
and emergency equipment, under the NDP they received $1.5 
million, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the neglect left over by the members 
opposite when they were in government has put us in a position 
where we have a large deficit, Mr. Speaker, to take care of 
when it comes to the maintenance of our facilities, Mr. Speaker, 
and when it comes to building new facilities within this 
province, Mr. Speaker. But certainly this government has 
indicated and demonstrated that we are committed to doing that. 
 



4584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister actually read 
through the 250 pages of urgent requests from the health 
regions, he would know that the reality for seniors in care 
facilities does not match his rhetoric. 
 
The standard of care is uneven and inadequate. The urgent 
request document shows that if you’re a senior in Heartland 
Health Region, you get about three hours less care per week 
than you do if you’re a senior in Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region. That’s because this government chose to do away with 
province-wide minimum care standards. 
 
To the minister: how can this government defend a seniors’ care 
system in which the standard of care is different depending on 
which community you live? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, just to correct the member opposite, we do have, 
through the special care home program guidelines, we do have 
minimum standards that we have put in place for all regions to 
follow, who operate long-term care facilities, special care 
facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the Urgent Issues Action Fund, this 
was — as an editorial just this morning in The StarPhoenix has 
indicated — this was extraordinary funding and mid-year 
funding, Mr. Speaker, that has been provided that will result in 
significant improvements, Mr. Speaker, to long-term care, 
something that that editorial and in fact former NDP cabinet 
ministers have indicated that seniors’ care had been long 
neglected, Mr. Speaker. That their focus was elsewhere, I 
believe is what Pat Atkinson had to say on the matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as for the decisions that we’ve had to make, I 
would just quote The StarPhoenix and I quote: “For Mr. Broten 
to say that the government should have forked over $18.5 
million in order to meet every request made by the regions 
suggests that he’s simply trying to pander to public sentiment in 
a sensitive area,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to being able to report later this 
spring on the progress that we’ve made through the Urgent 
Issues Action Fund and the good work that that will have done. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are so many 
problems in seniors’ care, yet this government continually 
refuses to listen to residents, their families, and front-line staff. 
This has to stop. It is unacceptable for the standards of seniors’ 
care to be so uneven and inadequate. 
 
Later today I will introduce legislation that will establish a 
residents-in-care bill of rights and require the government to 
regulate province-wide minimum care standards. A legislative 
bill of rights is a step that the government’s own Law Reform 
Commission said would help address problems in seniors’ care. 

To the minister: will he agree today to work with the NDP to 
pass this legislation and start fixing the broken seniors’ care 
system? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly I will have a look at the legislation that the 
member would be proposing, although I would say that the Law 
Reform Commission, even in their own document, had 
indicated in the majority of long-term care facilities that they 
did survey in the province during their work, that many of those 
facilities had already adopted a bill of rights for their residents. 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the guidelines that we have put in place, 
the standards that we have put in place, much of them could be 
read and considered as roles and responsibilities, as a bill of 
rights so to speak, Mr. Speaker. That being said, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll certainly look at that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of listening to the residents, that’s 
certainly what we have done through the work of the CEO 
[chief executive officer] report and the tour, Mr. Speaker, 
something that had never been done, in fact ensuring that we 
linked back the $10 million Urgent Issues Action Fund to what 
the residents were actually saying, Mr. Speaker, to the point 
where, yes, some of the requests, Mr. Speaker, are going to be 
funded within the Urgent Issues Action Fund, Mr. Speaker. And 
we will look to see where we can continue to make further 
improvements. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been three days since the 
emergency debate in this legislature about the crisis in grain 
transportation. We supported the government’s motion because 
we stand by producers and want to help them get their bumper 
crop to market. But in these three days, the federal government 
seems to have again ignored Western Canadian producers. 
 
Just yesterday, Gerry Ritz, the federal Ag minister who has 
done nothing to help farmers, said he’s still waiting for the 
“right time” to do something. To the minister: what pressure is 
he putting on the federal minister to wake up and realize the 
right time is now? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is a very, very serious problem for our 
agricultural producers and indeed the economy of this province. 
We’re losing billions of dollars because of poor rail service, and 
not only in grain but also in potash, in forest products, in coal, 
and oil. 
 
This is unacceptable, and we’ve made that very clear to the 
federal government. We expect them to, we very much expect 
them to come up with emergency legislation that will legislate 



March 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4585 

levels of service and reciprocal penalties between the rail 
companies and the grain companies, and we expect this to 
happen very quickly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well we would agree we certainly need that 
emergency legislation. The problem is that federal Minister Ritz 
is still sitting on his hands. He’s waiting for the right time to do 
anything. The bumper crop has to move. Every day that passes 
puts farmers deeper in debt and more at risk. 
 
One of the ways that could help move the grain is to open up 
competition between the duopoly on the rail system. And on 
Tuesday the Ag minister admitted that, contrary to calling it a 
dumb idea the day before, he actually believes legislated open 
running rights could be a part of the solution to end this crisis. 
And while we welcome this flip-flop, what producers in 
Saskatchewan need is a minister to stand up to big rail and to 
the federal government and demand real penalties with strict 
enforcement and long-term solutions like open running rights. 
 
Will the minister do the right thing, now being the right time, 
and call on the federal government to stand up to the railways? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — That’s exactly what we are doing, Mr. 
Speaker. Unlike the members opposite, we are demanding the 
federal government come up very quickly with emergency 
legislation that will force the railways into level of service 
agreements with the grain companies and impose reciprocal 
penalties on the grain companies and/or railways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is far stronger action than advocating for dual 
running rights, which are already available to the railways and 
are already used in certain areas of the rail system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 

Ministry of Highways Contracts 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is 
the government that was the first government in all of Canada 
to actually fail an audit on its central books, Mr. Speaker. It 
claimed that there was a razor-thin $60 million surplus, but the 
auditor exposed the truth. And the truth is that the government 
had a $600 million deficit. 
 
But it’s not just the Premier and the Finance minister that have 
it wrong, Mr. Speaker, it’s also the Highways minister. In the 
fall the Highways ministry said that 13 per cent of the highway 
contracts in 2012-2013 were not completed on time. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the journalists dug into that claim and they 
exposed the truth. Almost half of the highway contracts in 2012 
and 2013 were not completed on time. To the minister: why 
does this government have such a hard time delivering the facts 
to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when it comes to highways in this province, a 
great number of factors play into it, Mr. Speaker. For example, 
the number of projects that were behind schedule last fall, 
weather played a huge role in this, Mr. Speaker. We had 
projects around the province that were nearing completion. We 
had an early winter, and the projects were delayed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the case that the member opposite is speaking to 
about what actions should be taken, I’m sure he’s speaking to 
the CBC news story that was on last night. He should also be 
aware as well then that the deputy minister of Highways was 
interviewed on that news story, and he indicated that officials in 
the ministry are concerned about this. They’re looking at 
potential ways to deal with this. They met with the Heavy 
Construction Association and are looking at ways to solve this 
problem. 
 
But in cases like the weather, Mr. Speaker, that can’t be 
controlled, even though the NDP thinks they can control 
everything, Mr. Speaker. In those instances it’s just one of those 
things that happen. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy that the ministry 
officials are looking into this issue. It is a problem, and they’re 
dealing with it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Excuses, excuses, excuses, Mr. Speaker. 
What we’ve learned is this government’s system for highway 
contracts is in complete shambles. This government has no way 
of tracking whether highway contracts are late and by how 
much, Mr. Speaker. This is a system that takes up $387 million 
of taxpayers’ money every year, and there’s no accountability 
built into that system. That’s totally unacceptable to the people 
and to the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Again to the minister, without excuses: why is this government 
failing to keep track of all the highways contracts it signs every 
single year? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that’s absolute nonsense. Of course the 
Ministry of Highways keeps track of every contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member is a former minister of Highways. He 
probably has forgotten that already, Mr. Speaker, conveniently 
because he’s embarrassed of his record. But, Mr. Speaker, that 
member should well know that he probably didn’t have that 
problem under his tenure because they didn’t build any 
highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been record highways budgets under this 
government. We have spent far, far more than those members 
ever, ever dreamt of, Mr. Speaker. We’re working to correct the 
infrastructure deficit that they left behind. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to continue to do that and continue to grow this economy 



4586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

in this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, there were 125 highway 
projects last year, and it shouldn’t be that difficult to actually 
keep track of 125 projects. But the government couldn’t do that, 
Mr. Speaker. It originally said that 16 of those projects were 
late, but journalists exposed the truth. There was actually 57 
projects that were late, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government should know what is happening with 
highways contracts, and they should ensure that they are 
delivered on time. When the needs our of highways are not 
prioritized, Mr. Speaker, the seriousness is people’s lives are 
put at risk. Once again to the minister of excuses: why is this 
government failing to keep track of all the highway contracts 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member knows full well that 
ministers are to be addressed by their correct title, so I would 
ask the minister to withdraw the remark and apologize. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize for the comment, 
but to the minister . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to withdraw 
the remark and apologize. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the comment and I 
apologize. Again to the minister: why is this government totally 
failing, failing to keep track of all the highway contracts it signs 
every single year? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As 
everyone in this room is well aware, that just simply isn’t the 
case. And, Mr. Speaker, that member making comments that the 
ministry doesn’t keep track of all the contracts frankly does a 
complete disservice to the very good officials in the Ministry of 
Highways. 
 
He heard in that news story that the deputy minister said he’s 
very concerned about the lateness of some of the contracts, and 
they’re looking at possibilities to rectify the situation. But as I 
said, Mr. Speaker, there is many, many variables around this. 
There’s weather conditions. There’s all sorts of things that are 
happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just simply the fact that he raises this with that 
sort of sarcastic attitude about the good officials in the Ministry 
of Highways frankly I think is disgraceful, Mr. Speaker. And he 
should be apologizing to those officials as well. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. That 
government had seven long years to figure out how to be the 

government, Mr. Speaker, but it can’t even answer basic 
questions about the contracts it signs with the road builders. 
And that’s completely unacceptable. 
 
And here is Ken Rasmussen, a well-respected public 
administration professor, has to say about this government’s 
failure, and I quote: “The fact that they don’t seem to be aware 
of the magnitude of the problem, the severity of the problem 
would be a concern. It should be a concern . . .” 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time has expired. Introduction of 
bills. Oh sorry, sorry. My mistake. Sorry. Go ahead. Sorry. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. “It should be a 
concern for the legislature and it should be a concern for 
citizens,” Mr. Speaker. Well it is a huge concern for the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, when this government can’t 
even get the basics of governing right. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when will this 
government get serious about fixing up the broken Highways 
contracting system to ensure that the highways are built on time 
— not to blame the Highways workers, Mr. Speaker — and to 
make sure that these roads are safe for our families? When will 
they do that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Government 
Relations can reply. I recognize him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you know, the rhetoric from the member 
opposite, a former minister of Highways himself who did very, 
very little during his tenure, Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . They do a 
great job of criticizing, but they didn’t do a very good job of 
governing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, record Highways investments under this 
government through all six years. Mr. Speaker, the record of 
those members in government is pathetic, frankly. And, Mr. 
Speaker, again I would bring this back to the fact that the 
member’s comments about ministry officials keeping track of 
contracts is just, frankly it’s terrible. He owes an apology to 
those officials in the Ministry of Highways. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I look at what’s happened around this 
province, all the highways projects we’ve done, record capital 
budgets, record operating budgets. Mr. Speaker, we’re fixing, 
we’re building new highways, new projects all over this 
province to keep the growth going in this province, to keep 
infrastructure improving, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue 
to do that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — To request leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 



March 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4587 

Agriculture. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I stand to introduce a former member of 
this honourable Assembly and now president of the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, Mr. Harold Martens 
and his wife, Sylvia. They’re seated in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re accompanied by Harold and Sylvia’s son Joe 
and his wife, Honey, and Harold and Sylvia’s grandchildren: 
Chase, Lincoln, and Charmayne. I’d ask all members of this 
honourable Assembly to extend a warm welcome to the 
Martens family. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Mr. Broten: — With leave to join introductions, please. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 
asked for leave to join in introduction of guests. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Agriculture minister in welcoming Harold Martens to the 
Assembly, along with the Martens family who live in a 
beautiful part of the province that is valued by everyone in the 
province. And it’s good to see them here in the Assembly today. 
Welcome. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 606 — The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
606, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from Riversdale that Bill No. 606, The Residents-in-care Bill of 
Rights Act, 2014 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When will this bill be read a second 
time? 
 

Ms. Chartier: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Privatization of Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Glad to join the debate today here in the 75 minutes. A fine 
introduction there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just to set the stage 
properly, I’ll read out the motion, and of course we’ll get 
around to moving it in the debate itself. But, Mr. Speaker, today 
we’re considering: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for 
undermining our Crown corporations and breaking its 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to protect our 
Crown corporations from privatization. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are events that have taken place over the last 
couple of years, certainly since the past election, that are very 
much part of the history of this province. And certainly in terms 
of my understanding of the political history of this province, 
Mr. Speaker, I think we’re back into a very interesting stage as 
regards to the question of Crown corporations in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Crown corporations in the case of SaskTel have 
been with us since the first decade of this province’s existence. 
In different forms, they’ve come together, Mr. Speaker, in terms 
of the delivery of services to the people of Saskatchewan. You 
think of the big ones in terms of SaskPower, in terms of 
SaskEnergy, in terms of SaskTel, and Sask Government 
Insurance, Mr. Speaker. But certainly there are other Crown 
utilities and agencies that have sought, through the people of 
Saskatchewan, to provide better services and better returns on 
investment to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I come to this from a perspective of the 
second son of Doug McCall who’s a 35-year gas fitter with 
SaskPower and then SaskEnergy of course after SaskEnergy 
was devolved as the gas division of SaskPower in the ’80s by 
the then Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. 
And I remember very well the concern around the McCall 
kitchen table about what was going to happen with SaskEnergy 
when that then government tried to sell off SaskEnergy. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I raise that for not just my own . . . 
sort of to put my own sort of marker in terms of how I approach 
these debates, but certainly historically, Mr. Speaker, we know 
that many people opposite in different ways were aligned with 
that government of the day, be it as staff or supporters or 
officials on different constituency associations, Mr. Speaker, or 
as in the case of the Premier of this province, Mr. Speaker, then 
working in this very legislature as ministerial assistants. 
 
And I believe that then the now Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
served a tour of duty in the Office of Public Participation, 
which was headed up by then MLA for Wolseley, Graham 



4588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

Taylor. And, Mr. Speaker, that particular agency, that particular 
office, Public Participation, was of course the way that the then 
Conservatives were framing the privatization debate. And we 
saw all sorts of things being sold off or attempted to be sold off 
in some of the most unseemly of manners, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and one of the spearheads, one of the tip, the tip of that 
spearhead, was the Office of Public Participation. 
 
And of course we know that the Premier said that he’s learned 
many lessons from the time he had spent working for that 
government about what not to do, and I think he had learned 
some lessons about what to do as well. And it’s interesting, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s the way some of these things emerge over 
time. But certainly when the now Premier assumed the 
leadership of the official opposition, he was confronted with his 
past and, you know, asked about what are the lessons that 
you’re taking from that time. And he had said, well there’s a lot 
of lessons on how not to do things. 
 
But in 1991, Mr. Speaker, he was so nonplussed and so, you 
know, turned off by the experience he had had that he had 
sought a nomination in Swift Current, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And you know, there’s a fine mustachioed picture of the then 
seeking-nomination candidate that you can look up for 
historical sake, Mr. Speaker. But I think the point that I want to 
make here is that while other people were learning the lessons 
of the Devine government, the individual from Swift Current 
was seeking a nomination. And you know, there are fewer 
endorsements other than giving yourself up for nomination, Mr. 
Speaker, to indicate that you think the agenda’s been great. 
 
So in 1991 he didn’t win the nomination, but I think we take 
that as certainly approval for the then agenda of the Devine 
Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, and the way that that government 
pursued privatization and a number of other things that were 
very damaging to the fiscal and social health of this province. 
But when we hear different things over the years about 
members around Crown corporations, we know that they come 
to it from a very ideological, very right wing perspective. And 
it’s not so much about pragmatics or what makes sense, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When the government took the pledge and voted for the Crown 
corporation protection Act or the then opposition took the 
pledge and voted for the Crown corporation protection Act after 
the 2003 election — in which of course 2003, one of the turning 
issues in that election was privatization — and the way that the 
then leader of the official opposition, Elwin Hermanson, said 
that they’d be open for bids . . . And certainly there’s a fairly 
good list of quotes from then members of the official 
opposition, some of them still seated in this place, Mr. Speaker, 
talking about, you know, selling off SaskTel to get the best 
bang for the buck. 
 
You go back to the late ’90s exercise around trying to consider 
the future of Saskatchewan’s Crowns and the then submission 
from the Progressive Conservatives headed up by the current 
member from Kindersley where they would have sold SaskTel 
off, you know, lock, stock, and barrel as soon as they could 
have. The current member from Melville-Saltcoats, who in ’98 
opined that, you know, they’d missed the boat on selling 
SaskTel, and maybe it wasn’t too late after all, but they should 
really have sold it off when competition came to this province. 

And you look at that record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s not 
surprising that in 2003 privatization was a definite issue. And 
that Elwin Hermanson was straightforward enough and honest 
enough to talk about what was happening with their agenda for 
Crown privatization, I think did a favour to the people of 
Saskatchewan because with that kind of information on the 
table, the people of Saskatchewan made an informed decision. 
And they didn’t choose the privatization agenda of Elwin 
Hermanson and the Sask Party. 
 
And one of the things that’s interesting about the days that 
followed that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Sask Party learned a 
lesson. They’re like okay, well you know we’re still right 
wingers. That’s who we are. We still have this ideology. We 
want to get government out of the way. We want to sell off 
public assets. But how do we do that? How do we square that 
with the fact that the people of Saskatchewan don’t support 
that? How do they square that circle? 
 
So on the surface, Mr. Speaker, we see things like the vote for 
the Crown protection Act and the way that they all took the 
pledge there. And then subsequently, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you 
saw two straight elections where the Premier of the province 
said, absolutely we will not be privatizing Crown corporations. 
We support the Crown corporation protection Act, full stop, 
period. 
 
And you saw different ways where that played out in terms of 
. . . I think of the Information Services Corporation where they 
sold off a significant chunk of the assets of that corporation, 
where up until the years before, the then minister, the member 
from Silver Springs was saying, oh absolutely we value our 
Crown corporations. This is not for sale. We’ll never sell it. 
And then of course, you know, after the 2000 election, guess 
what’s up on the auction block? 
 
And after the 2011 election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it turns out 
that there were some caveats and there was some, you know, 
there was some fine print that people should’ve really read 
about how they were approaching Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming. And it wasn’t, you know . . . We’re not going to sell 
off existing stores. But all the new stores, those are going to be 
private. And they play some of these, you know, semantic 
games in terms of, oh this is exactly what we’ve been 
promising. And you know, if the people of Saskatchewan didn’t 
get it, well apparently it’s on them. 
 
And you see that approach, the way that there’s been activity on 
the surface and lip service being paid on the surface, Mr. 
Speaker. But when you get down into the guts of the individual 
corporations, I think of the way that Ledcor is playing a role in 
terms of different of our corporations on installs. I think of the 
way that Northland Power is running a significant chunk of our 
power generating grid up in The Battlefords, all of which is 
work that SaskPower could have done, you know, quite 
handily, thank you very much. But it helped them to manage the 
look of the books, and it helped this government to sell off 
something that should’ve otherwise made sense as part of a 
public utility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again that sort of slavish devotion to that 
right wing ideology of privatization is something that we see 
playing itself out in many different ways. But again, back on the 



March 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4589 

other side, how do they square that with the fact that the people 
of Saskatchewan don’t support that? 
 
Well it’s going to be interesting, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve 
had the Premier come forward and say that we need to have 
another conversation about Crown corporations in this province 
and where we’re at in terms of the future of Crown corporations 
in this province. And one of the ways that he got that 
conversation substantially under way was by opening up the 
Sask Gaming Corp for bids. And this is something that had 
been definitely refused in 2007, in 2011. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, it wasn’t talked about on the hustings and, you know, 
we find this out in February that this is what’s going to be 
offered. And in point of fact, Mr. Speaker, the actual workers in 
the corporation found out about these games that were being 
played with their livelihoods on the floor of the casino. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that — it’s sad in fact — that, 
you know, this is a government that ran what The StarPhoenix 
called hateful ads about resource revenue sharing, hateful ads 
about resource revenue sharing, and played divisive games with 
the lives in this province, Mr. Speaker. But when it comes to 
Sask Gaming Corp, suddenly they can’t support the aims and 
ambitions of First Nations and First Nations people enough. 
Suddenly that’s their fundamental concern in life. 
 
And you know, into this there are bunch of things that flow, but 
for one, Mr. Speaker, in terms of that government pursuing that 
deal, they could have done so quite handily all by themselves, 
thank you very much. But why did they need the Saskatchewan 
NDP to sign off on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s because they 
wanted political coverage to proceed with what is a larger 
agenda of privatization. And again, Mr. Speaker, if you look at 
the history, if you look at the way that this government and the 
party that is represented in those government benches, the way 
that they’ve approached the questions of privatization, it’s 
always that struggle. They can’t wait to privatize things, but 
they know that it’s not acceptable to the broader public. So 
what do they do? We see these piecemeal privatizations. We see 
these stealth privatizations. And here with the Sask Gaming 
Corp, we saw one that was a full-frontal privatization. It was 
ready to go like that. 
 
[11:00] 
 
But they wanted to have the NDP sign off on their plan, you 
know, despite the fact that they could have proceeded quite 
handily under the Crown corporations protection Act and that 
then the public would have had a say. The public would have 
had full say in terms of the hearings that are safeguarded in that 
Act, and then it would have been subject to final approval in an 
election, which is where the people of Saskatchewan ultimately 
have their say. But they didn’t want to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So was it really about an honest effort and making a respectful 
reply to a request coming forth from the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, or was it about Sask Party 
political gains? I think it was about the latter, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I think that’s pretty clear. 
 
But in terms of the way that privatization is alive and well in 
this province under the leadership of that government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this is the way that we see the debate 

unfolding. You know, they’ve apparently . . . The one lesson 
they’ve learned from history is that they can’t have a 
straightforward debate about privatization. They can’t debate it 
on their merits, so they’ve got to tilt the table, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve got to spin it. They’ve got to get at it sideways. So 
we’re going to have that debate, but part of it is, Mr. Speaker, 
the fact that the Premier is already breaking his word. And 
that’s why I’m pleased to move this motion today: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for 
undermining our Crown corporations and breaking its 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to protect our 
Crown corporations from privatization. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for 
undermining our Crown corporations and breaking its 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to protect our 
Crown corporations from privatization. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You 
know, when I first read the member from Elphinstone’s motion, 
I was a little bit surprised. I thought maybe the staff had written 
it up and he hadn’t actually read it before they submitted it, but 
after listening to him I kind of understand where he believes 
he’s coming from. 
 
The first word that came to my mind though when I was 
listening to him was hypocrisy. Because if you want to actually 
balance the scales, if you want to really look at the records of 
this government as opposed to the opposition when they were in 
government, there’s stark contrast, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll 
endeavour as much as I can in the 10 minutes I have to point 
out some of those. 
 
And again listening to the member from Elphinstone, I find that 
it’s again the same old NDP. They’re coming from a place of 
insinuation and fear, not from fact. And, you know, again 
comparing records, there’s a lot of facts to be presented here. 
 
He did point out some very interesting things that we do believe 
in, a lot of us on this side of the House do believe in, is that the 
strength of the Crowns is integral to a strong economy in our 
province. If you look around the world in a lot of other 
jurisdictions, it’s recognized that a solid host of Crown utilities 
does in fact lend some stability to the environment, the 
economic environment and the business environment within the 
province, and we see that happening in this province today. 
 
In fact I can point to a lot of different ventures in my 
jurisdiction, in my area in and around Yorkton, when it comes 
to stable power, stable gas delivery. And we look at what’s 
happening there with record development of our agricultural 
industry and value added there with the canola plants, with 
grain millers, the P & H grain handling facility there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as well as a lot of different manufacturing that 



4590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

goes on there with Leon Ram and Morris and Parkland Welding 
and a lot of these other businesses in the area that are doing a 
lot. They not only support our economy, but develop a huge 
amount of jobs and employment opportunities for our people of 
this province. 
 
You know, again looking at the member’s motion, he used the 
word undermine. And I don’t know if they’ve got a different 
definition for the word undermine, but it just doesn’t seem to fit 
into when you actually look at the facts and records again of 
what the NDP did for a number of years, very many years, as 
opposed to our record with the Crown corporations here. 
 
So I will get right into some of the meat here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Again I have already touched on the fact that we do 
see the Crowns, the Crown utility, as a very important part of 
our economy in the province. And again I pointed out to some 
of the instances around my area in Yorkton. We want to look at 
the actual management of the Crowns. And I would point to the 
record of the NDP being very much one of mismanagement, 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the lack of investment, mediocre 
investment. I’ll try and get to some of those details, but honestly 
very mediocre investment into some of those Crown 
corporations. 
 
And then looking at some of the dividends drawn back out and 
admittedly going to possibly very good ventures, but the 
amount of dividends drawn out making those Crowns very 
unstable, not a very good business model. Whereas I would 
argue the way the Crowns are being managed right now, a lot 
more stable, a lot more investment in infrastructure, a lot 
stronger Crowns. Admittedly gaining some debt because they 
are gaining business debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Anybody that’s run a business knows from time to time you 
have to accumulate some debt when you’re investing back into 
your company. For example, when I ran my company in 
Yorkton, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some pieces of equipment were 
running upwards of half a million dollars. I didn’t have a half 
million dollars in the bank, but I would have to finance that 
equipment, amortize it over a period of time, invest back in my 
company, get more of a client base, which the utilities here are 
doing — SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SaskTel. I will try and get to 
those numbers as well when we look at the customer base they 
are drawing from now, Mr. Speaker, and how it’s been built up 
over the last six years, and again the success and the stability 
and the positives that those Crown corporations do have. 
 
Again when I’d buy equipment, I’d amortize it over years, build 
up a customer base which would give me the capacity, the 
financial capacity and flow to finance more equipment, to build 
my customer base even farther, get to the point of having a 
large number of customers, being able to employ a large 
number of people in our area, pay them better, and really help to 
drive the environment of economy and business in my area as 
best as I could. 
 
And I see these Crown corporations doing the exact same thing 
right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are employing more 
people. They are investing record numbers back in 
infrastructure. SaskPower for example, if we look at that, 
SaskPower I think under the NDP, very minimal — $300 
million a year maybe investment at a high. We’re looking at 

SaskPower over the next 10 years, investing upwards of nine 
and a half billion dollars. This year alone we should have 
invested through SaskPower 1.3 billion to upgrade 
Saskatchewan’s electrical infrastructure. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy, when we look at 
them, they will be investing over 180 million this year, 
expanding and ensuring the integrity of their distribution 
system. 
 
SaskTel, Mr. Deputy Speaker, investments more than $300 
million, investing in areas that the NDP never did. They saw no 
value in rural Saskatchewan. They saw nothing outside of 
Regina and Saskatoon. We’re looking at the Crown 
corporations investing in our rural areas, investing back in our 
province, not outside of our borders losing millions and 
millions of dollars. In fact I think I’ve seen numbers in some of 
my notes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where upwards of $350 million 
lost in different ventures outside the province by failed capital 
investments by those members when they were in government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’re looking at the Crowns now investing back in our 
province, back in our communities, back into rural 
Saskatchewan, back into the North where those two members 
sit across and criticize our records from the North. And we look 
at the lacklustre performance they had. And we’re looking at 
the record investments going into all different areas, whether 
it’s infrastructure, whether it’s telecommunications, to 
encourage investment into those northern areas to help 
employment of all people in the North. We’re looking to job 
opportunities where they’re having to draw people from the 
South and fly them up north for mining and all the other 
opportunities that we have up now there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we wouldn’t see a lot of those investments if it wasn’t for 
the capital investment and the strengthening of the Crown 
corporations and investing in areas that the NDP never would. 
We see the value of our economy. We see the value of the 
North. We see the value of our rural. And we’re doing what we 
can through the Crown corporations to make sure they’re 
investing in, again, telecommunications, energy delivery, power 
delivery, and what we can do there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another Crown, I know it wasn’t mentioned here today — it is 
a Crown; I see it as a utility as well — is STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company], where admittedly some routes have 
had to have been drawn down because of a lack of ridership. 
One or two people a week at the very most can be dealt with in 
other ways, as well as shipping goods. But when we look at 
where STC is going that major carriers will not go, again 
enhancing the transportation in those areas and enhancing the 
balance of life and the quality of life in those areas as well. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, you know, talking about that, our Vision 
2020 and Beyond plan for growth in Saskatchewan fits right in 
with our plan for the Crown corporations and how they’re 
actually being managed and how they’re being utilized, when 
we’re seeing that they are enhancing the quality of life in 
Saskatchewan with again added economic opportunities in areas 
that the NDP ignored. We see added opportunities in 
employment, very good jobs that are online now that weren’t 
there before because of the total lack of attention by the NDP, 



March 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4591 

and really I’d say the mismanagement of the Crowns when they 
were in power. 
 
You know I really . . . I want to touch on a few things, the 
positives that were said by the members of the opposition. The 
member for Nutana, I noticed a quote that was in my notes 
where I give her credit. She was quoted as saying this: “We 
well know that there’s a $10 billion infrastructure deficit. So 
they’re beginning to catch up on that and that’s a good thing.” 
That was from April 10th of 2013, the member from Nutana. 
 
Then we look back in history a little bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and the member from Athabasca back in 2011: “Lowest bundle 
may not have worked. It may have been politically popular, but 
does it hurt the Crowns in the end?” He’s asking a question. So 
that’s very interesting coming from that member, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So before my time does come to a close here . . . I know a 
couple of other members are definitely going to want to get in 
on this debate. Just a point to be made again with the dividends. 
The NDP took unsustainable dividends, 181 per cent in 2001, 
114 per cent in 2002. The NDP took a 10-year average capital 
expenditure to the Crowns was less than 65 per cent of the 
Saskatchewan Party’s past three years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So again it points to the record of the NDP where they’re totally 
continually drawing down the income of the Crown 
corporations, making them financially unstable, and then not 
investing back into the businesses, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we 
see now a power grid that has to have billions of dollars 
investment, and all the other utilities need billions of investment 
over the next years to make them sustainable. I’m very proud of 
our government’s record and I’m happy to not support the 
member from Elphinstone’s motion and speak against it. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to enter this discussion. I’m disappointed that we have 
to have it at this point in time in Saskatchewan, but I’m very 
pleased to enter this discussion here today on an issue that’s 
critical to the future of our province and that being the health 
and welfare of our Crown corporations, their ability to serve the 
people of this province, communities across this province, not 
just today but well into the future. The facts will speak for 
themself on this front. You know, the member from Yorkton, he 
can get up and run through a revisionist history that’s been 
written by maybe caucus staff. Or I’m not sure who’s done, 
prepared those sorts of lines, Mr. Speaker, but the facts themself 
will speak for themself. And that government will be judged by 
their record on this front, and their record isn’t a good one. 
 
Those members can thump their desks all they want, Mr. 
Speaker, but the people of this province know this 
government’s record when it comes to our Crown corporations. 
They know that it wasn’t too long ago that that government, 
that . . . or before they were government, were outright in their 
willingness to privatize our Crown corporations. They then 
came around and started using softer language. Then they 
started offering commitments that they wouldn’t sell off our 

Crown corporations, a promise that they’ve broken, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Not only have they broken that promise. They’ve actively 
undermined those Crown corporations with deliberate actions, 
ripping money out of those Crown corporations at every turn to 
pull into general revenues — and we know what the auditor 
says about the general revenues of this government, the 
accounting of this government — as well as at every turn 
outsourcing the opportunities, the jobs for Saskatchewan people 
within that Crown sector. 
 
[11:15] 
 
We know the Crown sector’s been such a vital piece of 
developing Saskatchewan. We know how important it is 
alongside a strong private sector in building the economy here 
in this province. We know what it means in the lives of so many 
who are connected to it by way of a business that’s connected to 
it, by way of supplies or somebody who works directly within 
the Crown corporation. And the undermining and outsourcing 
of this government come at a direct cost to Saskatchewan 
people, real people in communities all across this province. It’s 
something we stand ardently opposed to. 
 
So it’s with some passion and with some pride that I speak in 
support of our Crown corporations, the value of those Crown 
corporations, stand against the willingness and the deliberate 
actions of this government to undermine, to outsource, to 
weaken our Crown corporations, and to privatize our Crown 
corporations — something that clearly isn’t in the best interest 
of Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan communities all 
across this province, nor for today or for our future. 
 
So I’ll be speaking in support of the motion put forward by the 
hon. member and my good friend from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. That motion reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for 
undermining our Crown corporations and breaking its 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to protect our 
Crown corporations from privatization. 

 
As I say, I mean, that government had pretended to 
Saskatchewan people, they took the oath that they wouldn’t be 
privatizing our Crown corporations. And they’ve of course 
broken that promise. We’ve seen them sell off DirectWest. 
We’ve seen them take ISC [Information Services Corporation 
of Saskatchewan], a Crown corporation that delivered $18 
million a year to the treasury here in Saskatchewan, to the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve sold that 
asset off without any consultation with Saskatchewan people. 
 
And they went before Saskatchewan people in the last election 
and they promised they wouldn’t be selling off our Crown 
corporations. Right after that election, they went directly at ISC, 
selling it off and to really what it would seem for short-term 
cash. Because the other concern on this whole piece is this 
government is using these dollars to plug holes within its 
budgets, to prop up its books, to play a game with 
Saskatchewan people — which is all part of why this 
government has failed an audit for the first time in Canadian 
history, because of its improper bookkeeping. 



4592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

We know that that government, since they’ve been in power, 
have taken over $2 billion from our Crown corporations. Those 
are dollars that the Crowns haven’t had to make the investments 
that they require. And those costs come directly on the backs of 
Saskatchewan families who see, on bill after bill after bill, big 
hikes as a consequence of that government. 
 
It’s interesting of course that this government broke its promise 
as it relates to ISC after the election, that they took the oath and 
promised they wouldn’t sell off our Crown corporations, selling 
that off. And it’s interesting as well to see where those dollars 
went. They privatized ISC and those dollars simply flowed back 
into budgets, not even leaving any sort of a legacy for the 
people of Saskatchewan. And I think Saskatchewan people 
deserved better answers as to their Crown corporations. 
 
We see a government scrambling right now, a government that 
wants to pretend one thing on billboards and news releases, but 
can’t get the job done when it comes to managing the finances 
of this province and won’t put the finances in a true and fair 
state to Saskatchewan people. As we say, the auditor has 
weighed in, calling the reporting of that government as it relates 
to our finances. She, and I quote, says, “They’re misleading,” 
that they’re “materially wrong,” and that they aren’t 
trustworthy, Mr. Speaker. Now that should be a concern for all 
Saskatchewan people and should be a concern that this 
government just uses the Crown corporations as an untapped 
reserve or as a reserve, I guess, that they’re tapping at every 
moment, transferring dollars across, forcing our Crowns to take 
on more debt and adding costs to Saskatchewan families. 
 
The Crowns play such an important role, as I say, in providing 
the services our communities need, families need well into the 
future. And they have such an important role, being owned by 
the people of the province, to do so with the best interests of the 
families here in Saskatchewan. This government seems entirely 
out of touch with the reality of Saskatchewan households as it 
relates to cost of living and the lack of affordability. It’s in this 
area that our Crown corporations can be such a vital tool, not 
just for today but well into the future. The undermining and the 
costly outsourcing is all piling up at households across 
Saskatchewan with added costs on bill after bill after bill. 
 
In Saskatchewan, people know that the reason they own those 
Crown corporations is to deliver those quality services and to 
do so at an affordable rate. And Saskatchewan people are 
concerned with this government’s outsourcing that’s costing 
them more, with the deliberate privatization that we’re seeing, 
and the willingness to open up, as the Premier says, the debate 
— we’ll have that debate, and we’ll stand strongly on the side 
of the Crown corporations here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Just maybe to review a little bit of the record as it relates to the 
current Premier on this front, the Premier said back in 2005 in 
this Assembly, “There’s too much state-owned enterprise in the 
province of Saskatchewan.” So I mean, that explains a lot when 
you look at the undermining, the outsourcing, the willingness to 
privatize, the outright privatization that we’ve seen of this 
government when you go back and read a comment like that. 
 
Going back a little further to 2003, the current Premier says . . . 
actually I’ll go to 2002: “Our position is that we want to move 
out of STC. We want to move out the cost that is to the 

taxpayers.” Mr. Speaker, this is just another example of the 
Premier saying that he wants to sell off STC, a vital and 
invaluable service to the people of this province, and a service 
that’s run, I believe, quite efficiently to connect families in a 
large, vast province and, in many cases, families and people to 
health care. 
 
Moving some of those quotes forward, we then had this sort of 
change in position from that Premier and this government who 
said they then wouldn’t be selling off our Crown corporations. 
But of course as we say, that’s been a broken promise to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
When it comes to this Saskatchewan Party government, that 
Premier, with our Crown corporations, I believe Saskatchewan 
people can’t trust them with our Crown corporations. And 
Saskatchewan people know the value of those Crown 
corporations in creating quality employment, in being an 
important contributor to our economy. And that government’s 
approach of outsourcing opportunity such as what we see with 
Texas plates all over our province on SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy vehicles, exporting those profits far outside 
Saskatchewan and not providing that quality employment that 
those Crowns should in our province, is something that’s 
troubling. 
 
Not to mention the fact that all these decisions of that 
government in this outsourcing and privatization costs more. So 
it just doesn’t make sense. It’s selling off the opportunity and 
advantage for Saskatchewan people, the one that they should 
rightfully have today and well into the future. We’ll stand 
opposed to those actions any day of the week, and we’ll stand 
for a strong, vibrant Crown sector that’s meeting the needs of 
communities here today, meeting the needs of families here 
today and well into the future. 
 
I’m glad that finally we’re starting to see a factual debate on 
this front. I’m glad finally we’re letting . . . having government 
speak in a more honest way about this. Their willingness now to 
privatize, we’ll proudly oppose that approach any day of the 
week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Carlton. 
 
Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
begin by saying it’s going to be a pleasure today to take part in 
this debate on this discussion. But it’s a very sombre statement I 
want to start off with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
NDP privatizations. The NDP sold their remaining interest in 
the Lloydminster heavy oil upgrader in 1998 for $310 million to 
Husky Oil. The NDP government completed the privatization of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in 1993 and 1994. 
 
Cameco was created in 1988 by a merger of Saskatchewan 
mining and development corporation and Eldorado Nuclear. 
Originally 62 per cent of the company was owned by the 
government. In 1996 the NDP sold 10 million shares. In 2002 
the NDP sold the remaining 5 million shares. 
 
Four power purchase agreements were signed by the NDP 
between 1999 and 2006. They contracted out power 



March 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4593 

procurement to private companies. That isn’t sad, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That was probably a good decision. Nothing wrong 
with using taxpayers’ dollars in a very efficient manner, looking 
at a means to provide services to this great province and to the 
people who built this province, stayed in the province, and 
during those years, sadly though, were leaving this province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Here’s what I thought was very stark in comparison to the 
members opposite’s debate motion today. In 1999, then deputy 
premier and Crown Investments Corporation minister Dwain 
Lingenfelter announced the sale of Saskatchewan’s 50 per cent 
share in Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation for $80 
million to MacMillan Bloedel. 
 
Today we hear from opposite across the way that the members 
of the NDP are chastising this government for breaking our 
promise on the privatization issue when clearly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we have facts, we have figures — and I’ll go into 
some of those in a while — that the NDP chose to privatize 
what would be, at the time, clearly Crown corporations which 
in and of themselves supported the economic development of 
this province. They chose to do those privatizations freely. And 
today the members opposite stand in their place and criticize 
our government for doing something that we really have not 
broken a promise on. 
 
We support The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are solid behind that statement, behind 
the Act. It’s hypocrisy to have members opposite criticize and 
challenge us and question us that we are, in fact, privatizing 
Crown corporations, when in fact those Crown corporations that 
are so important to our province that we’ve talked about before 
provide our way of life, provide low utility bundles for our 
people, our population, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are protected by 
the Act that this party, when in opposition, clearly supported in 
2004 for a good reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have a time like no other time, I believe, in this province. 
Maybe not since the creation of this province when we saw 
utilities and the Crowns working to expand and provide services 
for the fine women and men in our province as they forge 
forward to create a better place for the children and 
grandchildren. 
 
I want to thank the members of the Crown corporations. Those 
women and men who work in some of the worst conditions that 
we’ve seen, in 50 below wind chills outside, but who day in, 
day out, are there to support our people. We have people who 
call in to the Crowns to complain about outages, complain 
about service needs, whether it be SaskTel, SaskEnergy, 
SaskPower, and they proudly serve this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
There’s one thing that we have to recognize, and we say it time 
and time again, that Saskatchewan is a place to be, no longer a 
place to be from. And that’s because the province is growing, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And as the member from Yorkton clearly 
stated, my colleague, there is a mechanization for a corporation 
to invest dollars to expand. 
 
Sadly we talk about, as well, the history of this province with 
the lack of infrastructure that we inherited, the decline or the . . . 

not so much the demise or decline of infrastructure, just that it 
wasn’t enough plan for it, insomuch as that we find and hear 
and can pick out quotes that the NDP government of the day, 
before 2007, were planning for decline. They were very, very 
proud to have mediocrity as the norm. And then they challenge 
a question our Premier today, who was leader of the party at the 
time, in opposition, about trying to grow the province even by 
100,000 people. I’ll get in some quotes about that too later on, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I have time. 
 
One thing that’s happened in this province is that we’re seeing 
housing starts and business starts and expansions of business, 
because those people believe in this province and we need the 
services that go along with that through the Crown 
corporations, through tel, energy, and power, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and to the point where they’re working day and night 
to provide those services. And we’re very proud to support that. 
 
We had a population increase in this province like no other 
time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and one thing that we have to 
recognize is that we have a plan for growth. We had the plan for 
growth since before 2007. Our leader of the party talked about 
that. He had a policy document. He had 100 points where the 
party developed a plan to show how this province could grow, 
how this party would work if in government at one time and 
have the honour to serve. And we’re seeing many of those 
initiatives come to fruition in the last seven years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
One thing we’re definitely doing that we’re very proud of is 
we’re recognizing that growth cannot happen without the 
stability of the Crown corporations, those that supply us with 
utility bundles that we so need to ensure we attract business and 
retain business, whether it’s large corporations or small 
mom-and-pop operations, the ones that drive the economy, the 
small business leaders in this province. 
 
And to that point the motion falls on its face when you read the 
words, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our actions are clear here that we 
have seen the Crown corporations expand in this province to 
provide those services to the women and men, the taxpayers 
who pay our salaries and proudly have moved back and are 
staying in this province and expanding this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
[11:30] 
 
You know, I touched on some of the sombre moments about 
privatization, but let’s not forget how much money the NDP 
lost on investments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Clearly if they would 
have not failed at investing . . . And they never should have, 
because the government should stay out of investments. Let the 
business sector invest in some of these I believe far-fetched 
ideas. They lost $329.42 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 
their tenure in ventures. 
 
Now I’ve got to tell you, when I first became an MLA I knew 
about some of these. Like there was the one that we hear about 
many times, about Navigata, $90.8 million lost. You know, we 
took over Big Sky Farms. We inherited that situation, lost $26 
million. Of course near and dear to my heart, SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], $35 
million lost. 



4594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

The NDP government tried many other times, and I think other 
members here will know these. I don’t have to go through them 
list by list because my time’s running out, but over $329 million 
lost in investments. And they stand in their place and they 
ridicule and they ask questions about why are we asking the 
Crown corporations to expand, take on debt for infrastructure 
needs. Because they failed to do that. Because they made these 
ridiculous investments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which lost the 
taxpayers of the province all this money. Had they not done 
that, they could have invested that in infrastructure, which they 
clearly decided not to do. 
 
So now we have a province that’s growing. My daughters are 
staying in this province because they see they have a future here 
now. We’re very happy with that. 
 
We have members on this side of the House who have 
grandchildren who are going to hopefully stay in this province 
because now there is a beacon of light which is that we 
recognize that this province has more potential. Every day we 
wake up and it’s another day of a challenge to make it be a 
better place to live and be. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think what’s really 
bothersome to our party is that when we had to look at 
expanding the Crown corporations infrastructure because the 
party opposite would strip dividends, strip and strip and strip 
dividends from the Crown corporations and fail to recognize 
that they should have invested in infrastructure because 
infrastructure does fail. We know that. Things do crumble. 
Things do have to be renewed. And they chose opposite to let 
that course run and not make the investments that they should 
have. 
 
So they stand in their place and they chastise this government 
and, more so, the women and men who lead those Crown 
corporations, who put forth strong business cases to support the 
infrastructure growth and the demands of this province as part 
of the growth plan. It’s not so much as that’s part of our growth 
plan, but they have to support their initiatives because they’re 
being tasked by business and people in this province asking for 
those services, which is a great thing on their part, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no way that I 
can support the member’s opposite motion. But I can definitely 
say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’ve hit on some of the highlights 
of the NDP privatization. My colleagues will do the same after. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, today in question period we had a 
number of questions around the grain trade and what’s 
happening in the grain trade. What we know is that 
Saskatchewan farmers, Alberta farmers, Manitoba farmers are 
subject to the international trade, international corporations. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the fundamental question in this discussion 
this morning is about how much control do we retain as 
Saskatchewan citizens, as the legislature of Saskatchewan, over 
some crucial parts of our economy? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, over many years the Saskatchewan Crown 
corporations have become part of our way of keeping some 
local control. And what’s fundamentally frustrating for me and 
for many people in Saskatchewan is that the Premier muses at 
different times, 2003 he made the comment basically that: 
 

The Sask. Party has committed to selling off the 
government’s “non-core” assets and use the proceeds to 
reduce the province’s debt. It would review the major 
Crown corporations and be “open to anything,” said Wall. 

 
This is the Leader-Post, September 3rd, 2003. 
 
Now just recently last year, our Minister of Highways reflected 
on some of the comments about SaskTel and about the 
possibility that it was for sale. And basically the comments 
scare people in Saskatchewan. And the reason that they scare 
people in Saskatchewan is that there appears to be a lack of a 
sense of how crucial these corporations are for the province, for 
its economy, for the jobs, for the people, for communities 
across the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in February 1992, some very capable 
chartered accountants were asked to prepare a report which is 
called the Report of the Saskatchewan Financial Management 
Review Commission. And that report was brought forward in 
this province because the province was bankrupt. Mr. 
Mazenkowski was the federal Finance minister. He ended up 
putting some backstops in to try to help keep the province from 
going bankrupt, and some of the conditions that he had was, 
well look, you better check and see what you’re doing in your 
province and why you’re in such financial trouble. 
 
Well that group went forward and looked at the Crown 
corporations and how they’d been managed by a predecessor 
government to these members opposite who basically said, 
we’re open for business. Well they ended up running the Crown 
corporations into the ground. They ended up guaranteeing loans 
without really knowing how much there was there, and they 
created a huge mess for the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately some of the language and 
some of the things that have been learned by the Premier — and 
he’s spread it around to some of his other colleagues — are 
lessons that weren’t learned from those 1980 times. What we 
know in the province, and the member who just spoke from 
Prince Albert listed off some of the things that had to be done 
because of this report, and that was get your finances in order, 
sell off some of those assets to just try to deal with some of the 
issues that are there. 
 
What we are concerned about on this side of the House is that 
the government enters into an agreement through SaskPower 
with Northland Power in North Battleford and they won’t tell us 
how much it costs. We don’t know how much it costs. Well that 
is a major decision being made by a Crown corporation to 
privatize, to sell off a chunk of our corporation. And they don’t 
even tell us how much that’s going to cost us in the long run. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would prefer if this government was more 
open and more accountable and told us what these costs were, 
but it may be that we’ll need another Gass Commission to 
actually sort out decisions that are like that. 



March 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4595 

We also see on a regular basis, and any member who lives in 
any part of Saskatchewan knows about the coffee shop 
conversations with Crown employees who are concerned about 
their jobs. We see what’s happened in SaskPower with the 
various tasks that are there that have been contracted out. We 
see what’s happening in SaskTel where jobs are contracted out, 
whether it’s the Texas plates or whether it’s the other aspects of 
setting up some of this new metering. Those are the kinds of 
tasks that Saskatchewan ingenuity and Saskatchewan people 
could do in a very positive way. 
 
But what happens is, there’s this push to kind of keep a shell 
there but transfer a lot of the jobs. We know that they’re also 
now trying some of that in some of the government departments 
where you have Ontario companies screwing up our camping 
system, where you have problems arising out of what’s 
happened as far as the issues related to hunting and fishing 
licences. All that stuff is way away from what happens here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned that the types of decisions 
these people are making is because they’ve run out of money. 
They’ve got all kinds of commitments. They’ve run out of 
money, and they’re trying to pick up cash anywhere they can. 
So you can do that in a couple of different ways. One is you can 
set up projects that are funded by promises to cover the cost 
later, P3 kind of projects. You can borrow money directly or 
indirectly. 
 
What we’ve seen is this government has been borrowing money 
through the Crowns and then taking their dividends and using it 
for the general revenues of the province. How does this work? 
We’re in the best times that Saskatchewan has ever seen, and 
our government is running out of money and they’re borrowing 
and they’re creating all kinds of things that are happening in 
this province. And that’s why people are fundamentally afraid 
of the ability of the Premier and the Finance minister to manage 
the finances of this province. 
 
Now what do we do when it comes to Crown corporations? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these are about the long-term future of the 
province. And what we have to make sure that we do is that we 
make decisions that are appropriate business decisions, that we 
make them in a way that looks at not just what’s going to 
happen in the next one or two years before an election, but 
what’s going to happen to make sure that it’s part of the 
long-term future of the economy. 
 
Any one of us who travels outside of Saskatchewan always gets 
surprised questions when they hear that we still own our own 
telephone company, which allows us to have all kinds of 
technological things that other states or provinces or countries 
don’t have. We also, through the power corporation, we end up 
having much more control over what happens. 
 
Now I know that a number of these members don’t have a long 
memory and they haven’t looked at things like the Gass report. 
I encourage them to sit down and read what a mess their 
predecessors put the province in. We all suffered in trying to 
clear up the debts that were there, whether it was municipalities 
or whether it was educational institutions, health institutions. 
We don’t want that to happen again. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s not allow our Premier to muse about 
these important assets for our province. Let’s make sure that he 
says very clearly that what we have and what we’ve built here 
in Saskatchewan will be built on and strengthened. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there are many people in the province who are very 
concerned when the Premier goes off on these different 
tangents. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what does this motion today talk about? It 
talks about a commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what it means to be a member of this 
legislature. It means to have a commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan to make appropriate decisions for the long-term 
future of the province of Saskatchewan. Many of us are 
extremely concerned about the short-term decision making, the 
let’s get some dollars here because we’re short of money 
decision making that we see happening. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a Saskatchewan way of doing 
business. It’s not a Saskatchewan way of governing. It’s not a 
Saskatchewan way of thinking. And, Mr. Speaker, if these 
members opposite persist in that type of attitude, they will be 
gone soon. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Well the member opposite just sat down, and 
he was talking about Saskatchewan. This is not Saskatchewan. 
This is not Saskatchewan. I would like welcome you to the new 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The three speeches we just heard from the members opposite 
were utter and total nonsense. It was ridiculous to sit here and 
listen. One of the members from Elphinstone talked about the 
1980s. I wasn’t even born yet. Get over it. We’re not the 1980 
Conservatives. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to start this speech off with a 
thank you. I would like to thank the employees of SaskEnergy. 
We can all agree in this Chamber that last weekend was a pretty 
cold week in Saskatchewan, the coldest ever in quite a few 
communities. And those men and women at SaskEnergy did an 
absolutely amazing job. Twenty-three of our communities 
reached 47, minus 47 degrees celsius without the wind chill. It 
was much colder in Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the men 
and women worked 24-7 to ensure that when people needed it 
the most, that furnaces were on, people were safe. And I just 
want to say thank you very much to the hard-working men of 
the Crown corporation of Sask. And men and women of the 
Crown corporation of SaskEnergy did a wonderful, wonderful 
job last weekend. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a few corrections I’ll have to make 
after listening to the members opposite’s speeches. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think it’s totally an unbelievable statement 
for those men . . . There’s the three men that spoke for the NDP, 
stood in their spots and talked about how wonderful they treated 
the Crown corporations under their 16 years. It’s an 
unbelievable statement that they think people don’t realize 
actually what went on when they were in government. I don’t 
know how they continue to stick their heads in the sand like an 
ostrich and pretend nothing happened under their terms in 



4596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[11:45] 
 
But just for a reference, to talk about SaskEnergy and the 
wonderful job they did last weekend, since 2008, including ’08 
to ’03, the gross capital spending has totalled $970.5 million of 
capital investment for SaskEnergy. This is compared to $434 
million under the previous five years of the NDP government. 
Now that’s pretty close to 50 per cent more invested in 
SaskEnergy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And you wonder why some 
of our Crown corporations had to increase their debt ratio a 
little bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The members opposite totally ignored infrastructure, 
infrastructure investments into our Crown corporations. But a 
few things they didn’t ignore — and this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will be some fantastic reading for the NDP caucus, a couple of 
their researchers, after their speech — SaskTel dividend history, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: 2000, the NDP took 94 per cent; 2001, the 
NDP took 90 per cent; 2002, the NDP took 90 per cent; 2003, 
the NDP took 92 per cent.  
 
In stark contrast, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 2008, dividends 64 per 
cent; 2009, dividend 80 per cent; 2010, 90 per cent; 2012, 65 
per cent for SaskTel.  
 
Mr. Speaker, but I would like to talk about a few more of the 
dividends that our members opposite don’t really tell the public 
about, how much the dividends they took or actually how much 
they invested, because it’s embarrassing really, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some investments that they 
did take from SaskPower were . . . I’ll get those in a few 
seconds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I want to talk about some 
more of our investments. 
 
Average infrastructure investment from 2000 to 2007 was $568 
million from the NDP. Mr. Deputy Speaker, infrastructure 
investment from 2008 to 2012, $1.2 billion. That’s an 
investment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our infrastructure across 
our province. It’s an investment in the people of Saskatchewan. 
It’s an investment that shows businesses that want to come to 
Saskatchewan that we are serious about the companies that 
provide our power and provide our energy, provide the things 
that businesses need to get started in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s why businesses are coming to Saskatchewan more 
and more. 
 
And I think why this speech, this debate came about, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if I can take some insight into the opposition, 
is they want to talk about privatization. They want to have the 
debate that they’ve tried to have for the last 93 elections, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, so they could scare the people of our province. 
It’s all about fearmongering from the NDP again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They want to scare people. They talk about people 
losing their jobs. I think they don’t realize that we live in this 
province as well. And my neighbours are SaskPower workers. 
My neighbours work for SaskEnergy. And we know these 
individuals and these employees as well as they do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I’m not hearing the same response from . . . their 
having fear of the Sask Party being in government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They know our government takes pride in our Crown 
corporations. We support our Crown corporations through 

infrastructure investment, and they don’t have the same fear that 
they’ve shown on the other side of the benches. 
 
And there’s another thing that we wanted to have a little 
conversation about and it’s . . . There was a conversation in the 
news a couple of weeks ago about casinos, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I would like to read a quote from Chief Perry Bellegarde. 
Yes, I was talking to him all weekend. In fact on Sunday I 
offered, can we meet with Premier Wall to clear the air, get on 
the same page? He said no. Do you want a copy of the MOU 
[memorandum of understanding]? He said no. That’s why I’m 
disheartened.  
 
And I’m really disappointed in what’s happened with this 
because we’re getting caught with a good opportunity. Again, 
it’s not rushed. And to everybody else that’s listening 
throughout Saskatchewan, what was proposed was strictly 
limited to Casinos Regina and Moose Jaw — no other Crown 
corporations, just those two in particular. That was it. It was just 
to start the process. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is obviously about 
the conversation that FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations] wanted to have about Casino Regina and Moose Jaw. 
 
And those members over there at the start had some tacit 
agreement from the Leader of the Opposition, and then those 
members over there did a one-eighty on the FSIN. And my 
question, Mr. Speaker, is . . . There is two members from 
Athabasca and Cumberland. Where were they in this 
conversation? In this caucus meeting when the nine agreed, the 
nine of them agreed to totally change their mind and flip-flop 
on this issue, Mr. Speaker, which is kind of what they’ve been 
known to, where were the two members from the North sticking 
up for the FSIN, sticking up for the voice of First Nations 
people across the province, which had a great, a great 
opportunity to get more involved in the economy of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where was the voice of the two members from the North? Is 
their voice so weak in that caucus among nine of them that they 
couldn’t be heard? They could not talk, they could not talk to 
their members and say, this is a wonderful opportunity? This is 
a wonderful opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We want to take 
this opportunity. We want to take Chief Perry Bellegarde’s 
advice and say, you know what? This is a fantastic opportunity 
for First Nations people across the province, and we’re going to 
stick up for them. We’re going to make sure that our caucus 
colleagues know that we want this opportunity. Nothing. 
Silence. Nothing. They had this one quick meeting, changed 
their mind. Their leader flip-flops. They won’t even have a 
conversation with Chief Bellegarde and the Premier to try and 
get something started, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I find it very disheartening that they just go blindly through the 
night. They have no plan. They have no policy anywhere. They 
have had a new leader for a year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they 
don’t got a lick of policy on their website. They have no idea 
where they’re going. And they want to rehash this Crown 
corporation privatization debate so they can scare a few people, 
a few Crown employees, and make them think that they’re 
trying to protect the rights of the workers, when I think the 
member from Rosemont just rehashed his speech he gave a 
couple of days ago, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s all just 
fearmongering, and I think it’s time for them to jump into the 



March 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4597 

21st century, into a new Saskatchewan and come on board, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
government has been investing in the growth and sustainability 
of our Crowns, unlike members opposite. We have the numbers 
to prove our government’s strong support of Saskatchewan’s 
Crown corporations. For example SaskPower’s investing over 
9.4 billion in capital infrastructure over the next 10 years. From 
1998 to 2008, the NDP only invested 3.2 billion in capital 
infrastructure. In the same number of years under the NDP, 
SaskPower invested less than one-third of what they’re 
investing under our government. While the NDP were in 
government, they pushed SaskPower to have artificially lower 
rates and to defer investment just for their own political gain. 
SaskPower suffered from their political rhetoric. 
 
Our government is committed to healthy Crowns with 
competitive rates. To the member of Regina Elphinstone: how 
can you say that the government hasn’t invested in Crowns 
when the people of Saskatchewan are seeing them flourish 
under our government rather than fail under the NDP 
leadership? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Perhaps that member could explain to the House how it is that 
when that government across the way solemnly pledged that the 
situation at SaskPower demanded no dividend be taken from 
SaskPower, what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They went around 
and they took a dividend — 120 million, 120 million of, you 
know, dividend they said they weren’t going to take. 
 
The situation was such that SaskPower was going to keep that 
money and reinvest it in the provisions of the corporation. So 
what happens instead, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They say they 
aren’t going to take a dividend; instead they take $120 million 
dividend. So if they want to talk about keeping their word, 
maybe they can start there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
Saskatchewan people across our province are concerned by the 
broken promises of this government as it relates to our Crowns 
— the privatization, the outsourcing, the selling off of 
opportunity for Saskatchewan people that we see from this 
government.  
 
My question is to the member from Walsh Acres, and my 
question is: would he ever support the privatization of a current 
Crown corporation? If so, which ones? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and thank you very much to my colleague for the question. I 
found my SaskPower notes, so if you want to talk about broken 
promises, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about some of the broken 
promises the NDP would have. Obviously they’re the masters 
of breaking promises. Some of the dividends they stripped from 
SaskPower and didn’t invest any money was: 1993, 100 per 
cent of their earnings; 1998, 114 per cent of the earnings; 1999, 
97 per cent of their earnings; 2001, 181 per cent of the earnings; 
2002, 114 per cent of the earnings. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find it unbelievable that they want to 
have a conversation about Crown corporations when they 
stripped that many dividends from SaskPower under their term. 
Mr. Speaker, I support our Crown corporations and the Crown 
corporation protection Act. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
know how greater economic opportunities benefit people, and 
we know the significant economic and social benefits for First 
Nations people that these greater economic opportunities 
provide, Mr. Speaker. And we know even more that those 
benefits are even more significant for First Nations when they 
create their own opportunities. 
 
My question is to the member from Rosemont. Why did the 
NDP sabotage the possibility for an improved quality of life for 
First Nations people by vetoing the possible sale of Casino 
Regina and Casino Moose Jaw to First Nations people, an 
agreement that could have provided untold opportunities for 
First Nations people? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m disappointed that he’d 
have a question like that, from a friend and the hon. member 
from Douglas Park. For that government to pretend somehow 
that they have sincere interests in the discussions with First 
Nations around economic futures is simply not on with the 
record of this government. 
 
I’ll also remind that member that they have a pretty big majority 
over there. In fact we have a pretty small opposition and that if 
some sort of deal that was put together between that 
government and the First Nations of Saskatchewan was signed 
in good faith by that Premier, then he should be able to move 
forward and bring that to the light of day. 
 
For this opposition to be sort of pushed into a position somehow 
that we should be supporting a secret, private, backroom deal 
instead of applying The Crown Corporations Act and that kind 
of accountability, questions, and due diligence that 
Saskatchewan people deserve, simply isn’t on. And we’re going 
to stand up for Saskatchewan people on that front. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
For the member from Regina Walsh Acres, he’s talked about 



4598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

his neighbours that work at SaskEnergy, SaskPower. When my 
colleague, the member from Rosemont, asked him a very 
straightforward question about would that member support the 
privatization of any Crown corporations, he of course did not 
answer the question. So if he doesn’t want to answer to us, 
perhaps he could tell us what he would say to his neighbours 
that work for Crown corporations. Will that member support the 
privatization of any Crown corporations? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know the members 
don’t like to listen to our answers when we’re answering, but I 
said it at the end of my answer last time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that we will continue to support The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act and will continue to support our Crown 
corporations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I answered that the first 
time. And I think that when I talk to my neighbours, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I am proud to talk to our neighbours about our 
record, not only on Crown corporations but on growing this 
province, on having more people come to our province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. When I talk to my neighbours, I’m proud of 
our government’s record. When you talk to your neighbours, 
are you guys proud of what you’ve done? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, this government is proud of our 
investments in our Crown corporations. In our first five years in 
government, capital expenditures at SaskTel, SaskPower, and 
SaskEnergy totalled over $5 billion. This is 95 per cent more 
than the NDP spent during their final five years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Our investments in these corporations aren’t the only things that 
have increased. Since 2007 SaskEnergy has seen its customer 
base increase by more than 30,000, with customer levels 
expanding at more than double the 10-year average. It is now at 
its highest customer level in history, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
our government will continue to support growth such as this to 
ensure long-term success of our Crown corporations. 
 
To the member from Regina Lakeview: do you agree that our 
Crown corporations are much stronger now that there is a 
government that takes Crown investments seriously? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite doesn’t 
acknowledge that this money that goes into these Crown 
corporations comes from the ratepayers, the shareholders, the 
people of Saskatchewan. It’s not this government. This 
government has been putting those Crown corporations in debt 
and then taking that money for other expenditures in a way that 
they should not do it. 
 
And that member and other members are standing up here and 
saying, I wasn’t born yet. I don’t know what’s going on. Well 
everybody in this province is concerned because there are steps 
being taken by this Premier that are putting us back into 

financial difficulty, and none of us want that. We want clear, 
accessible books. We want clear accountability. And we need 
that before we can trust anything these people do. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
One of the challenges that we have is keeping straight the story 
from members opposite in terms of what their position is on the 
Crown corporations. And I guess one of the things that is a little 
difficult to sort through is the way that the position keeps 
changing. 
 
And you know, you need look no further than the position of 
the Premier when it comes to the Crowns to understand how 
challenging that is. You go from the ’80s when he worked for 
the Devine Conservatives, trying to sell off everything that 
wasn’t nailed down. You go to September 3rd, 2003, where he 
stated, the Sask Party is committed to selling off the 
government’s non-core assets and use the proceeds to reduce 
the province’s debt. It would review the major Crown 
corporations and be “open to anything.” Or is it the Premier that 
campaigned in 2007 saying that they wouldn’t privatize 
anything? To the member from Walsh Acres: who are we to 
believe? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I’m very happy to be able to take this last question from the 
hon. member for Elphinstone. Mr. Speaker, I think the people 
of Saskatchewan will believe a government that fulfilled 120 
promises in their first term. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the 
people of Saskatchewan will believe a government that’s tabled 
seven consecutive balanced budgets, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan are going to 
believe that people have invested money into the Crown 
corporations instead of strip money from Crown corporations, 
taken 181 per cent of a dividend. I don’t even know how. That’s 
mathematically impossible. Maybe the figure man over there 
from Regina Rosemont can . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Plans for New Schools 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Marchuk.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 



March 6, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4599 

Speaker. Thank you for the slow clap over there. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m very pleased to enter into this debate to talk about 
what is an emergent issue in our province right now. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have had unprecedented amount of people 
coming into Saskatchewan. We’ve had people coming in from 
Western Canada, Eastern Canada, United States, and believe it 
or not, we’ve actually had people in here from Texas. I know 
that might be a foreign concept to the members opposite, but 
yes, we do have people coming here from all across North 
America as well as around the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
 
And one of the most important things that we need to do is to 
make sure that they feel welcome here, not just in their 
workplace but in their homes. And certainly one of the most 
pivotal areas of our community is our school systems, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And within our school systems, we have seen a huge amount, 
unprecedented growth in what is now being called the new 
normal in Saskatchewan. We have classrooms that are getting 
extremely large. Teachers are having to adapt on a daily basis to 
bringing in new students and teaching them in the existing 
facilities. 
 
What we have over on this side of the House is a plan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We have a plan to deal with what is going on 
within our education system. The plan is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is to continue to build schools in a traditional manner. We have 
been doing that since we took over or since we came into 
power, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 2007. Now we have an even 
larger need. And how do we solve that larger need? Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we need to go into our P3 [public-private 
partnership] format and be able to provide nine joint, new 
joint-use schools throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very, very concerned why the 
members opposite are not in support of this, because the Leader 
of the Opposition wasn’t even there when we announced these 
nine joint new schools even though on multiple times, I believe 
it was 51 or 52 times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he got up and read a 
petition about a school in Hampton Village. 
 
I’d like him to go and talk to the people in Hampton Village 
because actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have been over in 
Hampton Village talking to some of the residents over there. 
They couldn’t be more excited about having a school in their 
area. They’re not really concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 
how the school is getting there. All they’re concerned about is, 
is this going to be a good school for my kids? When is it going 
to open? And how fast can we get this done? 
 
And I’d like to ask the members opposite over there, because 
they are so dead set against this proposal that we have, if we do 
a traditional build, what schools get built first? Do we do the 
ones in Martensville? Do we do the ones in Regina? Where do 
we do those ones? Because if we do a traditional build, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it could take up to 10 to 15 years to meet that 
emergent problem. 
 
Well now we are into a whole other problem, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because of the birth rates that are going on in 
Saskatchewan. All of those people are coming, all of those 
children are coming up into our school system, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We couldn’t catch up if we were doing a traditional 
build. It would almost be next to impossible to be able to try to 
get ahead of this without doing an emergent nine joint new 
schools. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this whole P3 program, I’d like to find 
out what the opposition has to say. What is their plan? They’re 
against our plan, but they don’t actually have a plan of their 
own. The leader has been in power, the new leader has been in 
power over there for a year — nothing. We are still waiting 
over here. The people of Saskatchewan are waiting to hear what 
they have to say. 
 
So I thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would talk a little bit about 
plans because maybe they don’t over there understand what a 
plan is. So I thought it may be very simple and I could help 
them out with this of what a definition of a plan is. It’s a set of 
actions that have been thought out as a way to achieving 
something. This is what we are doing. We have a plan. We have 
multiple plans. We had a plan after our Premier Wall was in 
opposition for one year. Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Premier . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Is that what you are 
offering? Mr. Deputy Speaker, my apologies for that. 
 
What I would like to say is, we have had a plan since the 
inception of this party. We knew what we were going to do. We 
knew how we were going to grow the province and we had a 
road map on how to get there. They had a plan. At least the 
former leader had a plan. It was a disastrous plan of $5.1 
billion, but he had a plan. 
 
Now over there I think they’re scared to have a plan because 
they’re not quite sure what they can do. They don’t have any 
ideas. They say that they’re supporting our government when 
we have a good idea. I haven’t seen nothing over there from 
support from them. But maybe we shouldn’t call it a plan. 
Maybe that’s too big of a word for them over there. Maybe we 
should call it something different. Maybe we should call it a 
program. Maybe we should call it a process, a system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also notice that a couple of the members 
opposite were former teachers. Now as my wife was a former 
teacher, she had a teacher’s plan. She would go in and teach a 
subject. They would have a plan on what to do. I’m wondering 
if the members opposite would go into their classrooms, in their 
day, with no plan on what they’re going to do. I wonder how 
their students would react when they had nothing to be able to 
go forward on a minute-by-minute basis. Absolutely nothing. 
Yes, well I guess if things keep going, they might be falling 
back on that teaching career, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about some of the positive feedback 
that we have heard from the people within the school system. 
Just give me a half a second here, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, yes. As my colleague said, I’ll 
get to that in a minute. Here we have, quote . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . We do have a plan. We have a great plan. 
What’s your plan? Please tell me what your plan is. 
 
This is a quote from Ray Morrison, Chair of the Saskatoon 
school board: “To say that I am pleased to be here today for this 
announcement would be a serious, serious understatement.” 
Because he understands exactly what’s going on within the 



4600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2014 

Saskatoon school system. We have great quotes coming from 
people in Regina as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
understand. When I go to the school to pick up my kids, what 
are their teachers saying? They’re saying that they want a 
school. They want it now. They want qualified teachers and 
they want this to happen. They don’t want to talk about it for 
another three or four years like the members opposite would. 
They actually want to have a plan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very, very happy to be in on this 
debate. As a father of four, as talking to teachers and talking to 
other parents on my son’s hockey team, they are very excited 
about this school system, so they would actually like to get this 
done immediately. So I am very, very happy to enter into this 
debate. And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland has moved to adjourn debate on the motion. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:11.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4579 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4579 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4579 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Women’s Day 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4580 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4580 
 Performing Artist Named Woman of the Year 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4580 
 Equipment Dealers Association Donates to Parkland College 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4580 
 Potash Company Strengthens First Nations and Métis Engagement 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4581 
 Cougars Win Track and Field Championship 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4581 
 Spending Priorities 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4581 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provision of Nursing Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4582 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4582 
 Standards in Care Facilities 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4583 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4583 
 Grain Transportation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4584 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4584 
 Ministry of Highways Contracts 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4585 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4585 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4587 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4587 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 606 — The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4587 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Privatization of Crown Corporations 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4587, 4597 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4589 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 4591, 4597 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4592 
  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4594, 4598 
  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4595, 4597 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4597 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4597 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4598 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Plans for New Schools 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4598 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


