
























































Hansard: May 07, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 60A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 7, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5315 
 May 7, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce a number of people today, starting with a gentleman 
who’s no stranger to this Assembly. In your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, is Duane McKay. Duane is executive director and fire 
commissioner for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But with Mr. McKay today, we have a number of young people. 
There’s a group of young men and women from Wesmor 
Community High School in Prince Albert. I’m going to 
introduce them; I’ll ask them to give us a wave when I call your 
name, please. We have Creedin Daniels, Kirsten Michel, 
Brandy McCallum, Shane Mike, Dolton Larivere, Keenan 
Roberts, Sandy Anderson, Alyssa Jobb, and their teacher, 
Tyson Fetch. Mr. Speaker, these young men and women are 
students in the brand new high school emergency services 
response training program in Prince Albert. 
 
This week, Mr. Speaker, is Emergency Preparedness Week, and 
as part of that week and as part of the new high school program, 
this morning these students toured, along with Duane, the 
emergency operations centre. And they had an opportunity to 
take part in a training program with Mr. McKay and his team. 
From all the reports I’ve heard, I had a chance to talk to them 
briefly during lunch hour, I think they enjoyed it immensely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the high school emergency services response 
training program was launched by our government last 
December in Wesmor and St. Mary’s high schools in Prince 
Albert. During that three-semester program, these students 
learned about several areas of public safety: just for example, 
firefighting, search and rescue, emergency medical service, 
policing, leadership, team building, and the list goes on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The group has now completed the first class or level 10 of the 
program, and I’d like to commend them for their interest in and 
their commitment to this program. Mr. Speaker, I’m confident 
that some of these fine young men and women after they’ve 
graduated will either potentially choose a career in public safety 
or possibly use the training that they’ve had in other capacities, 

in volunteer capacities such as volunteer firefighters in their 
community. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to welcome these 
wonderful young men and women to their Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the minister and welcome these leaders to 
their Assembly here today. Certainly I want to welcome Fire 
Commissioner Duane McKay to his Assembly, no stranger to 
this place. And I want to recognize his efforts and certainly the 
many that ensure safety, peace of mind, and protection for 
communities across Saskatchewan, often at very vulnerable 
times in the life of a community, in the lives of families. And I 
know your service and your commitment, your leadership is 
valued. 
 
It’s a pleasure as well to have the group of students from 
Wesmor Community High School from Prince Albert here 
today. These young leaders, and leaders that will with some 
certainty provide a lot of service and leadership in our province 
for many years forward, certainly it’s an honour to have you in 
your Assembly here today. The program, the emergency 
response program, sounds like a very important program. I 
know that we support these efforts. 
 
We thank the school board. We thank the teacher that’s here 
today as well. We thank all the partners in delivering that 
program. And it’s a pleasure to welcome these leaders to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to 
welcome corrections workers from across Saskatchewan. We 
have many communities represented here today, including 
Kelvington, including North Battleford, including Prince 
Albert, including Saskatoon, including Regina, including 
Moose Jaw. It’s a pleasure to have these individuals come to 
their Assembly here today. We thank them for their service and 
leadership to our province, the careers they’ve built within our 
province, all their other contributions back to the community. 
 
And certainly we join with them in their concern as it relates to 
government’s agenda as it relates to privatization of the 
corrections system and the concerns that come with that sort of 
privatization — the threats to integrity, the threats to safety, the 
threats to rehabilitation, and so many more, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
all members though of this Assembly to welcome these fine 
leaders to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west gallery 
today, we have 12 grade 12 students from Glaslyn Central 
School. They are accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. Brian 
Goota, chaperone Janelle Stoebich, and bus driver Mervin 
Pritchett. These people have driven some five, five and a half 
hours to be here today, and I’ll be meeting with them after 
today’s proceedings. So I ask all members to welcome them to 



5316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
two individuals seated in your Assembly, or in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Assembly, and that’s Pauline Paterson and 
Sheryl Rosom. And to me they’re known as Auntie Sheryl and 
Auntie Pauline, sisters to my dad, Mr. Speaker. Auntie Sheryl 
lives here in Regina and visits from time to time, but Auntie 
Pauline doesn’t live in Regina and tells me that the last time she 
visited the Legislative Building was when her father, my 
grandpa was an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
sometime in the ’60s. So it’s a bit of a walk down memory lane 
for Auntie Pauline. I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Pauline and Sheryl to the Assembly today. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a number of individuals who have joined us in your 
gallery. Today with us to recognize Maternal Mental Health 
Day are members of The Smiling Mask team. And I’ll maybe 
ask them to give us a wave when I introduce their names: Carla 
O’Reilly, Tania Bird, and Elita Paterson. They do a great job 
and some important work to raise awareness for maternal 
mental health, and I’m pleased that they’re joining us today. 
And I’ll have an opportunity I hope to speak with them not long 
after question period ends this afternoon. 
 
Also joining us today is Elita’s partner, Ward Paterson; as well, 
Tanya Condo, who is from the Mother First working group. 
And so I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister on behalf of the opposition to welcome 
the women from The Smiling Mask team in recognition of 
Maternal Mental Health Day today. 
 
As a mother myself, I’ve had many friends who’ve suffered 
from postpartum depression. And raising awareness I think is 
absolutely critical, and your work is very appreciated. I know 
from my friends’ experiences it can be incredibly debilitating, 
lonely, and as your smiling mask reveals too, that I think people 
on the outside have to feel like they have to appear a certain 
way. But the inside, it’s a very different story.  
 
So on behalf of the opposition, thank you so much for the work 
that you’re doing in raising awareness about postpartum 
depression and maternal mental health. So with that, I ask my 
colleagues to join in welcoming you to your legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Weekes: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, in 
the west gallery I’d like to introduce 48 grade 4 and 5 students 

from Langham Elementary School, accompanied by their 
teachers Danielle Olson, Ben Dunville, and educational 
assistant Barb Leite. The chaperones are Ken Dignean, Erin 
Brown, Sheila Wiens-Neufeld, and Monica Thiessen. I look 
forward to a photo later, and a visit with you. Please welcome 
them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I would like to recognize someone in her Legislative 
Assembly, Delphine Melchert. She really likes to work in the 
background, but the genesis of the emergency preparedness 
program started with Delphine and Duane together. I worked 
very closely with her in my community of Prince Albert, and 
she is a stalwart of the community as a director of the 
community networking coalition. I ask all my members to join 
me in welcoming Delphine to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to join with 
the member opposite and welcome a leader in this province to 
education in this province, Ms. Delphine Melchert, to her 
Assembly. This is somebody who has provided great leadership 
in the community of Prince Albert, but not just leadership in the 
schools of Prince Albert but leadership to schools all across the 
province. 
 
She’s the executive director of the Saskatchewan community 
schools council, their association. I’m not sure I have the right 
term. But her leadership is important to so many across this 
province, and it’s my privilege to welcome this leader in 
education to her Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you. I would like to join with the 
member opposite in welcoming Delphine to the Assembly. We 
know of the good work that is being done and look forward to 
continuing having discussions. And I want to thank them, not 
just for being here but also for their contribution to education of 
our children, and wish to join with the member opposite in 
welcoming them to their Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the legislature the 
people who were brought to us by the Legislative Library to 
read at lunch hour. And so I’m very pleased to welcome James 
Daschuk who has written the book, Clearing the Plains; Paul 
Wilson who’s won the poetry for his book, The Invisible 
Library; and Lisa Bird-Wilson, who won the Book of the Year 
Award for Just Pretending. And I ask all members to welcome 
them to this legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Again being polite gets me last. I’d like to 
also introduce, it’s my pleasure to introduce and welcome 
Saskatchewan authors seated in the Speaker’s gallery: Lisa 
Bird-Wilson, James Daschuk, and Paul Wilson. These authors 
are distinguished recipients of the Saskatchewan Book Awards 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5317 

this year. 
 
Over lunch today in the Legislative Library, they treated us to 
readings from their award-winning books. This event was 
sponsored by our own Legislative Librarian, Melissa Bennett, 
also seated up in the Speaker’s gallery. I’d also like to 
acknowledge the Saskatchewan Book Awards especially Joanne 
Skidmore, Carol Todd, and Nickita Longman for organizing the 
readings today. 
 
Please join me in congratulating these authors on their book 
awards and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of anti-bullying. And we 
know that bullying causes serious harm, and the consequences 
of bullying are devastating, including depression, self-harm, 
addictions, and suicide. And we know that other provinces have 
brought forth legislation and various tools and programs, 
showing swift and effective government action, and we know 
that this government is not doing enough to protect 
Saskatchewan youth. And we know that bullying can occur 
within schools but also through social media, cellphones, and 
through the Internet, also known as cyberbullying, and bullying 
is a human rights issue, one of safety and inclusion. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 
Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives of 
young people are at stake and this government must do 
more to protect our youth. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 
Saskatchewan as it relates to unsafe conditions on Highway No. 
1 just east of Regina, sort of the area that connects through 
Balgonie, White City, Emerald Park, Pilot Butte, of course, that 
connects there, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners are calling for 
immediate actions to ensure safety for those using the highway, 
and they’re calling for actions because quite simply too many 
lives are at risk at this point in time. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan, until the overpasses 
are built along this corridor, immediately install traffic 

lights at appropriate locations along Highway No. 1 
between Regina and Balgonie, immediately reduce speeds 
to appropriate levels within this corridor, and take steps to 
ensure that speed limits are enforced. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by residents from, I believe, 
many parts of Saskatchewan, but specifically Regina, Emerald 
Park, White City, and Balgonie. I so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present the petition on 
Highway 102, north of La Ronge. This road is a major highway 
used by the mining, the forestry industry, many students 
travelling to the community of La Ronge for schooling. The 
road also provides residents that go out trapping, fishing, 
blueberry and mushroom harvesting as well as medicine plants, 
many residents travel out on these roads to do that and provide 
that. It also provides tourism access for camping, sports fishing, 
and for many activities that are in the North, and the beautiful 
North that people come. So, Mr. Speaker, the people would like 
the government to hear and pay attention to this. And I will read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to recognize that the repairs and 
maintenance on the La Ronge north road, Highway 102, is 
important to northern residents and must be undertaken 
immediately. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
rise today to present a petition on Highway 155, which is the 
main highway for northwestern Saskatchewan. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to commit to repairing and 
upgrading Highway 155. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse and Patuanak. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of safety and rerouting of 
heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue. Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners state that: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 



5318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by heavy-haul traffic on Dewdney Avenue 
west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and well-being 
of communities, families, residents, and users; and that 
those actions and plans should include rerouting the 
heavy-haul traffic, receive provincial funding, and be 
developed through consultation with the city of Regina, 
communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens here in the 
city of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition about the fact 
that we have public corrections facilities both for adults and 
young offenders in Saskatchewan. The government intends to 
privatize the food services in corrections, and they are failing to 
listen to the workers that are working in this area, and they have 
not looked at or provided the public with their rationale for 
doing it. So the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
may be pleased to cause the government to cancel its 
privatization in the corrections and young offenders 
facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 
This is signed by people in Regina, Foam Lake, Lang, 
Lumsden, and Balgonie. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition to properly address the grain transportation crisis. And 
the undersigned want to bring to the attention of the Legislative 
Assembly the following: the grain transportation crisis is 
hurting many producers across the province as last year’s record 
crop sits in bins, causing a huge financial crunch on producers 
who have limited cash flow to pay their many bills and loans. 
And in the prayer that reads as follows, they: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan push for the federal government to require 
the rail companies, by law, to have the capacity to handle 
large volumes of grain like this year’s crop in a timely and 
efficient fashion; and to push for open running rights on 
the railway system to ease future backlogs and introduce 
more competition into the grain transportation system. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this comes from individuals from several 
communities in the province: Canora, Melville, Prince Albert, 
Wakaw, Saskatoon, Regina, Canora, La Ronge, and several 
other communities, Humboldt being amongst them, and North 
Battleford and Estevan. I so present 
 
The Speaker: — Before we proceed, I would like to remind 

guests in our galleries, they are not to participate in the events 
on the floor and that includes applause. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

National Day to End Bullying 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When children 
grow in a supportive and loving atmosphere, the explorations of 
their youth allow them time to discover their talents. In 
whatever enterprise they find their passion, we know that each 
child in our province has the potential to change the world if 
only they believe in themselves as much as we do as their 
parents. This is why we are so pleased to join the Boys & Girls 
Clubs of Canada today as they lead the National Day to End 
Bullying. 
 
Belonging and acceptance — this is the message the Boys & 
Girls Clubs are asking Canadians to tweet, post, and discuss 
over the course of the day. Positive relationships that encourage 
children to be confident in themselves and their abilities make a 
tremendous difference and should surround students throughout 
their lives.  
 
Our government is taking action across the ministries with 
815,000 in new funding to implement Saskatchewan’s action 
plan to address bullying and cyberbullying. This includes 
funding to RAP [restorative action program], a project that 
brings a professionally trained worker into Saskatoon 
classrooms to teach conflict resolution, leadership, and positive 
relationship skills. 
 
We take the matter of bullying very seriously, so we commend 
the Boys & Girls Club and their sponsor, CIBC [Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce], for taking the initiative to help 
our province’s children and youth. I ask that all members join 
me in recognizing their efforts today as we take action on the 
National Day to End Bullying. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today Boys & Girls 
Clubs from across the country call on Canadians to celebrate a 
day of belonging on the National Day to End Bullying. The 
Boys & Girls Clubs of Canada have been working with partners 
to raise awareness and recognition that bullying is a growing 
issue facing all Canadian youth. Every child has the right to 
safe and supportive places where they are listened to, respected, 
and valued.  
 
The Boys & Girls Clubs are aiming to shift the dialogue around 
bullying from negative to positive, focusing on a young 
person’s sense of belonging to lessen the harm of bullying. 
Young people today benefit from feeling like there’s something 
to belong to, and that this initiative aims to support our youth in 
finding it. CIBC and BGCC [Boys & Girls Clubs of Canada] 
have partnered on a campaign designed to support positive 
behaviours which include developing abilities and skills, 
building confidence and competence. They have taken a 
proactive approach in addressing bullying, and we can learn 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5319 

from their example. 
 
Mr. Speaker, bullying comes in many forms, and we are 
reminded to challenge these negative behaviours by 
highlighting the importance of acceptance and belonging from 
the earliest possible age. Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to 
recognize Boys & Girls Clubs of Canada’s National Day to End 
Bullying and to support their integral goal of creating safe, 
supportive environments for our youth. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Steps for Life Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
weekend I had the great opportunity to fundraise and walk with 
my daughter Courtney in the Threads of Life annual fundraiser, 
Steps for Life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Threads of Life was the first organization around 
the world to offer peer support programs to family members 
who are living with the consequences of a workplace tragedy. 
This great organization provides family support program, 
regional family forums, links to professional support services, 
advisory support for workplace investigations, and the 
opportunity to promote workplace injury prevention and 
awareness. 
 
Steps for Life is a 5-kilometre walk which raises funds to 
support Threads of Life programs and services for families who 
have suffered from a workplace fatality or a life-threatening 
injury or occupational disease. 
 
Our government in partnership with the Workers’ 
Compensation Board has formed WorkSafe Saskatchewan. Our 
goal is simply stated in two words — Mission: Zero. For us, 
Mr. Speaker, the only acceptable number of workplace 
incidents, injuries, and illnesses is zero. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Threads of Life 
for hosting this great event and for all the work that they do to 
support families who have faced workplace tragedy. I’d like to 
thank all those who participated in the walk and donated to 
Steps for Life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Nuit Blanche Arts Festival 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to 
recognize an important new cultural event coming to our 
province. Nuit Blanche is a free, nighttime arts festival that 
showcases and celebrates art and culture across the country, and 
I’m proud to announce that Saskatoon will now be among the 
Canadian cities who will host such an incredible event. The first 
annual Nuit Blanche is set to take place this fall on September 
27th. I look forward to seeing the city streets and venues filled 
with contemporary art installations, dance, theatre, music, and 
poetry. 
 

Last night, organizers held a Nuit Blanche Saskatoon artist and 
enthusiast information night. Attendees had a chance to get a 
sneak peak of the artist showcases, meet and ask questions of 
the organizers, and independent artists and volunteers now have 
the opportunity to apply to participate.  
 
This festival provides an opportunity for local talent to shape 
and enhance Saskatoon’s landscape with physical installations, 
live performances, and sculptures. I encourage all artists to 
consider applying for the chance to contribute their work. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m proud the city of Saskatoon will be joining other 
Canadian cities as host to this cultural festival. 
 
I would like to congratulate the executive of the first board of 
Nuit Blanche in Saskatoon, and that’s Sean Shaw, Tara Reibin, 
Sam Lock, and Brett Suwinski. They have a 15-member board 
that are working hard to bring this festival to Saskatoon in 
September. 
 
I would also like to recognize the important work of this diverse 
team and everyone else who’s bringing the Nuit Blanche 
experience to Saskatoon. I have no doubt this important event 
will enrich the city and the arts scene alike. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 

Long-Term Care Facility Opens 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week, along with the Minister of Rural and Remote Health, I 
had the opportunity to attend the grand opening of the new Rose 
Villa long-term care facility in Rosetown. It was a momentous 
day for the people of Rosetown and surrounding area, and it 
was another exciting milestone for our province’s health care 
infrastructure renewal plan. Rose Villa accommodates 54 
long-term care beds and offers a comprehensive range of health 
services, larger private rooms, and state-of-the-art equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project couldn’t have happened without the 
cooperation of municipalities in the area, and we want to extend 
our gratitude to the towns of Rosetown and Zealandia, the 
villages of Harris and Milden, and the RMs [rural municipality] 
of Harris, Milden, St. Andrews, Pleasant Valley, Marriott, and 
Mountain View. The Rosetown and district health foundation 
was represented Friday by Chairman Marcel Dubois. The 
foundation played a huge role in helping to fund the local share 
through all of the hard work of their volunteers. 
 
The success of this project demonstrates our government’s 
commitment to renewing health care infrastructure in the 
province and ensuring our seniors are safe and comfortable. It’s 
another example of how this government is putting patients first 
by ensuring that all our communities and health care providers 
have the right equipment and the best environment to provide 
quality care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank and congratulate everyone involved in this 
terrific project for Rosetown and surrounding area. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 



5320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

Trades and Technology Centre Sod-Turning 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the 
opportunity to attend and bring greetings, along with the 
Deputy Premier and Minister of Advanced Education and other 
dignitaries, at the sod-turning ceremony for the new Trades and 
Technology Centre at Parkland College in Yorkton. The 
ceremony marked a significant milestone for the college, which 
has been dedicated in their vision and commitment to this 
project. 
 
The new Trades and Technology Centre will increase the 
number of graduates by over 350 per year in many highly 
skilled areas that are needed in Saskatchewan’s workforce. This 
is vital for our region, as we are currently experiencing 
significant economic growth and the need for skilled workers 
has never been higher. It will also make it possible for students 
in the Yorkton area to learn closer to home and ensure that 
Parkland students can continue to develop the skills needed to 
meet their education and employment goals and make the 
transition from learning to earning. The Parkland College has 
done an outstanding job of raising support in the region, truly 
setting the example in bringing projects like this to reality. 
 
Our government is honoured to commit $10 million to the 
Trades and Technology Centre and partner with the college, the 
city of Yorkton, the community, and corporate partners. This 
commitment shows recognition of the regional need for skills 
training in the surrounding area by helping to reach the goals of 
our growth plan and the province. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the college and 
Yorkton region for bringing this project to fruition, and thank 
all parties who helped make it happen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Mental Health Awareness Week 
and Maternal Mental Health Day 

 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
announce May 5th to May 11th is recognized as Mental Health 
Awareness Week, and today has been proclaimed Maternal 
Mental Health Day in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mental health issues directly affect one out of every five 
Saskatchewan residents, and one in five women experience 
depression in pregnancy or postpartum. Our government 
recognizes the importance of providing appropriate and timely 
access to mental health services. Over $200 million in funding 
is targeted to mental health services for those in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has also committed to develop a 
10-year, inter-ministerial mental health and addictions action 
plan. This is the first time as a province that we have 
undertaken a cross-sectoral approach to address the many 
complex issues presented by mental health and addiction 
challenges. Mental health and addiction actions plan 
commissioner Dr. Fern Stockdale Winder is completing her 
extensive public consultations soon and will be providing her 
recommendations to government later this year. 
 

During this very important week, I want to remind my 
colleagues that we all have a responsibility to raise awareness 
of mental health issues and to work to reduce the discrimination 
and stigma associated with mental illness. I’d like to encourage 
Saskatchewan families who may be struggling with mental 
health or maternal mental health to reach out for help and 
support. Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Health Care and the Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know this 
government has a lot of intimidation tactics to keep nurses and 
other front-line health care workers quiet when it comes to the 
negative implications of lean on patient safety and on quality of 
care. This government’s even gone so far, Mr. Speaker, to send 
out speaking notes and suggested testimonials to front-line 
workers. 
 
But Joan Neufeldt has been a nurse in Saskatoon for 42 years. 
She’s seen many trends come and go, and she’s still working in 
the health care system. And she’s not afraid to speak out about 
the latest flavour of the month because she has never seen, Mr. 
Speaker, a pet project that is as ridiculous, as wasteful, and as 
expensive as this government’s obsession with lean. Mr. 
Speaker, my question to the Premier: will he listen to Joan 
Neufeldt’s common sense, or will he continue to dismiss the 
concerns from front-line health care workers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re very interested in the 
input from front-line workers in health care, not just about lean 
but about the system in general. In fact shortly after coming to 
office in 2007, the then minister of Health undertook a 
patient-first review of the health care system that very much 
centred on input from patients, obviously, and family members 
of patients, but also from those who are stakeholders in the 
system, those who work in the system. Lean is all about 
listening to front-line workers. We know 40,000-plus health 
care workers are going to have some concerns out there, and we 
want to be attentive to those. We want to be improving the lean 
process, Mr. Speaker. We know that lean has already saved 
more money than it has cost. It has led to improved patient care. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a flavour of the day, Mr. Speaker, 
except on the benches opposite. I think just in the last little 
while WestJet’s announced they’re moving to a lean process. 
We have major hospitals in the United States that are leaning 
out their system. We have organization after organization that 
recognize the benefits of lean, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen the 
benefits here already, acknowledging that we need to be 
listening to front-line workers such as the individual that has 
been raised by the Leader of the Opposition. We’ll continue to 
do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5321 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a car on the assembly line is 
different than a patient in a hospital bed. A suitcase, Mr. 
Speaker, going into a plane, is different than a senior who’s in a 
long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker. Joan Neufeldt says there’s 
a bunch of people that keep saying that everything will be so 
much greater with lean, yet she keeps seeing, Mr. Speaker, 
patient outcomes that are not better. And that experience, Mr. 
Speaker, is backed up by the government’s very own data 
through the Health Quality Council, which shows that quality of 
care and shows that patient satisfaction is actually getting 
worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: how can he keep 
dismissing these concerns from front-line health care workers, 
especially when the concerns are backed up by the 
government’s very own data? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to dismiss 
any of those concerns as they’re raised with us either by the 
members opposite or by health care workers themselves. 
Neither will we dismiss the support we’ve received from 
nurses, Mr. Speaker, from doctors from the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, for example, who support the 
transformative work of lean. We won’t disregard their 
comments. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have hospitals, health care institutions 
like the Virginia Mason Hospital, who are engaged with the 
same contractor frankly, who believe that we can improve 
patient care. I have a number of new examples to present before 
the House of the benefits of lean with respect to patient care, 
with respect to a better system, Mr. Speaker. If the deputy 
leader wants to listen to those or heckle from his seat, that 
would be his choice. But we’ll be happy to canvass those 
improvements in the subsequent questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, common sense has gone out the 
window with this government’s approach to lean. Joan talks 
about tape being put on the desk where lean consultants think 
that the phone and the stapler should go, Mr. Speaker, as if 
nurses are in grade 4 and are clueless about such matters. She 
talks about lean consultants, Mr. Speaker, taping off areas 
where they thought supplies should go but would have blocked 
vital access to fire safety equipment. It’s absolutely bizarre and 
ridiculous. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: why are we paying 
a US [United States] consultant $40 million, paying Japanese 
senseis $3,500 per day, to have them come to Saskatchewan 
and tell nurses where the stapler should go, where the phone 
should go, and that in fact they should block the exits with the 
tape on the floor for equipment, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the lean contract that’s 
referenced by the member opposite has already identified more 
savings for taxpayers than the total contract will cost, Mr. 
Speaker. Moreover, we’ve seen improved patient care 

experiences and improved efficiencies in the system as a result 
of lean. I would just ask the member . . . What he’s said is 
serious and what the nurse is saying is very serious. We would 
like to know the specific example that’s being referred to with 
respect to the blockage of traffic in a health care facility. Would 
he please provide that specific information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thankfully, Mr. Speaker, the nurses spoke up 
and said, my goodness, you can’t block the fire exit with the 
tape on the floor and put equipment in the way of necessary fire 
equipment. That’s the common sense that nurses provide every 
day in the units, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Joan Neufeldt has been through the kaizen basics training. 
She’s been in the Health Quality Council additional 
programming, Mr. Speaker. But she has definitely not drunk the 
lean kaizen Kool-Aid like this government has chugged it, Mr. 
Speaker. She thinks the government has allowed the lean 
process to become a cash cow for the US consultants, for the 
Japanese senseis, Mr. Speaker, while ignoring, ignoring the 
needs on the front lines. She’s speaking out and she’s 
demanding better for patients and demanding better for 
residents in care facilities. And the vast majority of nurses and 
health care workers, Mr. Speaker, agree with her. 
 
My question to the Premier: when will he start listening to the 
concerns from the front lines? When will he admit that he’s 
gone way overboard with his lean obsession? When will he 
finally cancel the fat cash cow contract and put the focus on the 
front lines in the hospitals and the care facilities where it’s 
needed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, no matter how much more 
excited the Leader of the Opposition gets, the fact remains 
we’ve already identified more savings than the contract costs. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, because of lean, in the Saskatoon 
Health Region adult patients are spending less time waiting for 
an X-ray at the Royal University Hospital. Prior to the changes 
from lean, patients waited over an hour to complete their 
procedure. They’re now waiting just 22 minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
Regina Qu’Appelle’s musculoskeletal clinic continues to serve 
patients to a greater extent than it did prior to the lean 
improvements. Prairie North pediatric therapies has seen more 
patients every month as a result of lean changes. By creating a 
new standard work for clerical and pediatric therapy staff and 
reorganizing the therapy room, the clinic’s productivity has 
increased from 38 to 80 appointments per month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On top of the improvements that the Minister of Health has 
dealt with, on top of the fact that it’s already saved more money 
than it cost, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to seek 
improvements in the system. We’re going to continue to hire 
more health care workers, Mr. Speaker, as we have when we 
inherited a human resource deficit in the health care system, a 
capital deficit in the health care system from members opposite 
when they were the government. We’re going to seek to 
improve those things, Mr. Speaker, going forward. 
 



5322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier keeps parroting the 
words of John Black that it’s saving so much money — the 
same guy who is cashing the $40 million cheque based on this 
Premier’s lean obsession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the nurses. It’s not just the Union of 
Nurses that’s raising concerns — and that ought to be enough 
for this Premier and this government to pay attention — but it’s 
the Health Quality Council’s own data, Mr. Speaker, that shows 
that this Premier’s and this government’s lean obsession is not 
working. The HQC’s [Health Quality Council] own data shows 
that adverse events are up. The mortality rate is up. The 
infection rate is up. And patient satisfaction is down. My 
question to the Premier: how can he dismiss his government’s 
very own data? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve always got to check 
against the facts when we have questions from the Leader of the 
Opposition. The numbers that we have already presented to the 
people of the province into this House in terms of savings 
coming from lean have nothing to do with John Black. They 
don’t come from John Black, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this information we just received today is from the same 
member who stood up and castigated the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the current Government of Saskatchewan for, in 
the name of lean, throwing out Christmas trees in Moose Jaw, 
Mr. Speaker. The same member did that. The next day we 
found out the Christmas trees got thrown out by the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government, Mr. Speaker. He’s got to check 
the facts. More money saved than the program has cost. 
Improved patient experience in the system, Mr. Speaker. We 
will listen to front-line workers. We have not stopped adjusting 
the lean process. We’ll continue to do that. But we are 
determined to improve health care for Saskatchewan people by 
hiring more health care personnel, by building new capital in 
health care, Mr. Speaker, and by looking for efficiencies in the 
name of better patient care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely bizarre that this 
government’s go-to line now on why they need lean is because 
they can’t clean out the basement of a hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
Absolutely bizarre that that would be the evidence that this 
government would go to to say that a $40 million contract with 
a US consultant and $3,500-per-day senseis is in fact the smart 
approach and a wise approach and a good use of tax dollars. 
 
My question to the Premier: when will he listen to the front-line 
health care workers, admit enough is enough, and cancel the fat 
cash cow contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — All right, Mr. Speaker. Let’s revisit the case 
that the member has just raised in the preamble to his question 
— the case of the missing Christmas trees in Moose Jaw that 
were thrown out in the name of lean. That is true. The trees 

were removed from a storage facility in Moose Jaw because of 
a lean initiative, a lean initiative that happened under the watch 
of the New Democratic Party government. A lean initiative that 
happened under the watch of the father of lean, the member for 
Regina Lakeview, Mr. Speaker. That’s the facts. These are the 
facts. Well the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the 
Opposition’s chirping from his seat because he’s wrong again 
and he’s trying to cover over the fact with volume. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s some of the other results of lean. In terms 
of distributing the wrong medication, we’ve virtually eliminated 
errors in the mental health unit at Five Hills. This is another 
good example. There used to be 17 a year before we went 
through this process. There’s one too many because there’s only 
one now, Mr. Speaker, but one per year versus 17 before that. 
Defects in blood work have been reduced from 35 per cent to 
zero at the Saskatoon Cancer Centre. This is because of lean in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so yes, we will listen to front-line workers. We’re going to 
seek to improve it. But, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake: we will 
not stop looking for ways to improve patient care. We’ll hire 
more health care personnel; we’ll build more health care 
facilities; and we’ll seek to make sure the system is more 
efficient, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Living Skills Program 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
living skills program offered by SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology] in Moose Jaw is an 
employment readiness program designed to help adults with 
diagnosed disabilities enter the next stage of their lives. It’s a 
highly regarded 36-week program to help prepare these adults 
to be independent, self-directed, and work in engaging careers 
in the community. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been very successful. 
That’s why it makes no sense that this program was cancelled 
last week. To the minister: why was this program cancelled? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll take 
notice of that question and get back to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should 
listen to the question. I’ll go with a second question. Patty 
Lembke joins us here today with her daughter Shelley. Shelley 
is one of the successful graduates of the program. She excelled 
at the living skills program and is now working in the medical 
field here in Regina. Her mother, Patty, says the whole family 
was upset that this great program has been cancelled. 
 
The living skills program focused on the basics: helping these 
adults be independent, navigate urban transportation systems, 
follow proper nutrition, and generally get ready for a career. 
Shelley and Patty want to know why this government would not 
support the living skills program. To the minister: what’s the 
answer to this? 
 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5323 

[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
appropriate minister will be happy to meet with the individual, 
but we’ll take notice of the question and get back to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, Patty and Shelley are joined in 
the gallery by Kim Skidmore, and Kim is a foster parent here in 
Lumsden. She’s raising foster children, some of whom, or upon 
graduation, would be a perfect fit for the living skills program 
at SIAST. But because this program is being cut, Kim isn’t sure 
what to do. Kim wants the best for her kids that she’s had the 
privilege to help raise, and she thinks the living skills program 
would be perfect for them in the same way that it’s helped other 
young adults like Shelley. But now she has major concerns 
because this important program has been scrapped. Again to the 
minister: what do they have to say to Kim today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
look into this, but we’ll be happy to meet with those in the 
gallery today and we’ll take notice and get back to the 
Assembly on this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Food Services in Corrections Facilities 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, whatever isn’t nailed down gets 
privatized under this government. It’s piecemeal privatization. 
The government wants to contract out food services in 
corrections and youth custody, the facilities in Saskatchewan. It 
will affect 60 or more staff who will lose their jobs in the 
province’s corrections and youth custody facilities. To the 
minister: why is the food service and youth custody in 
corrections facilities not considered a core function of their 
operations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Government of 
Saskatchewan is committed to providing a safe, secure, 
effective, and efficient correctional system. Our correctional 
services and programs in our facilities have not been looked at 
or under analysis until now. But the period of time in there, Mr. 
Speaker, is 23 years. Sixteen years were under the members 
opposite. 
 
We must ensure, and I’m sure the taxpayers of the province 
agree, that every dollar that is being spent is for our best 
outcomes. Every program must be for our best outcomes. And 
no final decision has been made to contract out our food 
services. The earliest a decision is expected is fall 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the government said that this 
wasn’t about the cost of providing safe food services in these 
facilities. They originally told the media, food didn’t meet the 
corrections system’s “core business opportunity.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure why the government sees its 
corrections and youth custody facilities as businesses but that’s 
the phrasing they used. In many of these facilities, food service 
workers assist with rehabilitation. They help those incarcerated 
or in youth custody to get job skills they need to find work 
when they re-enter the community once again. Can the minister 
guarantee that a private sector provider of food services would 
be able to offer that same program for rehabilitation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said earlier 
and I will repeat, no final decision has been made on whether 
we’re going to contract out our food services in our institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an independent review was done of our current 
food service delivery model to ensure that our services are 
aligned with our core business. The review showed us, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are currently five different food service 
delivery models in practice across the province. Our operational 
improvements and efficiencies may be achieved by delivering 
consistency and centralization. And again, Mr. Speaker, no 
decision has been made. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the government has said, and has 
just said right now through the minister, that they did a review 
about the system across the province in seven different 
correctional institutions. But when we filed an FOI [freedom of 
information] request to get the report, the government denied its 
release in full. When we asked in committee yesterday, the 
officials said it would not be released. 
 
The government is using this report to justify their privatization 
agenda but they won’t release it or any part of it. If this report is 
so compelling that the province has decided to privatize these 
jobs, why is it afraid to release this report? Will the government 
table the food services review report today, especially since 
she’s used it in question period to answer the question? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — So answering on behalf of she, we want to 
ensure that every dollar is being spent efficiently and effectively 
in corrections, Mr. Speaker. The report I am referring to is 
advice provided to executive government and the member 
opposite knows full well that that information is privileged 
information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Programming with respect to our food service delivery in our 
correctional facilities, the programming and the job skills 
training will still be offered. And if the member took the time to 
look, he would see that that issue is in the RFP [request for 
proposal]. 
 



5324 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

Security is a priority, Mr. Speaker. Co-operation with the 
ministry in all security matters was even highlighted in the RFP. 
I do suggest that the member take a close look at the RFP 
before he stands up for his next question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, people’s lives are at stake in this 
whole question. There’s many, many people concerned about 
the system. We’re also concerned about the rehabilitation of the 
people who are inmates in these various facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that minister has used that report in this House to 
answer a question, and I think it is incumbent upon her or upon 
the Premier to make sure that that report is public. I ask the 
minister again: will you release that report? Will you table that 
report so that we can see why you’re making this unexplainable 
decision? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to 
further elaborate on some of the questions the member has 
asked earlier — and of course we were in committee yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker — that food services in correctional facilities is 
already being contracted out in facilities in Alberta, BC [British 
Columbia], and Ontario. Mr. Speaker, this is nothing new. 
 
The report that was commissioned was done to ensure that we 
are delivering the right service at the right time for the expected 
outcomes. And the people of this province expect us to deliver 
effective programming services to our inmates for public safety 
reasons. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when a minister answers a 
question in this House and uses material and uses it again and 
again, I think it’s incumbent upon her to provide that material to 
this legislature to justify the answers that she’s given. Mr. 
Speaker, this affects many people in this province, and I think 
that there is a strong onus on the minister and on the Premier 
and on executive government to make sure that this legislature 
gets the information that it needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that minister again: will she table the report 
on the food services in the correctional service today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, a request for proposal was 
issued to determine if there is interest and ability to provide 
food service to our facilities. Mr. Speaker, it will be an open 
RFP, and anyone can submit a proposal for consideration. This 
RFP was closed on April 22nd, Mr. Speaker, and no final 
decision has been made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must also add that we, the ministry officials, are 
working very closely with the affected union of the employees 
in our food services in our correctional facilities and meeting on 
a regular basis, keeping them informed and advised. In fact this 

started just prior to this particular issue being discussed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to look for the best ways to 
provide the best service to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Bill of Rights for Seniors’ Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — We keep hearing about how this government 
continues to neglect the basics in seniors’ care. That’s why, at 
the start of this spring session, I brought forward the NDP 
private member’s bill The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, 
which would be an important step to start fixing the basics in 
seniors’ care facilities. 
 
The government said it would take its time to review the NDP’s 
legislation. To the minister: he’s had over two months. Has he 
reviewed the legislation yet? And will he commit to pass this 
important bill this session? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have had the opportunity, as I hope all members 
have, of looking at the member’s private member’s bill that she 
put forward in terms of special care homes. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that when I have a look at the bill, I think that there are some 
deficiencies in terms of the things that the bill speaks to, in fact 
that our guidelines that we have in place actually go further than 
the bill. And I’d be pleased to talk about them this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the bill it calls for care plans that must be 
developed. However the bill was silent on whether or not care 
plans need to be followed up and changed and amended in 
terms of the care that the residents would require based on a 
changing condition. Our minimum guidelines state that every 
three months those care plans need to be amended. So that’s 
one area that the bill was deficient. 
 
The other would be that residents have the right to have the 
most recent routine inspection report of the facility. And the 
members opposite will know that they amended the Act to take 
out the ability for the ministry to inspect those facilities. So in 
fact the reports that she’s calling for in her bill, the NDP got rid 
of the ability for the ministry to actually do those inspections. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this government removed 
minimum care standards from the regulations, and the 
guidelines that this government has for seniors’ care facilities 
clearly are not working. We hear repeated examples of that, Mr. 
Speaker. This government’s own Law Reform Commission 
recommended a legislated bill of rights for seniors’ care 
facilities. To the minister: why is this government ignoring the 
advice of its own Law Reform Commission and refusing to take 
the important step to improve seniors’ care in our province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5325 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I think, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already, think 
I’ve already laid out why I will not be supporting the private 
member’s bill put forward by the member. I think that our 
special care home guidelines in fact go further than what the 
member had offered in her bill. And as well I hope that all 
members have the chance to look at the bill in fact, including 
the member who introduced the bill. 
 
In an interview in a scrum outside of the rotunda when the bill 
was introduced, a reporter asked her, and I quote, “What 
specifically is in here that isn’t in the guidelines?” and her 
answer was, and I quote, “The laying out of a minimum hours 
of care.” Mr. Speaker, if the member looks at her own bill, the 
words minimum, hours, and care do not actually appear in her 
own bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the chairperson of the Human 
Services Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 
concurred certain estimates and to present its fifth report. I 
move: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Human 
Services Committee: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the chairperson of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report that it has considered certain estimates and to 
present the sixth report. I move: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred in. 

 
[14:30] 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs Committee: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 
Chair. 
 
Why is the Government House Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move 
that the House recess for 10 minutes in order to prepare for 
Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — There’s really no need to recess at this time 
for Committee of Finance. I will just leave and the House may 
proceed to get ready. 
 
Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 
 
[15:00] 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Chair: — Okay. I will call the Committee of Finance to 
order. The business before the committee is the estimates for 
Executive Council. The first item of the business is the main 
estimate for Executive Council, vote 10, found on page 55 of 
the Estimates book. 
 
Before I call the first vote, I would just like to make a few 
comments. I would like to describe the process that we will 
engage in here this afternoon. It is a bit different than our 
standing committees. And for members and for those people 
watching — and I know our Pages had some questions about 
the process here this afternoon — in Committee of Finance only 
the minister, in this case this afternoon it will be the Premier, 
that is the only person that can answer the questions. Officials 
do not answer questions in the Committee of Finance, which is 
unlike our standing committees. 
 
The other important difference is that in this committee all 
members are voting members of this committee. And the third 
difference that members will notice, the viewing public will 
notice, is that when members enter the debate they stand, 



5326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

whereas in our standing committees you sit. So in this case 
you’ll only be recognized if you stand. 
 
So with that explanation, members, I will invite the Premier at 
this time to introduce his officials. I will then call the vote, and 
then I’ll invite the Premier to make his opening comments. So, 
Premier, if you would like to introduce your officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
thanks to all members of the committee who have joined us 
here today. I look forward to the discussion that we’re about to 
have, the debate perhaps we’re about to have with members of 
the House, with members opposite. And I’m pleased to have 
senior officials of the Government of Saskatchewan join me 
today to help, assist with the provision of full and complete 
answers to the committee, Mr. Speaker, wherever possible. 
 
And I’d like to introduce Doug Moen, who’s the deputy 
minister to the Premier, the deputy minister of Executive 
Council, and therefore the senior civil servant in the province of 
Saskatchewan, someone who has served in the civil service of 
our province spanning three different administrations. And I 
certainly value his counsel and input for today. 
 
On my right is my senior adviser to Executive Council, Reg 
Downs. On the other side of Mr. Moen is the associate deputy 
minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, Wes Jickling. Just 
behind him is James Saunders who’s the associate deputy 
minister, cabinet planning and Executive Council; Bonita 
Cairns is the executive director of corporate services, to answer 
the financial questions in the budget, the actual budget of the 
Premier’s office or Executive Council that members may have 
for us today. And then immediately behind me is Graham 
Stewart. He’s the executive director of House business in 
Executive Council. I thank them all in advance for their work 
today. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Premier. The business before the 
committee today is Executive Council, vote 10, subvote 
(EX01), central management and services. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — Premier, I would invite you to make your 
opening comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, time’s limited, so I’m 
going to waive that opportunity. I will have a chance to debate, 
discuss, elements that we wish to get on the record and answers 
we wish to provide, but we waive that in the interests of getting 
right to questions. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, first of all for the 
introduction to the committee and some of the ground rules for 
those that are watching at home, and perhaps just some 
information for some of the members in the Assembly as well. 
 

Welcome to the officials who join us here today. Thank you for 
your role in ensuring that the process goes smoothly and the 
right information is provided. And thank you to the Premier for 
his welcome and allowing us to cut right to the chase in terms 
of the questions. 
 
I just briefly want to say, this is a very important time in the 
democratic process in our Assembly and in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, a time where the opposition can ask questions to the 
Premier, hopefully a good number of questions and hopefully a 
good number of answers as well. So it’s very important. It’s 
unfortunate that government’s only giving three hours for this 
time, but without further ado, I’m happy to get to the questions. 
 
My first question, Mr. Speaker, is does the Premier have any 
concerns about the independence of the Social Services Appeal 
Board? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank the member for the question. I think three, by the way, 
just in terms of the length of time, I think three hours is what 
was asked for by the opposition. I may be wrong in that, so I 
don’t want those watching the proceedings to think we’re trying 
to limit Executive Council estimates. I might be wrong on that, 
but I think that’s what was requested by the opposition, and 
that’s what we’ve agreed to. 
 
I would say this, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the particular 
question: the answer would be no, we would have no particular 
concerns about its independence. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well actually three hours was all that was 
offered up, but that’s not the main point of the discussion here 
today, Mr. Speaker. The Social Services Appeal Board is a very 
important board within Social Services. It’s an independent 
tribunal. And it’s an opportunity for clients to ensure that they 
have been treated fairly, in accordance with The Saskatchewan 
Assistance Regulations. 
 
So it’s the final step in a three-tiered appeal process under the 
regulations. So if the client disagrees with the decision, or if the 
ministry disagrees, the next step is actually the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. So it’s a significant and important board within 
the ministry, absolutely. 
 
The pamphlet that’s handed out to social service recipients says 
specifically that the Social Services Appeal Board is “. . . made 
up of citizens who are independent of the ministry.” But we 
know, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Social Services 
appointed her very close friend and her travel partner to the 
independent tribunal.  
 
So my question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. Has the 
Premier spoken to the Minister of Social Services about her 
decision to appoint her very close friend and travel partner to 
the Social Services Appeal Board? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5327 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m just looking 
over the qualifications of the individual that the member is 
raising with respect to the board. And they’re impressive in 
terms of her experience in social work, specifically in the area 
of child protection, work that she has been undertaking since 
1989. She’s been working in the social work field. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, on this matter I can’t help but 
take the counsel of the Minister of Social Services who has 
served the province in an extraordinary way in that capacity. 
And she has complete confidence, notwithstanding the fact that 
this individual is known to her, complete confidence in her 
independence and her ability to bring her considerable skills to 
bear in the interests of those who are appellants, Mr. Speaker, 
and do it in an independent way, notwithstanding any other 
intersects they had in terms of knowing each other. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, as I look at the CV [curriculum vitae] and 
précis here, I just think that this individual is qualified to serve 
in the capacity to which she was appointed at the time and her 
interest in the field. Her work and experience in the field goes 
back to 1989. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue actually 
isn’t the qualifications of the individual who has been appointed 
to the board. I do not know the individual CV in fine detail, Mr. 
Speaker, but that’s not the issue at hand here. And the issue 
actually isn’t even whether or not political appointees should be 
on boards. Perhaps this individual could serve on a health 
region board or some other board in a different ministry. 
 
The issue here, Mr. Chair, is whether someone who is a close 
friend of the minister, someone who is a travel partner to the 
trip to Africa should in fact be the individual who’s the 
Co-Chair of the very important tribunal that reviews the 
decisions of the ministry that obviously that the minister is 
responsible to oversee. 
 
So that’s the real question here in my view, Mr. Speaker. So my 
question to the Premier: would the Premier think that it’s 
inappropriate for the minister and her close friend to have any 
conversations related to the Social Services Appeal Board? 
Would it be appropriate for the minister to talk to her friend 
about issues related to the Social Services Appeal Board? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The answer to the 
question is no, it wasn’t the occurrence at all with respect to the 
minister’s activities and the Chair of the board. 
 
I would also point this out for the House, and this is important, I 
think. During this individual’s time on the appeal board as 
Chair, there was the overruling of the minister’s ministry 
decisions 26 per cent of the time. This is 2 per cent higher than 
previous Chairs. So this, I know it’s being alleged here by the 
Leader of the Opposition. But, Mr. Speaker, I think we should 
get this on the record in the interests of, at the very least . . . I 
mean we’re all politicians. We’re all subject to — we should be 
— to scrutiny and to these questions. But this individual’s not 
here to defend herself from the member’s allegations. So let’s 

get it on the record here that during her time as Chair, she 
overruled the minister’s team officials 26 per cent of the time. 
This is higher than it was previous. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the Premier to table the 
appeal record during that period of time. What the minister said 
when this was brought to light, the minister said, “They gave 
me a list and I said if all people are the same, as competent, 
well then put Rita on the board.” 
 
The issue isn’t about the competency of the individual in 
question. It’s about the judgment to have a very close friend as 
the Co-Chair of the committee, of the tribunal reviewing the 
decisions of the ministry, Mr. Speaker. That is the conflict and 
the question. My question was to the Premier, and it was, does 
the Premier think it’s inappropriate for the minister and her 
friend to have any conversations related to the Social Services 
Appeal Board? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — There is still an inference in the member’s 
question that somehow the relationship between the Chair and 
the minister influenced her decisions. That’s clearly where the 
member’s going, I think. And fair enough, we’re in estimates. 
He can ask whatever he wants. If he has an example of that, that 
would be serious. And I think it should be brought before 
members of the House, and I would like to have access to that 
information because that would be highly inappropriate. But, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no evidence to that effect. 
 
He has switched back to the competency question. What I 
offered him in the last answer was the fact of the matter, which 
is this individual has actually presided over more decisions that 
overturned ministry recommendations or decisions than her 
predecessor. And so I’m not sure where else the member wants 
to go. I mean there are . . . There’s an interesting example from 
November of 2002 involving the minister, then MLA, when she 
was asked about an appointment by the New Democrats of a 
Ralph Nilson who is the former dean at the University of 
Regina school of kinesiology and health studies, as the 
Vice-Chair of the new Saskatchewan Health Research 
Foundation, an independent body in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The Mr. Nilson in question happens to be the 
brother to the member for Regina Lakeview and highly 
qualified. 
 
In fact ironically enough, the critic for the Saskatchewan Party 
that was asked about this appointment was the Minister of 
Social Services in question, and she said she wasn’t . . . This is 
quoting the article now, Mr. Speaker, in The StarPhoenix. She 
said she wasn’t concerned that the Health minister has 
appointed his brother to the Saskatchewan Health Research 
Foundation, the Health minister appointing someone to the 
Health Research Foundation. Why? And here’s the quote: “I 
would imagine his brother is a qualified man,” she said. 
 
So we’ve already established, and I think with agreement from 
members opposite based on the CV that I’ve read, that this 
individual is competent. The other question would be, quite 
rightly, and the member’s at least asked it or inferred it or got to 



5328 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

its edges, the question would be, well what about the 
independence of this individual, notwithstanding the 
competency? And by the record, where we have more decisions 
overturned by this Chair than by the predecessor, Mr. Speaker, 
it would indicate that there was a great deal of independence 
and competence in the appointment of this particular individual. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note this is an 
appeal board. This is an appeal board that reviews the decisions 
by the ministry. If one was a Social Services client, Mr. 
Speaker, that a ruling had been made and that individual felt 
like the ruling was not fair and was not the right outcome, that 
individual would want to ensure that absolutely there was no 
appearance of any sort of conflict between the individual who 
has been appointed by the minister and the minister. I think 
that’s a very fair and reasonable thing for anyone appealing to 
the process. It’s an appeal process where the next step is 
actually going to court. It’s not like this is some minor, 
low-level tribunal. This is very important. 
 
The Minister of Social Services said on April 15th that she has 
not had any discussions with her friend about the work she does 
on the Social Services Appeal Board. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is to the Premier: has the Premier asked the Minister 
of Social Services whether that’s actually true? Has he asked 
the minister if she has said any such . . . if she has had any such 
conversations with her very close friend who is now the 
Co-Chair of the Social Services Appeal Board? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, it’s interesting. I’m not sure 
where the member’s going with this, the line of questioning. 
Because if you extend it to, for example, the judiciary, you run 
into an interesting proposition where judges, before they’re 
judges, would be well known to ministers, notwithstanding 
what party’s in power. Some would be more than well known, 
would be friends and acquaintances. And yet there is a 
confidence I think that we have when those judges were 
appointed, either by the previous administration or by ours, that 
they will take their role, the role of independence and the 
principle of blind justice to the bench. And we have that 
confidence because that has been I think by and large the great 
experience of the province of Saskatchewan and indeed across 
our country. 
 
But it’s also true that they would have been known prior to their 
appointment by ministers. I would expect that Justice ministers 
would count among their friends those that have potentially 
been appointed to the bench, federally and provincially in 
different political parties. And I don’t think we would question 
their independence because I think those people then, when 
they take up their role as a judge, leave whatever of those 
relationships behind them in the adjudications and the decision 
making that they have to proceed with as members of the 
bench. 
 
So you know, with respect to the member’s direct question, 
there’s every assurance from the minister that any discussions 

with anyone involved on any of the appeal processes . . . And 
by the way I understand there was a meeting of some of the 
regional partners and the provincial group to talk in general 
about social services issues, not just with respect to any Chair 
but a number of them, to talk a little bit about improving the 
process in general. So sure, there’s general discussions that 
happens, but nothing obviously specific to a case. 
 
And I want to correct the record as well, Mr. Chair. In fact the 
chairman in question ruled against the government in favour of 
the client 33 per cent of the time, and the previous average I 
think had been about 31. So it’s still the 2 per cent difference, 
but fully a third of the time, the Chair was ruling in favour of 
the client. You know why? I think, Mr. Chair, without knowing 
the details of those cases, I think that was the case because she 
took her duties very seriously and left whatever relationships 
behind her, much as a judge would do. And for $10,000 I think 
a year is what these Chairs get paid, took her job very seriously, 
deliberated the case as it was presented to her, Mr. Chairman, 
and in a third of the instances, higher than previously, she’s 
decided in favour of the client and against the ministry. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Will the Premier table 
that list of rulings? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I’m not sure about the privacy 
issues around sharing specific rulings, but I think written 
question 346 had these numbers in it. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is doing . . . well 
getting rather twisted up as he’s trying to rationalize how it’s 
appropriate that the minister appointed her good friend and 
travel partner as the Co-Chair. But the Premier should listen, 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister’s very own words when she was 
first confronted on this, and at that time the minister said, “It’s 
probably better if they’re not a real close friend of the minister.” 
And that’s coming straight from the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve received information, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 
Social Services has had inappropriate conversations with her 
friend that she appointed to the Social Services Appeal Board. 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, taxpayers actually paid for at least one of 
those conversations in early February. My question to the 
Premier: does he know anything about that? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The answer is no, I’m not aware of that. If 
the member has some information, we’d be happy to look into 
it. I’d also point out that the questions with respect to appeals 
decisions by this individual versus a predecessor’s is in the 
annual report and available to the member. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re here for a considerable 
amount of time yet, not enough, but a considerable amount of 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5329 

time, and there are enough political staff in the minister’s 
office, in the deputy minister’s office, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure 
that they can work with the Ministry of Social Services to 
quickly review the expense claims put forward by the minister’s 
friend and they can send in that material, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Assembly so that the Premier is able to provide the relevant 
information, and that it’s in front of him. So we’ll be coming 
back to this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier said that he reviewed all of the travel expenses 
from his ministers and that there were only two, two concerning 
incidents involving the Deputy Premier and the Minister of 
Social Services, incidents that we’ve discussed here in the 
Assembly over a number of days. My question, Mr. Chair, is to 
the Premier. Did the government actually review all of the 
travel that has occurred under this government in order to 
confirm that there were no other inappropriate expense claims? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Just with respect to the last set of questions 
again — and the member said he’s coming back to it, and that’s 
fine, and we’ll debate it then — but I want to highlight another 
example for members of the committee about someone who 
would be known to members on both sides, who would I think 
be a friend to members on both sides, but whose independence I 
don’t think anyone would question. 
 
Yesterday the Children’s Advocate presented his report — Bob 
Pringle, a former member of the Assembly for the New 
Democratic Party and also a friend to members on this side of 
the House certainly I would say as well. I think we came 
together as a House and realized though Mr. Pringle’s ability to 
do his job, to set aside any particular friendship or affinity he 
had for members on either side of the House, and represent the 
interests of children in this province. And I think the report 
yesterday was an indication that he has done exactly that, Mr. 
Speaker. Because I think when people assume these duties, 
again whether it’s the Chair of the appeals board or whether it’s 
the Children’s Advocate or a judge, I think they leave these 
things behind them. And the record I think reflects that that was 
the case with this individual who, yes, was known to the 
Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that the review of 
government travel went back to 2007. It’s how we’re able to 
determine, by the way, that our travel . . . I’m pleased to report 
to all members of the Committee of the Whole, including 
members opposite, that government travel is down over 50 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, in terms of our last year versus theirs. I’m 
happy to report that the use of government exec air is down 
significantly as well. These things matter. 
 
Although, Mr. Speaker, here’s another thing that matters. It’s 
important that we tell our story. We inherited a situation where 
there was not a great deal of international engagement, some 
towards the end by Mr. Calvert, I think, but not a great deal of 
international engagement, especially in Asia. And we have set a 
priority of doing that. Not opening trades offices. Almost every 
other province has trade offices around the world, especially 
other Western Canadian provinces or members of the New 
West Partnership. We have a joint office in Shanghai with the 
New West Partnership, and that’s it pretty much. And the rest of 

it is contract support on the ground when we get to those 
countries and also trade missions. We support STEP 
[Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership] to go to places 
like . . . That’s the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. 
We’ve increased their budget because we believe engagement is 
important. 
 
I have travelled to these places as well, regularly, and will do so 
again because I think it’s an important part of what we do in 
government. For example I hope, I think that our visit three 
years ago to Bangladesh and then our subsequent action on 
return from Bangladesh was a bit of an assist. And I think 
Canpotex and the federal agency CCC [Canadian Commercial 
Corporation] deserve most of the credit. But I think we had a 
former Bangladeshi in the ministry. I think our visit and a visit 
that I had with Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina helped reopen the 
conduit of Saskatchewan potash to Bangladesh. We had made a 
sale to that country in 1992 and then it stopped. And so we’ll 
make no apologies for travelling and getting the message out, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you drive by Moose Jaw, there’s a big facility called 
Agricore. They’re from Singapore. In many ways the contact 
for that was made on a trade mission. We met again when we 
were in Singapore this fall. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to go open up those markets, and 
we’ll spend some taxpayers’ dollars doing it. But even having 
done that, we’ll come in at a lower level than was the case with 
the NDP. And more importantly than that, we’re going to 
ensure that we’re careful about the spending, Mr. Chair. And 
there’ll be a debate now that we have a brand new disclosure 
process, in part because of questions asked by members 
opposite. There’ll be a debate every time there’s a report about 
whether this trip was worth it or that trip was worth it. Fair 
enough. We’re prepared to have that debate. We’re prepared to 
move to a step of disclosure and transparency greater than 
we’ve ever had. 
 
But we’re going to make the case that we’re not opening up 
trade offices, but you bet we’re going to be involved in trade 
missions. We’re going to tell our story around the world and 
hopefully open up markets, especially in markets where the 
nation-to-nation or the government-to-government relationship 
is important, as it is in much of Asia. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To first comment on the 
previous comments the Premier made about the earlier question, 
the Chair of the province-wide board, the individual in question 
that the minister appointed, Mr. Speaker, in that role on the 
provincial Chair made six decisions: two in favour of the client, 
four in favour of the ministry. But before as a regional Chair, 
there is a different record where she made 223 decisions, 17 in 
favour of the client. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, on at least, Mr. Chair, at least on 
one occasion that the taxpayers footed a bill for the Chair to 
speak with the minister. And we look forward to that 
information being obtained from the ministry and being 
provided here in the Assembly before this committee, Mr. 
Speaker. 



5330 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

The Premier talked about the need for travel, and travel that has 
occurred by the Premier and other ministers. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this isn’t about the need for the Premier of the province and 
senior ministers to travel. Of course they should be travelling. 
Of course they should be representing Saskatchewan and 
promoting our interests in different spots. I have no objection 
with that, and I would expect and want the Premier to be doing 
that. That’s only reasonable and a smart thing to do. 
 
The question was, the Premier said they reviewed all of the 
expenses. And out of the expenses, all they found were the two 
incidents that we’ve discussed in question period, of the Deputy 
Premier and the Minister of Social Services having improper 
expense claims. And the Premier said, we reviewed it and 
everything is good to go. My question is, who did that review? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — We wanted to come quickly with the new 
process for disclosure, so there was work conducted for the 
weekend, through the weekend by a number of officials. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — And in reviewing that information, Mr. Chair, 
is that how the Premier came to the conclusion that out of all of 
the travel the ministers have done and the Premier has done 
since ’07, that only the incident of the Deputy Premier and the 
Minister of Social Services were the only two improper expense 
claims? 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as far as I’m aware, 
the records of the government travel we looked at, I asked 
officials to bring forward any concerns they would have about 
others. They did that, Mr. Chairman. We did not . . . They did 
provide a report. There wasn’t any other concerns that stood out 
in terms of things that we would want to address. But we did 
actually go further than our government as well. There were a 
few other things that did stand out. 
 
Because we wanted to find out, well if we were changing the 
disclosure process of travel, we wanted to find out, well, what 
did the NDP do in office? Did they, how did they disclose it? 
What was included in their reports to the taxpayers? Maybe we 
could learn something from what the NDP did. And so we did 
find a few other things, Mr. Chair. We found a limousine 
service, and this was actually a limo for an airport ride from 
Vancouver to the port facility in Vancouver for $181 signed by 
the minister. I mean, I think we were having a good debate in 
the House about when a taxicab might suffice. This is probably 
an occasion where that would have been the case, but there was 
a limo service booked for the minister of the time, Mr. 
Lautermilch. 
 
We were also able to determine — and not with a lot of detail 
because what we did learn about the NDP years is that most of 
the receipts were discarded, or at least we didn’t have access to 
them; not a lot of information there — but we were able to find, 
for example other reports of the minister of the time, Maynard 

Sonntag. He was the minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation for the NDP, where the minister attended meetings 
along with Mr. Hart, Frank Hart who was the head of CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], regarding 
the investigation they were making of public-private 
partnerships in Australia and New Zealand for about 53 — 
what’s the total? — $53,000. 
 
They went and they met with EnergyAustralia and 
Infrastructure Auckland, obviously in New Zealand, in addition 
to other government agencies and private sector companies. 
They said the reason for the trip was to gather information 
around how P3s [public-private partnership] work and how they 
are implemented in areas such as fire suppression and highway 
funding. Interesting. Basically the privatization of highway 
funding is what they were looking at. 
 
By the way, I want to say very genuinely to the Leader of the 
Opposition, thank you for your support, thank him for his 
support of the Regina bypass P3 initiative because we are going 
to have a private contractor involved in that. 
 
And it was interesting, I followed the debate between the 
member for Lakeview and the Minister of Corrections today 
earlier when we had union members from the corrections 
facility on the food services piece. I think it’s fair to say that 
with the NDP position in support of the private involvement of 
highway construction in the Regina bypass announcement, 
because I think they thought it made pragmatic sense, that I 
hope that they would advise the government to review the RFP 
with respect to corrections in the same vein, to see if it makes 
sense. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, the bottom line is this: we know we will 
have a new disclosure process now that will be better for the 
government, better than what we used for six years. Should 
have done this earlier? Absolutely, but we were also watching 
our expenditures, Mr. Chairman. This has always been the 
priority of the Government of Saskatchewan since 2007, that 
we would, Mr. Chairman, treat the taxpayers’ dollars very, very 
carefully. And that’s why the number of out-of-province trips is 
down 31 per cent in terms of our term in government; cost of 
out-of-province travel down 21 per cent; in- and 
out-of-province costs down 46 per cent; executive air costs 
down 63 per cent, all the while where we were engaged in the 
international travel that I’ve referenced for the obvious reasons. 
 
So we take this seriously. We watch this money very, very 
carefully. And when there was a mistake made, when an official 
booked a service that was arguably not needed, first the 
ministers involved voluntarily agreed to offer the money back 
when they realized what had happened. And it was brought to 
the attention of the House, of the members of this committee by 
the members opposite — a credit to them. And then the 
individual that had booked it without the minister’s knowledge 
stepped forward to pay it as well. So you know, that’s obviously 
a step in the right direction. What has come from that is a new 
disclosure process, and we’re happy to be moving forward with 
that increased transparency. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well it was an interesting filibuster from the 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5331 

Premier in his own estimates, Mr. Speaker. If the Premier wants 
to go back on to travel to ’91, okay. If he wants to go back to 
1982, okay. He can do these deflection issues, Mr. Speaker, as 
it relates to the questions at hand about the travel that has 
supposedly been reviewed by this government. 
 
The Premier said that staff officials reviewed the travel from the 
last number of years and that two incidents were identified, and 
there were no other incidents. I assume the officials that were 
working over the weekend, as the Premier referenced, were not 
down in the basement going through shoeboxes of receipts. I 
assume there was some sort of format that this information was 
provided in. My question to the Premier: what format were they 
reviewing that information in? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, some of the work was to go 
through receipts: some in files, some of the work involved 
digital records if they were current enough, but usually receipts 
are in paper form. And so this work was done. We tried to find 
all of the information we could to answer questions in this 
House, as we should, and also to inform a new process for 
reporting. 
 
Mr. Chairman, though I’m a little disappointed that the member 
would completely discount the past in all of this because, what 
he said, what he personally said in his questions of the minister 
in question period — the Minister of Social Services — went 
right to her family. It was quite personal about whether it was 
appropriate to take family members on what he characterized as 
a personal trip. Well that matters, Mr. Chairman. 
 
It matters then if he would apply that same standard to himself, 
for example on a CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association] trip to Louisville. If the issue of family members 
travelling was an issue for the Minister of Social Services, is it 
an issue for all of us? Is it an issue for the member that asked 
the question? Is it an issue for his current Justice critic who, 
while he was a minister of the Crown, would regularly attend 
something called the western attorneys general conference. But 
the western attorneys general conference I’m talking about was 
not the Western Canadian attorneys general conference. It was 
an American western attorneys general conference. 
 
Mr. Chairman, for these trips — and I don’t know if I 
particularly have a problem with this. I don’t. I don’t — the 
minister at the time, the current member for Lakeview, took his 
family. And they went to places like Sun Valley, Idaho, and 
Monterey, California. They went to Sylvan Lake resort in 
Custer in South Dakota. Here’s the thing: he wasn’t even the 
attorney general for some of these trips. He was the Minister of 
Health, but he was going to an attorney general meeting, and 
there was the family with him. And the amount of the trips, 
these three trips, cost about $12,000. 
 
Now there was also a family component there. So all I’m . . . 
I’m not sure, I don’t think that’s a problem. In this political life, 
I think if it’s within the rules — and these were; and so is what 
the minister did; so is what, I think, the hon. member did with 
respect to CPA — I don’t think it’s a problem. But the point is 
this: if the Leader of the Opposition is going to raise the 
questions about family in an accusatory tone of any member on 

this side, then he has to also ask himself how one standard can 
apply to members here and another standard for members 
opposite. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister, when we talked 
about the trip to Ghana, has yet to explain how that trip 
provided a benefit to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, has 
yet to explain that in any way, shape, or form. And, Mr. Chair, 
as all members, we can have a discussion about the merits of 
CPA trips and all of those things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The issue here, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about the 
expenses, the Premier said it was reviewed. The Premier said, 
Mr. Speaker, they determined that there are only two instances. 
The Premier said that the information that they have available 
. . . is it some in electronic format, maybe some on paper 
spreadsheets? I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. But when this 
government provided the information for the expenses for the 
last year, Mr. Speaker, they left out, they left out the staff 
expenses. So presumably if it’s on a spreadsheet, if it’s in 
electronic form, Mr. Speaker, that information could be 
provided. My question to the Premier: will he table that 
information today? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re coming to a 
new process so we can report in specificity. And I want to just 
make this point to the hon. member: there were not staff costs 
included in the current disclosure process. And that’s a mistake 
and it’s going to be fixed. And it is exactly the same process 
that existed for years under the NDP. 
 
When we say we’re spending less in travel than the members 
opposite, we’re comparing apples to apples because neither did 
they include staff costs. This is wrong, by the way. We need to 
address it, six years perhaps too late, and we’re going to do that. 
We’re going to have a new disclosure process that addresses it. 
 
Then the member stands up and says, Mr. Speaker, as a 
declarative that the minister brought nothing back from the trip. 
He’s going to find out on Monday in fact that he’s wrong. 
Never mind the FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] 
exchange that occurs at the conference, but as a result of a stop 
in the United Kingdom, Saskatchewan is going to have one of 
the most innovative tools in terms of social development, social 
impact, the only province that will have this tool. And it is a 
direct result of the minister’s trip, a direct result. 
 
I know the member’s been on a CPA trip. Maybe there was 
family members with him. What did he bring back from that 
trip for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has admitted that the 
information related to travel expenses, including the expenses 
of staff, Mr. Speaker, are in a format which is digestible, on 
spreadsheets, in paper. My question to the Premier: why won’t 
he table the information related to staff travel costs over the past 
year, as they have put forward the information for ministerial 



5332 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

travel? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, is 
that the information with staff costs included is not how we’ve 
compiled information to date. It’s not how the NDP did it. 
That’s why we’re changing the format. So for him to say it’s 
digestible, whatever that means, is not quite accurate, if I think I 
understand what he’s saying. 
 
But the member wants to skip through these issues now. The 
member wants to not answer. Yes, I think it’s a chance for him 
to respond at least because he spent quite a few questions in 
question period on the attack of the Minister of Social Services. 
He just did it here today. What did she bring back from her trip? 
Well we’re going to be able to . . . She’s already made her case 
as to what she brought back. It’ll be made further on Monday. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition cannot have a double standard. 
What did he bring back from his CPA trip that he attended, and 
I think with a family member? What did the member for Regina 
Lakeview bring back from attending four conferences in a row 
all over the United States of the Western American attorneys 
general where his family came with him, in his capacity as the 
Health minister? It’s a fair debate. If the member wants to have 
this discussion, he better be fulsome in his answers or people 
will conclude that there might be a double standard over there. 
And I don’t think that’s anything a new leader of a political 
party needs. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, every member of this Assembly, 
government side or opposition side, when they go on a CPA trip 
they provide a report to all members of the Assembly of what 
was done and what was learned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, the Premier said that they reviewed 
the expenses for travel, staff expenses and ministerial expenses, 
Mr. Speaker. But my question then: if the information is not 
together in a digestible way when it comes to staff expenses, 
how could the Premier determine that all expenses were 
appropriate? 
 
[15:45] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. When we 
announced the new disclosure process, which will be a great 
improvement over what we have done and what the NDP did 
when they were in office, we said pretty clearly right then that 
the current reporting process had been exactly the same as what 
was under the previous government, but doesn’t simply 
automatically allow for the pulling together of all of the 
information, which is still available. 
 
We get asked by the media about costs for trade missions when 
they’re completed, and we’ll certainly provide that. We know 
the global numbers for our government’s travel are under what 
was spent by the NDP, even unadjusted for inflation. We can 
provide those overall numbers, Mr. Speaker. On a case-by-case 

basis, we’ll work to provide all the detail we can to members 
opposite because, Mr. Speaker, the numbers are down, and the 
numbers are down significantly over what members were doing 
when they were in government. 
 
I would say though that going forward we’re going to have a 
disclosure process. We’re developing it now so that all of the 
information is available in terms of all of the attendant costs of 
a trip. The breakdowns are available, reported twice a year. And 
it’ll certainly be an improvement over what we’ve been doing 
so far and what the New Democrats did when they were in 
office. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s important to have 
the travel expenses for staff, as we’ve seen from the two 
incidents that the Premier identifies of the Deputy Premier and 
the Minister of Social Services. In those instances, Mr. Speaker, 
many of the expenses were billed by the cabinet secretary, the 
staff along. In the instance of the Deputy Premier, it was the 
ADM [assistant deputy minister] where many of the expenses 
showed up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if the Premier has determined that the expenses are above 
board, that everything is fine, that these were the only two 
examples, it’s important to have the figures for staff in addition 
to the ministers themselves. So it would be good for that 
information to be provided. 
 
Earlier on in the spring sitting, the Premier put the cabinet 
secretary and clerk of Executive Council on probation. That’s a 
very significant step, Mr. Speaker, because this individual has 
been the Premier’s right-hand adviser for a very long time. So 
my question to the Premier, Mr. Chair: what does this probation 
entail? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the matter was very serious 
because the booking of the particular service did not come to 
the attention of the ministers involved, and they were rightfully 
concerned about it. And so I took the action of placing the 
cabinet secretary on probation. It meant a travel restriction. And 
I know that, whether or not as a direct result of probation or not, 
the individual in question came forward and decided, 
notwithstanding the fact that ministers were prepared to pay 
back the amount of the car service, he chose to do that. 
 
I wouldn’t say that’s a direct function of probation, but I think 
there was certainly an impact there, and those would be the 
particular terms of the probation. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to the Premier for some 
of the detail around what the probation entails. I’m curious, Mr. 
Speaker: what is the entire rationale for the decision to put this 
very senior political appointee on probation? What is the entire 
rationale? What was discussed with the individual? Was it 
simply the travel incident that we know of in the Assembly or 
were there other instances where there was inappropriate 
spending? 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5333 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — It was the issue in question. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We put forward a 
freedom of information request for all the expenses of this very 
senior political appointee. The government is stalling on that 
release of information. They’ve extended the FOI by 30 days. 
My question, Mr. Chair, to the Premier: will the Premier agree 
to table the expense claims of the cabinet secretary and clerk of 
Executive Council today? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I am informed that the 
officer, the independent officer who handles FOIs, has received 
an extraordinary number of requests. The information will be 
provided. The FOI will be responded to. There is the provision, 
with respect to FOIs, for an extension. And in the case where 
the officer is extremely busy, it’s invoked, and that’s the case 
here. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well there’s an 
amount of time left on the clock. There are a number of 
officials, Mr. Speaker, who are in this room, officials who are 
watching in the building and throughout the capital, Mr. 
Speaker, watching these proceedings. So I would hope that in 
the time that we have available, that the information with the 
cabinet secretary’s expenses would be brought into the 
Chamber and the Premier would be able to table that 
information. 
 
Because the Premier says that, oh it’s just these two incidents 
and we know the cabinet secretary’s been put on probation. 
There’s no problem here. Everything is fine. But I think 
Saskatchewan people should see the invoices. I think 
Saskatchewan people should have the information available to 
them. And I would encourage the Premier in the time that we 
have here this afternoon to get that information and to provide it 
to the people of the province. 
 
Moving on, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said that his 
right-hand adviser is serving as Saskatchewan’s representative 
to Buckingham Palace. Could the Premier please explain what 
exactly that means? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. The 
cabinet secretary has been involved in terms of the 
government’s coordination of its relationship with Buckingham 
Palace with respect to the royal visits, with respect to the 
Prince’s charities, Mr. Chairman. We’ve also asked him, and 
he’s done an excellent job of coordinating and liaising with the 
various Ukrainian associations both here in the province and the 
national ones, and of course there’s been a much greater import 
lent to these particular relations here of late. But these date back 
even to the province being the first one to recognize Holodomor 
with the private member’s bill, with the work I should say 

rather led by the Deputy Premier. 
 
And so from time to time we ask officials where they have 
capacity and connections to take on other duties, and he’s done 
these duties and done them quite well. In fact I know that with 
respect to this particular individual, there have been a number 
of meetings with respect to the superintendent of the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police]. There’s been help to 
coordinate what we might do in Charlottetown this summer as 
the province of Prince Edward Island seeks to commemorate 
the 150th anniversary of the Charlottetown Conference. There 
is a relationship to the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, the 
triannual conference, in terms of our province’s representation 
at some of these things. So we do want to be involved in them 
and because of a network there that was readily available to the 
government, the individual in question undertook these duties. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As it relates to the 
FOIs going to Executive Council, Mr. Speaker, I’m told that we 
only have three FOIs in for Executive Council, so it’s hardly 
swamping Executive Council with respect to providing 
information that is appropriate. 
 
This representative to Buckingham Palace, Mr. Speaker, is this 
a new position? And does being on probation affect any of the 
duties that would be expected from our go-between to 
Buckingham Palace? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, if there are any particular 
work that we need to do with the Prince’s charities, I think we 
would still call upon this individual as long as it didn’t involve 
any travel. 
 
And I want to point out for members of the committee that it 
would not just be the official opposition that would submit FOIs 
to the Government of Saskatchewan. They come from other 
groups as well. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My question to the 
Premier: is he absolutely certain that there are no additional 
inappropriate expense claims by the cabinet secretary? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I’m advised, Mr. Chairman, that to the 
knowledge of senior officials and to my knowledge, there was 
nothing counter to policy or regulations in the government. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Right now the 
coordination between those that are in this room and those that 
are in the building who would have access to the expense 
claims, has a message been sent to those individuals to bring the 
information to the Assembly for it to be tabled? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 



5334 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And just touching 
again on something we discussed earlier with respect to the 
expense claims put forward by the Co-Chair of the tribunal 
appeal board, the good friend of the minister who was 
appointed by the minister, is that information being gathered 
now so it can be provided to this committee? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Earlier on in committee, it was asked for the 
expense claims that the Chair of the Social Services Appeal 
Board has made. I have asked for that information to be 
provided to the Assembly because we’re aware of at least one 
instance where the Co-Chair billed for discussions with the 
minister. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, we’ll table . . . We’ll provide 
that information to members of the committee. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you very much. Back to the Provincial 
Secretary or pardon me, the cabinet secretary, not the Provincial 
Secretary. In other provinces, Mr. Speaker, where there’s an 
Usher of the Black Rod — and there aren’t many because it’s 
actually quite rare — in those provinces, the Usher of the Black 
Rod tends to be a ceremonial position that isn’t partisan, Mr. 
Speaker, and often the Sergeant-at-Arms is the individual that 
serves in that role. But here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we 
have the Premier’s right-hand adviser, a political appointee, 
serving in that role as the Usher of the Black Rod. Could the 
Premier please explain how that decision was made that this 
individual should serve in that role? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, this was an idea, an 
innovation of the individual in question and he spearheaded it, 
including raising thousands of private sector dollars to help pay 
for it, coordinating with the Buckingham Palace and the Prince 
on his visit. It’s a duty for which he receives no remuneration. 
It’s a volunteer position, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — So did the cabinet secretary just come to the 
Premier and say, you know what would be great? I’d love to be 
the Usher of the Black Rod. You think you could make that 
happen? Is that the conversation that happened between the 
cabinet secretary and the Premier? And my question, being on 
probation, does that affect any of the duties that the Usher of the 
Black Rod may have? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, just because of an interest in 
the innovation here pioneered by the individual, he as I recall 

actually submitted a number of names. And I asked him to 
perform these volunteer duties, and he accepted. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Through the discussions 
we’ve on a number of topics, we’ve discussed the role of FOIs, 
freedom of information requests, Mr. Speaker. A lot of the 
concerning details that have been revealed about this 
government’s actions as it relates to travel, as it relates to 
decisions, have been obtained through the FOI process. And 
that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, I believe for democracy, that 
that information can indeed be obtained. But we’ve actually 
found, Mr. Speaker, the FOI process to be quite frustrating. 
There are long delays. The law is not always followed. Fees are 
excessive and the public, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is not always 
served well as a result of that. 
 
[16:00] 
 
For example, the FOI for the Minister of Economy’s travel 
expenses took five months when in fact it was supposed to take 
60 days. The FOI for the VFA report in the Ministry of Health 
is still outstanding, and that’s now six months old. The 
government actually wanted to charge us, Mr. Speaker, over 
$16,000 for the FOI documents around contracts in Central 
Services. So it’s obviously cost prohibitive, and the people in 
Saskatchewan won’t have access to that information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand in other jurisdictions, other 
provinces, there are better FOI processes. And I have no idea, 
Mr. Speaker, if the FOI process has gotten worse under 
government or if this is par for the course, but I do think, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an area where things could be improved, things 
could be changed in order to have the most open and 
transparent government possible. So I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if 
the Premier would be willing to look at the FOI process, 
working with the opposition in a way, in order to ensure that the 
FOI process that is in place is in fact serving the interests of 
democracy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thanks, Mr. Chair, and I thank the 
member for the question. And I hope that in their internal 
discussions he’s perhaps asked the travelling Health minister to 
attorneys general conference in America about what he thinks 
about FOI processes, because we’re using the same FOI process 
we inherited from the NDP. And by the way, here’s the good 
news: it’s a good process. 
 
In 2012-13 government institutions processed, using that same 
FOI process, we processed 2,483 requests. That’s well above 
the average of 683 since the Act came into force. So consider 
this, members of the committee, now. Consider this, Mr. Chair: 
2,483 requests in ’12-13 — that’s the year we have complete 
numbers for, I would expect — well above the average of 683 
when the Act came into force. Where records existed, access 
was granted 98 per cent of the time and 98 per cent of the 
responses were within 60 days. 
 
Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, to my honourable 
friend, the 2012 National Freedom of Information Audit ranked 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5335 

Saskatchewan among the best in the country for both extent and 
speed of disclosure, better than British Columbia, better than 
Alberta, better than NDP Manitoba, better than Ontario. So I 
think the system is working well. Would we rule out changes, 
any improvements? No, I don’t think we would rule them out. 
Mr. Chairman, I also advise that officials within Executive 
Council are looking at the FOI process. There is a review under 
way to try to improve on what is already one of the best records 
in Canada. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, there are indeed merits to the 
process we have, but based on our experience and the 
experience I hear from other people in the province, the process 
could be improved. The process could be strengthened. And 
hearing a degree of openness from the Premier on this issue I 
think would be worthy of discussions between the two sides of 
the House. 
 
Moving on to another topic, Mr. Speaker, and that of temporary 
foreign workers, something that’s been in the larger media to a 
great degree and a discussion here in the Assembly as well. We 
note the government employs quite a few temporary foreign 
workers. We note the government has even employed a 
temporary foreign worker to work as a cashier at a liquor board 
store. So some questions on temporary foreign workers, Mr. 
Speaker. Can the Premier provide information on how many 
temporary foreign workers are currently working for the 
provincial government? Where are they working, and why 
weren’t Saskatchewan residents hired? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, once again, just to the last 
set of questions. I should also point out when the same survey 
with respect to the efficiency of the government’s FOI, of the 
current government’s FOI process, when the same survey was 
done of the previous NDP government in 2005 — a 
significantly different result than 2012, the recent one where we 
finished on the top of the list in terms of disclosure — in 2005 
Saskatchewan placed dead last, dead last under the NDP, dead 
last and was awarded an F grade by the same survey. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, we had some improvements to make, and we 
won’t rule out . . . And by the way, the member said, well 
sometimes we have to pay. I can tell my honourable friend that 
as leader of the opposition, we routinely faced huge bills asked 
of us by the government opposite to prepare information. And 
in many cases, the bills were warranted because of the amount 
of resources required. 
 
So we’ve made a great improvement on FOI disclosure from 
the days of your party, of the party opposite, Mr. Chairman. We 
can always do better. And that’s why the review is under way 
by the Executive Council members. 
 
With respect to temporary foreign workers, I have requested my 
deputy minister to do an update, a review of where we were at 
with respect to this issue, because I want to be aware of any 
temporary foreign workers that have been employed by the 
government, especially in the wake of recent developments. It’s 
obviously an important question at any time. And I’m told by 

senior officials that by early next week, we’ll have the current 
number, if there are any to report, and the circumstances around 
them. 
 
Because what we’ve said, Mr. Chairman, is this: we need to 
ensure that with respect to the temporary foreign worker 
program, that Canadians are getting the first access to jobs. And 
only then should there be a labour market opinion sought; only 
then should the TFW [temporary foreign worker] initiative even 
be contemplated. 
 
But we know in our province, Mr. Chair, that last year, when 
you include students, 55 per cent, 55 per cent temporary foreign 
workers made their way to permanent residence. And I’m not 
sure again of the number specifically; we’ve asked for that 
update and should have it very soon. We’ll provide it to all 
members of the committee. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well certainly, Mr. Chair, on record in the 
briefing binders they must have some sort of tally for how many 
temporary foreign workers are employed by the province in 
what positions, Mr. Speaker, and why, an explanation as to why 
Canadians weren’t hired for those positions. So my question, 
Mr. Chair, to the Premier: would he table the most up-to-date 
information that is available right now in committee, please? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As a 
result of my request to the Deputy, he has been working with 
the other permanent heads of government and the Crowns to get 
an exacting number in this. And I’m conferring with him now, 
and he’s not optimistic about by the end of business today or 
the conclusion of estimates, but we’re going to certainly make 
that effort and speed up the reporting process across 
government. But it has been initiated here very recently, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
We know that, with respect to the provincial situation, there is 
roughly 11,700 temporary foreign workers working in the 
province. That was as of December 2013. They account for 
about 2.1 per cent of the employment here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And with respect again to the path of 
permanency, that’s what we want from all newcomers into the 
province. We want them to be residents and citizens and 
eventually taxpayers. 
 
And the good news is that when you include students, we’re 
getting up to 55 per cent in the last reporting year of those who 
have been temporary foreign workers and moved to permanent 
residency. That’s up from about 50 per cent the year before. I 
think it was 44 per cent the year before that, and about 40 per 
cent in the year prior. So we’re heading in the right direction. 
 
Our number one priority as a province, and it would be as a 
government, is to hire Saskatchewan people. And within that 
cohort, our number one priority would be to hire First Nations 
people right across Saskatchewan. That would be true for our 
economy because we seek greater engagement there where we 
have an unemployment gap. But there is a role for temporary 
foreign workers where we cannot find people to fill the position 



5336 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

for whatever reason. And we’ll have the information to 
members of the committee shortly. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the opposition leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — How frequent is this information updated? Is 
this the type of thing that would be updated every few months, 
or is it a stand-alone project where the government seeks to find 
the information and put it in one spot? I know there’s been 
information released from government in the past that lists the 
different ministries and agencies where temporary foreign 
workers exist, so I would assume that there is some sort of tally 
somewhere within the binders across the floor, Mr. Speaker. Is 
there a previous list that the Premier can table today? And then 
we can see the updated list if in fact it’s coming to us shortly. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The reporting process previously would’ve 
been something that approximated an annual process. I have 
asked officials that the frequency of that report be increased to 
every six months. We would like to know the status of the 
government’s, any temporary foreign workers the Government 
of Saskatchewan will be employing. 
 
There might be occasions, for example, on the engineering side, 
perhaps on the research side, where students . . . And let’s not 
forget that there’s a great complement of students who qualify 
under this general category of temporary foreign workers, 
especially on the research side and the post-graduate side. So 
these would be potentially the kinds of rare instances of TFWs 
employed in the government, I would expect. But we’ll get the 
report, and then the report would be made more frequent 
because obviously all of us, in government and people across 
the province, have an even greater interest in the issue even then 
before. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s odd that’s there no 
information available to be tabled at this time. Just to clarify, I 
understand it’s being gathered. It’s being worked on. What is 
the commitment from the Premier as to when that information 
will be made available to members? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — As soon as I have it, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’ve asked a number 
of questions about the economic impact of the grain 
transportation crisis in Finance estimates on April 8th, Mr. 
Speaker, and in Economy estimates on April 14th, but we didn’t 
get a proper answer in either of those committees. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Finance pointed us to the Minister of 
the Economy for an answer and the Minister of the Economy 
pointed us to the Minister of Finance for an answer. 
 
The Minister of the Economy provided an estimated impact of 
between 1 billion and 7 billion. He went on to say, “But I think 
unquestionably it has the potential to have an impact now on 

going forward. I think that there’s some work being done by the 
Ministry of Finance around this area to try and establish what 
that impact might be.” And that’s from April 14th. So quite a 
range, Mr. Speaker, identified from the 1 billion to 7 billion. 
But on April 8th, Mr. Speaker, just a week prior, the Finance 
minister actually said, “. . . what analysis are we doing in 
Finance? — the answer is none in terms of actually monitoring 
that.” 
 
So perhaps, Mr. Chair, the Premier will have an answer on this. 
Which ministry in government is actually undertaking 
economic analysis about the impact of the grain transportation 
crisis? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the deputy minister to 
Executive Council who has just exited the Chamber, the 
committee meeting, to get a quick update on the current survey 
of the temporary foreign worker issue, and it’s been reported 
back through the deputy minister from Crown Investments 
Corporation that they are unable to find any temporary foreign 
workers in the Crown sector right now that they’re aware of 
with the process under way. We should have the numbers 
across the line departments of government by the end of 
business today, and we’ll share that number, if there are any, 
with all members of the committee. 
 
The fact of the matter is we have Economy, Agriculture, and 
Highways and Transportation that have been looking at this 
issue in a general sense that I would argue have been very 
effective in making this more of a national issue than it was 
before they got involved, before the province of Saskatchewan 
got involved. They’ve also been looking at the economic impact 
issue, but it’s very hard to be able to discern that impact and 
report to members of the committee either in the estimates 
previous or now because it’s simply almost impossible to track 
in individual sales that have occurred, even in the last couple of 
weeks or the last couple of months or, you know, dating right 
back to the time where the challenge became most acute with 
respect to the grain transportation backlog. 
 
We have estimates that in terms of direct impact to the 
economy, we’re looking at about $880 million, but indirect 
impact would be, well it would be well over $1 billion 
obviously because of the importance of the industry. We also 
know that the backlog has hurt on the potash side. We know 
that there have been challenges in terms of other commodities. 
Now in the spring we face, you know, some anecdotal stories 
already about inputs and access to fertilizer exacerbated by the 
same challenge with the rail companies. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I do welcome this question, though, Mr. Chair, because this — I 
think everybody was in agreement — this was the number one 
economic issue facing the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
believe this is the first time in this House the member has took 
to his feet to ask a question of the government, the first time. 
 
I remember meeting with the Minister of Agriculture federally 
when we were talking about this issue, when we were asking 
for inclusion in the Act, the federal Acts, and very specific 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5337 

requests. And I asked him at that time — and maybe it’s 
changed since — but that would have been, oh just before 
Easter I guess, or during the federal Easter break. I’m looking at 
the Minister of Agriculture. I think that’s about when it was. 
And we asked the minister’s office, did you hear, have you 
heard word one from my counterpart, from the leader of the 
NDP? 
 
Because they have sent letters to the Prime Minister and federal 
ministers on other issues, to their credit. I think with respect to 
fire suppression on First Nations reserves, the member was 
engaged, to his credit, sent a letter to either the federal minister 
or maybe the Prime Minister — I’m not sure — to the credit of 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
But on this issue up until that point, not a word. Some work in 
the House by the critic, some good work I would say, questions 
asked of the minister and exchanges. But in the province of 
Saskatchewan where we have 44 per cent of the arable acres in 
Canada, where agriculture, especially now in its renaissance, is 
a driver of economic wealth and jobs and where the 
transportation backlog risked our economy, and there’s a great 
risk still to it today, I was surprised, and I remain surprised, that 
the first time the Leader of the Opposition has asked a question 
about it, has spoken publicly about it to me anyway in this 
context of the House was just now, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I welcome the question. This is the economic impact we can 
estimate, but again it’s very difficult to bell that cat just because 
of the movement of grain, the sales that have even occurred, 
Mr. Chairman, from last week. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier should review 
the Hansard record. He and I both participated in a debate on 
this very issue on the floor of the Assembly. We’ve been raising 
this, Mr. Speaker, through our critic, through debates that we’ve 
had here in the Assembly, through statements in the public, Mr. 
Speaker, well in advance, well in advance of this government 
demonstrating interest and concern about the topic. 
 
It was back in March, Mr. Speaker, of 2013, not 2014, that we 
asked questions in the House on the federal rail freight service 
bill, questions here in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
interesting the indifference we actually saw from government 
members with their relationship, with their concern on this 
important topic, and their relationship with the feds. It was 
Bruce Johnstone that wrote on February 7th, 2014: 
 

What does it take to get Premier Brad Wall exercised about 
the fact that much of Saskatchewan’s record harvest is 
sitting in grain elevators or farmers’ fields, thanks to a 
grain transportation system that’s failed to deliver the 
goods and a do nothing federal government content to sit 
on its hands? Apparently, the threat of strike action. 
 
Until this week, Wall has barely said a word about the 
massive backlog of grain that’s costing farmers potentially 
billions of dollars in foregone income. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s rhetoric on this — and he’s fond 
of the word torquing — is a prime example here of what the 

Premier is doing. 
 
So we look at the huge impact that this will have on the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s important to ensure that the right 
ministries are tracking this and are taking the consequences of 
the crisis into consideration when making decisions around our 
finances. So my question is, how is the grain transportation 
crisis factored in the current budget forecast? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I want to point out 
for members of the committee that when we came back from 
our trip in the ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations], in Southeast Asia, one of my first stops was to meet 
with the Prime Minister, where long before we were hearing 
any concerns about the backlog, I was raising the concerns that 
we were hearing from our customer countries in the Philippines 
in the ASEAN region where we met with millers. And millers 
would say, you know, we don’t even call Canada in December 
and January because there’s not the reliability of delivery. And 
so this, by the way, predates the change at the Wheat Board. 
This was just a challenge that Canada was having in that 
particular market, and a lot of it was related to logistics. 
 
And on my return, I raised these concerns with the Prime 
Minister, concerns in general about a number of issues with 
respect to grain transportation. And subsequent to that of course 
we’ve had a very active Minister of Agriculture on this 
particular file, I think most would agree. 
 
And I’ve talked to a lot of farmers who have asked me to thank 
the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of the Economy 
and the Minister of Highways because those farmers believe 
that Saskatchewan was leading on the issue, that Saskatchewan 
was able to make this more of a national media issue. I had 
media tell me that when we were in Ottawa for another 
speaking engagement and I met with those officials. And so we 
should. Because we are home to most of the arable acres of the 
country, at least just less than half of those arable acres. And 
our exports have gone up 70 per cent since 2007, Mr. 
Chairman, not just in agriculture — that’s the overall number 
— but driven in many respects in those years by agriculture. 
 
With respect to the question on the forecasts, I can tell the 
members opposite that the GDP [gross domestic product] 
forecasts for the province remain unchanged, notwithstanding 
the grain situation. They were at about 2.4 per cent forecast in 
our budget documents, and I think it’s safe to say that they’ve 
been validated today by at least one additional, one external 
source. The Bank of Montreal reported out today, and I’m 
pleased to inform members of the committee that they’re calling 
for strong, steady growth for the province of Saskatchewan, 
GDP this year of about 2.4 per cent. So they’re validating, 
they’re corroborating the number in the budget. By the way, the 
reason they say that we have the prospects of solid growth in 
the province is because of the good financial management in 
Saskatchewan. I’d expect that would reflect the fact that the 
budget is balanced and that we’ve reduced the general operating 
debt of this province by over $2 billion. But they also point to a 
diversified economy. 
 
You know, it’s interesting, Mr. Chairman, and I’m glad we’re 



5338 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

talking about the economy. I’ve been noting in the recent job 
numbers — and I know the member will welcome this fact — 
in the recent job numbers we’ve seen an actual decrease in 
natural-resource-related jobs but an increase in the overall 
employment in the province, an increase in the overall number 
of jobs. And the reason, when you break down the numbers in a 
number of the reports, is that we’ve increased jobs in 
innovation. Sounds like smart growth. We’ve increased the 
number of jobs in the trade sector and in manufacturing. 
 
And so, not the government, but what this economy is doing, 
what the people are doing, they’re diversifying the economy. 
We need to do more of that but . . . And the member for 
Dewdney points out that sounds like more eggs in more baskets. 
I think he’s probably right about that. But as far as we know, 
and we’re watching this carefully, we’re not yet adjusting the 
GDP forecast for the province with respect to the budget, and 
that seems to be borne out by what BMO [Bank of Montreal] 
reported even this morning. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier says he’s 
been busy on this file, but it’s puzzling then why a columnist as 
recently as February 7th, 2014 would say, “Until this week, 
Wall has barely said a word about the massive backlog of grain 
that’s costing farmers potentially billions of dollars in foregone 
income.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question of the financial impact that the grain 
transportation crisis will have for the province is a very 
important one. That’s why the questions were asked in earlier 
committee sittings, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance as 
well the Minister of Economy. And the range given on the 
impact was quite significant or quite broad, I should say — 
from 1 billion to $7 billion, something like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So just to clarify from the Premier, Mr. Speaker: is it his belief 
that the government has appropriately and accurately evaluated 
the threat that the grain transportation crisis poses to our 
economy, and have the adjustments been made within the 
budget to properly reflect their estimation of what the impact 
will be? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I was wrong. BMO 
reported our GDP forecast to be 2.4 per cent. The budget 
document actually says 2.2 per cent. So the first independent 
economist report on our economy, the basis for which we would 
plan our finances, the first independent since the budget was 
tabled is actually higher than ours. So we’re watching it 
carefully because it’s an important issue. 
 
But you know, Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting. This member, 
this Leader of the Opposition, I followed the leadership 
campaign, and it wasn’t just because I didn’t have . . . You 
know, I’m interested in politics. So I’ve followed the campaign 
platforms of all of the NDP leadership candidates, including my 
hon. friend. And I thought except for perhaps the deputy, the 
current deputy leader, he was talking at least a lot about rural 
Saskatchewan. I give him credit for that. 
 

But, Mr. Chairman, I think the first test of his leadership on the 
issue of agriculture, on the issue of rural Saskatchewan, was 
this last spring in this very room. One of the best platforms — 
and I’ve had that job before — one of the best platforms an 
opposition leader will have to draw attention to an issue, to 
advocate for something important in the province of 
Saskatchewan, is question period. 
 
And the member has done a good job on health issues. I think 
he’s raised a number of health issues and done so effectively. 
And there’s been an exchange sometimes with me, sometimes 
with the Minister of Health. But not once, not once in question 
period since, I don’t know — when did we start here, the first 
week in March? — has the member stood up and asked a single, 
solitary question on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers. Not one. 
 
So I, with great respect, I’m not sure there would be a lot of 
credibility in him lecturing anybody in this House. His Ag 
critic, for example, who has been on the file or this Agriculture 
minister or this Minister of the Economy or that Minister of 
Highways, I don’t think anyone’s probably going to take their 
cues, with respect. 
 
And the bottom line is we have work to lead on the issue 
because it is important. We want to let our partners and 
stakeholders in rural Saskatchewan know that it’s important and 
doing so means working at it. Doing so maybe means taking the 
time as even a Leader of the Opposition to write a letter to the 
Prime Minister — he’s happy to do it on other issues — to write 
a letter to the Minister of Agriculture who’s from Saskatchewan 
and say, here’s the concerns of the NDP on behalf of farmers. 
Maybe, Mr. Chairman, it might be an indication that he cared 
about rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And if he has, I hope he tables it. If he would write a letter to 
his own federal leader. We were calling for federal legislation. 
So did he ever pick up the phone and call Mr. Mulcair? Or did 
he write a letter to Mr. Mulcair and say, we have an issue in 
Saskatchewan that we need you to co-operate with the federal 
government to get legislation passed, a short-term order in 
council or the long-term legislation? 
 
I think that would be the kind of effort that producers would be 
looking for. I hope they would say, I hope they would say that 
that is the effort they’ve gotten from members on the 
government side. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our record is very 
clear on the times we have raised this in question period, the 
times we have commented in public, the times we’ve debated in 
this Assembly. And the Premier might not like what 
independent and non-partisan analysts say, Mr. Speaker, but 
when they write on February 7th, 2014, “Until this week, Wall 
has barely said a word about the massive backlog of grain that’s 
costing farmers potentially billions of dollars in forgone 
income,” well, Mr. Chair, it’s probably fair to say that the 
Premier and I aren’t going to agree on the issue of who’s taking 
this issue seriously and who’s commenting on it. 
 
But thankfully on other issues, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
agriculture, we’ve actually seen this government do some 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5339 

flip-flops. First off, when we talked about joint running rights, 
at that time the minister said, well we’re not even sure if there 
really are answers; it’s really complicated. Well lo and behold, a 
bit of time passed and then they think joint running rights might 
in fact be part of the solution. On penalties for railways, Mr. 
Chair, initially they were happy with the $100,000 a day, but 
then, Mr. Speaker, they understood that, well actually that is a 
drop in the bucket with respect to what’s actually needed, and 
then finally called for $250,000 a day. On provincial lease 
payments, Mr. Chair, they initially sent threatening letters to 
farmers about paying up, but then they gave them a breather 
until July. So we have seen instances where they’ve 
flip-flopped, and it’s actually been for the better of producers 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But one area where they’ve been stubbornly dismissive, Mr. 
Speaker, where they have not been listening, is in the area of 
community pastures. And we’d love to see them flip-flop on 
this agricultural issue. So my question, Mr. Chair, to the 
Premier: why won’t the government change its mind on 
community pastures? 
 
[16:30] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thanks, Mr. Chairman. Again this has 
become a regular habit. We have to check, correct the record as 
has been presented by my hon. friend because he’s wrong and 
he’s mischaracterized the government’s position. Mr. 
Chairman, the Minister of Agriculture did not change his 
position on joint running rights. What we did say as a province 
was a need for the extension of interswitching, Mr. Chairman. 
These things are different because of course joint running rights 
would involve the entire track, the entire rail. We were talking 
about what might be more feasible, which actually manifests 
itself in the federal legislation, I want to point out, and 
something we raised directly with the minister. 
 
And by the way, Mr. Chairman, we often phone the minister 
directly. We raise things with him directly, and we don’t always 
check with the analysts that the hon. member has referenced 
before we do that. Moreover the member said, well we called 
for or we said $100,000 a day was fine. But the minister said, 
when the federal government acted in an unprecedented way, 
and I think to a great degree at the urging of the province of 
Saskatchewan — others as well but I think it’s fair to say that 
the efforts of the Government of Saskatchewan helped get the 
reaction from the federal government — the minister said it was 
a good start. And I lauded it as well. 
 
Members opposite panned it. Members opposite said, you 
know, basically rejected it out of hand. And were they the 
government, I wonder if they would have ever been listened to 
by the federal minister after that reaction when he went to 
develop the long-term legislation when the federal House came 
back. Here’s the fact of the matter is we asked for a 
$250,000-per-day penalty for the railway companies. 
 
So again we have to watch this member. We have to check his 
preamble facts because more often than not we’re correcting the 
record. Sometimes it’s on an innocent thing like trees. 
Sometimes it’s on a less innocent thing like mischaracterizing 

the position of the Minister of Agriculture on the file. But we’ll 
do that. We’re here to serve all the members of the legislature, 
including his members so that they know what actually has 
been said. 
 
With respect to the pastures, you know, Mr. Chairman, I 
wonder what the position of the NDP is. We want to hear 
directly from members opposite if it’s their position that the 
government should simply basically be taking over all of the 
responsibilities here. We’ve taken a different approach. The 
federal government has decided to make this change whether or 
not the province of Saskatchewan or any other province 
supported it. The request has been, take them over. 
 
What we’d have said is, we’d like to turn this over to patrons. 
We would like to have the patrons take control over these 
pastures. And the minister informs me that now 10 contracts, 10 
different contracts have been signed with patrons so that we can 
devolve. We can see the service, if you will, the capacity of the 
pastures continue but not necessarily take them over as a 
government, add it to government. Rather we’d rather have the 
patrons own them, and we’re making progress on that, and that 
remains the position of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This government’s been 
very selective with respect to who they’ve been listening to 
with respect to community pastures and ensuring that the 
expertise that has developed through community pastures, the 
services that are provided to a great number of patrons in the 
province, that that is in fact maintained and is there for the long 
haul based on the position that the federal government has taken 
and put many patrons in a bad place or situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk on another topic, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 
casino deal that we discussed in this Assembly to some extent 
in the previous months, and specifically I would like to talk 
about the VLT [video lottery terminal] situation. What’s the 
Premier’s position on the number of VLTs in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Just to provide 
members with a few more details about the pasture situation 
where we would like patrons to operate these, Mr. Chairman, 
we’ve also put in place funding of $120,000 to assist patron 
groups to set up business entities and receiving sort of training 
they would need. But it is our preference here that we would 
continue turning the operation of these over to the patrons. And 
I gave the member a chance to state the NDP position. There’s 
many issues to discuss, but I hope he’ll do that before the 
night’s over because I think that is important, whether or not the 
NDP believe we should operate these pastures that the federal 
government have gotten out of, or whether or not it’s important 
to facilitate the patrons doing that. 
 
With respect to the number of VLTs, the member will know, 
because I think he’s had discussions with the chief of the FSIN 
[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] about both the 
potential sale of the casino that we did discuss before the 
session started, but earlier on, I’m sure he will know that it is 
the position of the FSIN, they’ve requested to have more VLTs 



5340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

in the SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority Inc.] 
casinos. Mr. Chairman, we’re earnestly considering that 
request. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. What sort of increase 
would there be to the number of VLTs? What does the 
government have planned? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, those numbers are subject to 
a dialogue between the FSIN and the government, and there’s 
no announcement to make just yet. But we want to conduct 
ourselves in a professional manner, as I’m sure the member 
would understand, and so we’re not prepared to discuss those 
negotiations or the numbers that we’re talking about on the 
floor of the House when no final decision has been announced. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — What is the percentage . . . [inaudible] . . . of 
increase the number of VLTs that Saskatchewan could be 
looking at? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — It’s the same question, Mr. Chairman, and 
the answer’s the same as well. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — In which communities would we be looking at, 
is the government looking at increasing the number of VLTs in, 
throughout the province or in certain locations? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re negotiating with 
respect to SIGA so it would be SIGA communities if there’s to 
be any change. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know a few 
months ago the Premier wanted to sign, claims he wanted to 
sign, an MOU [memorandum of understanding] with the FSIN 
on several gaming matters. I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from 
The StarPhoenix on February 12, 2014. 
 

The deal would also grant the FSIN and SIGA the power to 
offer online gaming and lift the limits on how many video 
lottery terminal (VLTs), can be placed in each building. It 
would also allow for the creation of new VLT “gaming 
houses,” Bellegarde said. In an interview Tuesday, 
Bellegarde said VLT limits have limited SIGA’s profits 
and this provision will “let the market . . . [decide].” 

 
Mr. Chair, my question to the Premier: is it his intention to let 
the market decide what the appropriate number of VLTs should 
be in the province? 
 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — No. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So if it’s not the market 
that would be deciding, and it sounds as though Chief 
Bellegarde believes that it would be the market deciding, based 
on the MOU that the Premier said that he wanted to sign with 
the FSIN, through what mechanism will it be determined the 
appropriate level of VLTs in Saskatchewan communities? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, we respect the partnership 
we have with FSIN and SIGA and I don’t want to negotiate 
anything on the floor of the House in estimates. I will say that 
one indicator perhaps might be population growth, which has 
been significant, thankfully, for the province of Saskatchewan. 
But we’re not going to get into specific questions. I’m not sure 
where they’re coming from. Perhaps we can also revisit the 
casino deal itself in the House. I’m happy to answer those 
questions. But we won’t be negotiating. We have a partner in 
this respect that we want to deal with in a professional way and 
that’s how we’ll conduct our business. 
 
The Chair: — The Opposition Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s been said by Chief 
Bellegarde in the article February 12th, 2014, “In an interview 
Tuesday, Bellegarde said VLT limits have limited SIGA’s 
profits, and this provision will ‘let the market dictate.’” So 
that’s the MOU that this Premier claims that he was ready to 
sign on to with the FSIN, Mr. Speaker, according to Chief 
Bellegarde, that this was the reality, the market decide. I asked 
the Premier, Mr. Chair, whether or not the market would be 
decided in the appropriate level of VLTs. The Premier said no. 
It sounds as though the FSIN is of the position, Mr. Speaker, 
that it ought to be the market that decides. 
 
So my question is without . . . The Premier doesn’t have to give 
away the trade secrets and the negotiations going on, but 
Saskatchewan people should have the right to know how in fact 
the increase in the number of VLTs in communities throughout 
Saskatchewan will in fact be determined. 
 
The Premier mentioned population as a possibility, but surely 
there is more information that could be provided so 
communities know whether or not the number of VLTs in their 
communities will be increasing. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the member has a copy of 
the MOU. He knows exactly what’s in the MOU. It was 
furnished to him. It was furnished to his deputy leader because 
we were seeking unanimity of the House. We knew the Crown 
corporations protection Act was voted on unanimously by the 
House, and so it was our view that for it to change we needed 
unanimous support. And that’s why the government and FSIN 
reached out to the member that just asked the question. It’s why 
we reached out to his deputy leader. He has the MOU. He 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5341 

knows what is, or not, in the MOU and I think he can answer 
his own question. 
 
We’re bringing in a copy here but we . . . Maybe you’ve lost 
yours, but you have . . . You know what was in the MOU with 
respect to VLTs, and I’m sure you also understand it’s not how 
you’ve characterized it. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, my question to the Premier: through 
what mechanism will the increase in VLTs be determined? 
What sort of consultations are occurring around this decision? 
Because it can have a very big impact for communities. And 
what is the timeline for these consultations and this decision to 
be made? What are the timelines associated with it? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I’ve got a copy of the MOU here, and so 
just a question or so ago the Leader of the Opposition said, 
what’s in the . . . characterized a quote from the chief and said, 
so in the MOU you’re going to go to some market-based 
system. And I’ll read it. He’s got a copy because they at least 
considered it, this idea for a moment before he called his scrum 
on that day. 
 
It says that “The provisions relating to the number of electronic 
gaming machines that may be located at casinos operated by 
SIGA.” That’s point (b) of a section that talks about us entering 
into good-faith discussions regarding the gaming framework 
agreement. And that’s the answer to the member’s question. 
 
The number of . . . slots, really they are, in the casinos, the 
number of slots in SIGA casinos are dictated by the gaming 
framework agreement that we have with the FSIN. In order to 
make any changes at all, we have to reopen that agreement, and 
obviously that’s something the two parties agree to do. It is the 
subject currently of negotiations. And you know, loosely I 
would say that population is an indicator. 
 
I wonder if the member opposite would tell us and members of 
the committee whether or not in principle he opposes any 
increase to the slots in SIGA casinos? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We weren’t part of the 
secret negotiations that this government engaged in with respect 
to the MOU and the lack of transparency that this government 
displayed as they tried to do a fast one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to quote from the story, Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix 
on February 12th, 2014: 
 

The deal would also grant the FSIN and SIGA the power 
to offer online gaming, and lift the limits on how many 
video lottery terminals (VLTs) can be placed in each 
building. It would also allow for the creation of new VLT 
“gaming houses,” Bellegarde said. 
 
In an interview Tuesday, Bellegarde said VLT limits have 
limited SIGA’s profits, and this provision will “let the 

market dictate.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, so there’s the discussion of the increase in the 
VLTs. What’s also mentioned, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier’s 
intention for the creation of VLT gaming houses. Could the 
Premier please expand what are these VLT gaming houses, how 
many would be existing, and in what communities? 
 
[16:45] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chairman, he’s quoting a 
third party about what I said. These are not . . . Gaming houses 
is not something I said. We’re talking about slots in casinos. So 
he can read the article. I’m reading the MOU. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, let’s be very clear. One of the first people 
aware of or involved in the discussion of the potential sale of 
the casinos to SIGA, to FSIN was the member that asked the 
question. That member, I say — and I’m sure some members on 
this side of the House would perhaps be disappointed, but I 
thought it’s the only way that we can make progress on this file 
— he knew about the potential before some members on this 
side of the House. Why is that, Mr. Chair? I’m glad to get these 
facts on the record. 
 
About the third week of January — I’ll furnish the member with 
the dates, although he lived this, so he’ll know them — I met 
with Chief Bellegarde. We talked in very conceptual terms 
about what might be possible. We talked about the fact that the 
government wanted to negotiate the CDC [community 
development corporation] proceeds. We thought if we could 
take the proceeds of gaming that goes to the community 
development corporations and focus them on economics and 
education, especially in education where we’re now seeing 
some excellent results from initiatives that we’ve tried through 
the joint task force with the FSIN. By the way, we’ve doubled 
that funding in the budget. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we were very hopeful about that change. We 
were hopeful too about building capacity with SIGA, if this 
agreement could happen between the Government of 
Saskatchewan and SIGA.  
 
I did say to the chief, I said, though we campaigned very 
solemnly — twice, our party did — on not changing certainly 
the spirit and intent of The Crown Corporations Act, in other 
words, not selling things listed in the Act to anybody, including 
SIGA, and one of those was the casinos. So I said to him, Chief, 
in order for us to proceed, you’ve got to sit down with Mr. 
Broten — I’m quoting myself — with the Leader of the 
Opposition . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, that’s never 
good, is it?  
 
I asked him to do that, and within days he did. At least that’s 
what he reported back. He said he presented the general outline 
of what was possible if we could have unanimous agreement. 
So the truth is, he was involved in the negotiations earlier than 
most members in this House were involved in the negotiations. 
 
And my understanding from the chief was that there were no 
particular objections. Why in the world would we take the next 



5342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

steps that we took to advance this concept, to bring it to our 
caucus, to bring it to cabinet, say I think this is possible because 
I believe the chief’s met with the Leader of the Opposition, and 
he’s told them there’s no particular objections to it. He was 
involved in this secret deal three days after we first talked about 
it with the chief, involved in this secret deal before most 
members on this side of the House. 
 
You can’t have it both ways, Mr. Chairman. You cannot say 
one thing because it’s your political advantage in estimates or 
question period if you said something else or if you did 
something else. 
 
We will negotiate in good faith with the FSIN per the gaming 
framework agreement. There may well be an expansion of slot 
machines in the casinos. The economy’s grown. Some of the 
markets have grown. They’d be limited obviously to those 
communities. They’d be limited to those slots where those 
casinos exist, Mr. Chairman, as far as the government’s plans 
are right now. And we’ll undertake those negotiations in good 
faith with the FSIN. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As usual, the Premier’s 
completely mischaracterizing what happened. Interesting, Mr. 
Chair, that he can recount of a meeting that he was not in 
attendance at, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. Chair, to the 
Premier: were gaming houses part of the discussions? Yes or 
no? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I recall the term gaming 
houses being raised and not fully understanding it. I was sort of 
filling in the blanks myself, thinking of maybe what you’d find 
in some of the northern states, if you drive through Montana. 
 
But I think it’s clear what the government’s position was in 
terms of the wording in the MOU, which the member has 
because he was in on the secret deal within days of us raising it 
with the chief. He at least knew about it certainly and, 
according to the chief, didn’t seem to have any major problems 
with it then. 
 
Here’s what the wording says: “Without limiting paragraph 1 of 
this Section, the Parties commit to enter into good faith 
discussions relating to the GFA [that’s the gaming framework 
agreement] including . . .” And (b) is, “The provisions relating 
to the number of electronic gaming machines that may be 
located at casinos . . .” 
 
So FSIN may raise this other concept. I’m not quite clear on 
what that concept is. But the government’s been pretty clear, 
both in the MOU and I think in negotiations that the minister 
has had — we have the Minister of the Gaming Authority here 
and the Minister of First Nations — that to the extent there 
would be any increase in the slot machines at all, they’d be in 
casinos. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — So to be clear, Mr. Chair, is it the government’s 

position that they are not open to the prospect of gaming 
houses? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the casino is a gaming house, I guess, 
Mr. Chairman. I have just answered the question. To the extent 
there will be any additional slot machines, they’ll be in the 
casinos. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — What’s the government’s intention with respect 
to online gaming? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, as a part of the MOU again — 
and the member has a copy, but we’ll furnish him with another 
one — as a part of the MOU that was not signed and not 
executed because the New Democrats wouldn’t, couldn’t 
support it for whatever reason, we did indicate that the 
negotiation of some potential for online gaming by SIGA would 
be part of the agreement, which is of great interest to them. It is 
something they raise on every occasion. 
 
In light of the fact the MOU has not moved forward, we’ve 
indicated that, save for a discussion around the number of slots 
in casinos, we’re not interested at this point in moving forward 
with any of the other elements in the MOU. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. One of the big concerns 
I heard from First Nations leaders was about the plans within 
the MOU that would greatly constrain to what projects and 
what initiatives dollars from community development 
corporations could go. Currently, Mr. Chair, CDCs provide a 
fairly wide range of support to different initiatives like 
economic development, social development, justice initiatives, 
educational development, recreational facilities operation and 
development, senior and youth programs, cultural development, 
community infrastructure development and maintenance, health 
initiatives, and other charitable purposes. 
 
So for the Premier to want to have that constrain the work of the 
CDCs, the funding of the CDCs, to simply go to education, 
employment, and economic development is a fairly significant 
change from where dollars have traditionally be used for. So my 
question, Mr. Chair, to the Premier is, why was he so adamant 
on that point? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well once again the answer, I think, is in 
the MOU the member has. And I now have the dates clarified 
because again earlier on tonight — today, this afternoon; it only 
seems like night — he characterized it as a secret deal. So the 
first time we discussed this earnestly, this idea with Chief 
Bellegarde, was in the Premier’s office, just over here, 21st of 
January. It was a Tuesday. He met with the member on Friday. 
He met with the member on Friday and told him about the 
terms of it. 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5343 

So I hope he’ll at least, when he takes to his feet for his next 
question, acknowledge that maybe it wasn’t a secret. And if it 
was, it wasn’t a very good one because he found out about it 
three days after we had talked about it with the chief. I think he 
should do that, would he want to have the credibility to 
continue to be able to characterize the deal that didn’t happen 
— as he has done so, as he did so the day that he scrummed 
here, and as he’s done so on the floor of the House in a way that 
does not accurately characterize the deal at all — a deal he 
knew about three days, four days, three days after I first had the 
discussion with the chief about what was possible. I think he 
would probably want to do that. I think he’s a fair man. 
 
With respect to the issue of CDCs, Mr. Chairman, we’ll make 
no apology for the fact that we would like to see — if the chiefs 
would agree, and that’s why we put it into the agreement — a 
greater focus of the proceeds that go to community 
development corporations in education and economic 
development. We would want to make it, if we could, we’d 
want the chiefs to make it exclusively about education and 
employment and economic development. 
 
These are the number one issues facing this province today in 
terms of the gap that exists between Aboriginal unemployment 
and overall unemployment. Now that gap’s been decreasing a 
little bit thankfully; not enough, but it’s been decreasing. We’ve 
seen month-over-month reports that Aboriginal unemployment 
is on the way down, but it’s still far too high. There is a large 
gap. And so to the extent there are resources at all from the 
proceeds of gaming, we would like the CDCs — it’s not our 
money; it’s theirs — but we would like them to focus on 
economic development and education especially, Mr. Chair, 
when we now know there are some proven programs that are 
working. 
 
We think of what’s going on in the Saskatoon school system 
and their co-operation on the trade side. We think of what’s 
going on at SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies]. You know, Mr. Chair, our government has 
increased funding to the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies by 48 per cent and the reason is, is because what 
they do works. They develop training programs that connect 
First Nations to employment. 
 
And so we would like the proceeds from this industry, from 
gaming, to be focused on greater engagement of First Nations in 
the economy. And we thought the best way to do that is if we 
were to focus the proceeds of gaming on education issues and 
employment issues — economic development, I would say. 
And, Mr. Chair, I would just ask the hon. member, what is his 
position? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, no MOU was provided to us until 
we made our position public, and the Premier knows this very 
well. If the Premier thinks that he conducted himself in an open 
and transparent manner with respect to this, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier and this government are dreaming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
CDCs fund a lot of good programs and initiatives within the 
community. I recently read a report from The Battlefords 
News-Optimist about the local CDC donating $50,000 to the 

hospital for three new infant warmers, which allows the hospital 
to comply with the neonatal resuscitation program. So it’s 
clearly important. 
 
And when we’re talking . . . When I was listing the different 
areas that CDCs dollars can be directed to, someone said, play 
hockey, as if that was a bad thing, Mr. Speaker. Well in a long 
winter on a First Nations in Saskatchewan, I think hockey’s a 
pretty healthy and pretty constructive thing for the youth 
on-reserve, so that they’re staying healthy. They’re staying 
active and directing their efforts in a positive way. So to have it 
constrained only to these items, Mr. Speaker, I see is a 
concerning thing. My question to the Premier: does he 
recognize the consequences of restricting the CDC dollars in the 
way that he wanted to? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we have no problems with 
the proceeds of the CDCs being used for hockey or sports, but 
truly first things first, Mr. Chairman, and there are a number of 
First Nations leaders who agree. First thing, education. Very 
first thing we should be . . . every nickel we can funnel to that. 
And you know, we’ve doubled the budget for JTF [joint task 
force] and we need to do more, but every other dollar we could 
find from the proceeds of gaming, education must be first. 
 
This is a 100-year, intractable problem in the province of 
Saskatchewan where such a large portion of our population is 
underengaged in the economy, and the province is poorer for it. 
We wouldn’t need the temporary foreign worker issue if we 
could fully engage First Nations people. We wouldn’t. This 
place would be better if we were to say, every single available 
resource of the government or of First Nations-run businesses 
like expanded gaming, if first and foremost we focused on 
education and economic development and yes, we’ll do sports 
and recreation, but first things first. 
 
[17:00] 
 
And what we were saying to the chief and what we said in our 
MOU wasn’t anything different than what we said in our plan 
for growth with respect to this issue. It’s going to be education 
and the economy. And I guess here we don’t agree. And this is 
a good debate to have, and I appreciate the fact that the member 
has raised it. His view is that we can continue the CDCs as they 
are and our view is, well it’s none of our business. That’ll 
happen if that’s what chiefs desire but we’ll continue to use 
whatever moral suasion we can to say, let’s focus more on the 
economy and let’s focus more on education. 
 
Mr. Chairman, here is what the chief of the FSIN said publicly 
with respect to what the member just said. The Leader of the 
Opposition just stood up and said, we didn’t get an MOU until 
after we went public. Well he knows it was described and 
shown to the deputy leader the weekend before, his deputy 
leader. He knows that. 
 
And here’s something else he knows and I know it as well. 
Here’s what Chief Bellegarde said February 11th, reported on 
CJME. He’s talking about the Leader of the Opposition. Yes, I 
was talking to him all weekend. In fact on Sunday I offered, can 
we meet with Premier Wall to clear the air, get on the same 



5344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

page? He said no. Do you want a copy of the MOU? This is the 
chief now saying what he said to the Leader of the Opposition. 
He asked the Leader of the Opposition, do you want a copy of 
the MOU? He said no. 
 
Why? Why would you say no, I don’t even want to look at the 
MOU? If you were concerned about these issues and you have 
the chief of the FSIN saying, we want to talk . . . He had called 
me. He said, would you talk to the Leader of the Opposition? I 
said, you bet I would. I’m here all weekend. 
 
The quote goes on to say, this is what the chief said, “That’s 
why I’m disheartened, and I’m really disappointed in what’s 
happened with this because we’re getting caught with a good 
opportunity. Again it’s not rushed.” That was the other concern 
we had heard from the New Democrats. The concern is, well 
this is going to be rushed. 
 
So I said on the weekend, Chief, you can let the NDP know if 
we want to take months to do this, we can. We can introduce 
the idea. We can talk about legislative changes in the fall. 
We’re serious about the possibilities of this particular deal, but 
we need unanimous consent of the House. And so if it’s more 
time they need, they can have it. He knows this to be true. 
 
And here’s the chief of the FSIN saying, I wanted to give him a 
copy of the MOU, and he said no. And then he stands in the 
House and calls it a secret deal. He calls a scrum and says this is 
a secret deal, as if this was never offered. Mr. Chairman, it goes 
against credibility to say these things. 
 
But with respect to CDCs and with respect to any of their 
proceeds, it will always be the position of the Government of 
Saskatchewan that recreation and other quality of life initiatives 
are important for all of us, First Nations and non-First Nations. 
But when it comes to this gap that we face in this province, this 
gap of opportunity for First Nations, our number one priority 
will be education and economic development and greater 
engagement for First Nations, and we’ll make no apology for it, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, the Premier talks about not being 
rushed. If the Premier was honestly wanting to sign the MOU, 
Mr. Speaker, he’s the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 
He could sign any MOU he wants, Mr. Speaker. He could bring 
forward the necessary legislation in the House and follow the 
proper open and transparent procedures, but that was not in his 
interest at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
During the most recent review of the gaming framework 
agreement, the government refused to change the formula for 
the casino revenue crossover. The crossover means this, Mr. 
Speaker, that the provincial government’s General Revenue 
Fund receives approximately $10 million more from SIGA 
casinos than the First Nations Trust receives from Sask Gaming 
casinos every year. 
 
So my question, Mr. Speaker: if the Premier, if he truly wants 
First Nations to have more resources for things like education, 
for things like employment and economic development, then 
why not address the crossover and allow SIGA to keep their 

profits and invest them in initiatives that would help First 
Nations people here in the province? Why won’t he address the 
crossover? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, that’s an 
interesting line of logic from the member on his preamble. He 
said with respect to this casino issue, he said, you should have 
just done the deal anyway. Why didn’t you just ignore me? 
That’s what he’s basically saying to members of the committee: 
just do whatever you want. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, we campaigned on the 
preservation of the Crown ownership protection Act. That Act 
was passed in this House unanimously when the Sask Party 
voted with the NDP. And I’ve said very publicly, in order for 
that Act to ever be changed short of a mandate from the people 
in a general election, we’d have to have another unanimous 
vote. 
 
So that’s why we reached out to the member. That’s why I met 
with the chief on the 21st of January, and on the 26th of January 
he brought the member into the deal, gave him the general 
concept of the deal. That’s why we furnished him with the 
details of the MOU prior to the weekend. That’s why, when 
they said this is not enough time, we reached out over the 
weekend through the chief, said Chief, let me know if we 
should talk on the phone. If it’s a time factor, we’ll give it to 
them. There’s no place to hide for the Leader of the Opposition 
on this issue because he knows there was nothing secret about 
it. He knew about it before most other members of the House. 
 
Secondly, he knows, he absolutely understands that if timeline 
was a factor the chief told him, at my request, that the 
government would work with and accommodate his concerns. 
These are the facts of the case, the facts of the case. 
 
The FSIN and Chief Bellegarde and his predecessors have done 
a good job of pointing out that they would like to see more 
revenue as a result of the agreement. It is an agreement that was 
struck, the principles of which set by the New Democratic 
government some time ago, the GFA. Mr. Chairman, we do try 
to respond to issues of the FSIN. We have not yet responded to 
their request for a bigger share, that’s true. And maybe again, if 
it’s . . . Maybe the position of the NDP should be stated for the 
record, if they agree with the FSIN. And fair enough, because 
it’s an ongoing dialogue we have. And I would ask again the 
Leader of the Opposition, say should we do that? I’d appreciate 
his advice. 
 
But we have moved in other areas. In this particular budget, we 
doubled the funding for the joint task force initiatives. Again 
these are some of the education initiatives that we’re finding 
bear results. So 3 million to $6 million there. Overall, Mr. 
Chair, we have $189 million in the government’s budget for 
First Nations and Métis initiatives. That’s a 2.4 per cent 
increase over last year. We have literacy camp funding, 
Community Literacy Fund. We have 1.2 million and 1 million 
in capital for 15 new pre-K [pre-kindergarten] spaces; 276 
million for supports for learning which go to support all of our 
vulnerable students, and obviously within that cohort you’d find 
First Nations and Métis people. 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5345 

Mr. Chairman, we know the issue of the split of the funding 
with respect to gaming proceeds is there. We’ve agreed to 
disagree to the extent, so far with the FSIN. If the Leader of the 
Opposition has some advice to the contrary, I would be very 
open to it. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In 2007 there were 
adjustments to the crossover which affected the percentages and 
the amounts, allowing SIGA to maintain more of its profits. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, this is something that should be 
revisited. 
 
The government has said no in the most recent review. They 
said no. It sounds as though the Premier maintains that position 
that they’re not open to addressing the crossover. I think it 
would be an important step to allow SIGA to maintain more of 
its profits and make the right investments into First Nations 
communities and into First Nations lives, for the people living 
now and for their grandchildren and for their 
great-grandchildren, Mr. Speaker. I do think that would be an 
appropriate move. It would require the right discussions for the 
speed and the extent to which the crossover would be corrected, 
Mr. Speaker, but I think that is something that is worthy of 
consideration and worthy of discussion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, moving or switching gears now to another topic, 
on the issue of seniors’ care we know, Mr. Speaker, that it was 
this government that scrapped the minimum care standard 
guarantee, a base level of care to each senior. It was their 
decision. But we haven’t received yet a decent explanation for 
that move. So my question, Mr. Chair, to the Premier: can the 
Premier explain why those regulations were scrapped instead of 
being strengthened? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank 
the member for the question. You know, early on, well 
throughout the first term of our government and then even into 
completion in the second term, we noted that the guidelines 
being used by the province of Saskatchewan were from the, I 
think the 1950s is what the minister has reported, when 
obviously the standard and quality of care for seniors was much 
lower than it is today just as a result of advancing time and 
improvements in approaches to care. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I note that the Leader of the Opposition 
has on many, many occasions stood up and again said, I think 
erroneously, that there’s no longer a minimum standard of care. 
Mr. Chairman, what we replaced those 1950s guidelines or 
standards with was something called the Program Guidelines 
for Special-care Homes dated April 2013, and so it’s 193 pages 
of guidelines. 
 
And let me just read from the introductory paragraph called the 
“Purpose of the Ministry of Health Special-care Home Program 
Guidelines Manual.” It says the following: 
 

. . . all Special-care Homes and other designated facilities 
that provide this care shall operate in accordance with the 
standards sets out in the Program Guidelines for 

Special-care Homes. 
 
That sounds like standards to me, Mr. Chairman. 
 

The standards set within this manual are considered 
minimum standards [sounds like minimum standards in the 
manual] and must be adhered to in publicly funded 
facilities that offer long-term care services to residents in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Chairman, the contents — 193 pages of these guidelines 
that constitute minimum standards. And in here is detailed 
information on the rights and responsibilities for those who are 
obviously patients, residents in special care homes: consents; 
access to service; type of care in terms of long-staying care; 
adult day programs; palliative care; respite care; convalescent 
care; rehabilitative care; night care; resident charges including, 
you know, what’s done with that with respect to residents; 
income security and assistance programs; the prescription drug 
plan; what are the policies with respect to personal belongings; 
power of attorney; research and education; resident trust 
accounts; safekeeping of valuables. 
 
There’s an assessment policy guideline in terms of what the 
assessment tools are being used for residences, Mr. Chairman. 
It goes on and on. We can go down the list. But to characterize 
the system as not having any minimum standards is just not 
correct. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, it’s very clear to Saskatchewan 
people that these guidelines are not working. We continue to 
hear, Mr. Speaker, stories of Saskatchewan families coming 
forward, talking about a quality of care that is not acceptable, 
that is not bringing dignity for their loved ones in a hospital 
setting, Mr. Speaker, in long-term care settings. 
 
When we have stories of individuals being forced to soil 
themselves because there’s no one there to help them to the 
bathroom, that shows the guidelines aren’t working, Mr. 
Speaker. We have instances where families have to hire private 
care providers to come into the hospital simply to ensure that 
their loved one has help with meals. That shows the guidelines 
are not working, Mr. Speaker. When we hear from individuals, 
I think of Don Gunderson, who came to the Assembly, who 
talked about visiting his wife and seeing her slumped over in 
her chair because there were not enough staff to stop in and to 
ensure that she was in a comfortable and appropriate position. 
That shows, Mr. Chair, that the guidelines are not working, that 
they’re inadequate. 
 
Now this government, Mr. Speaker, likes to talk about targets. 
And I think talking about targets and having targets is a good 
thing. That’s why I’m puzzled, Mr. Speaker. I’m puzzled why 
this government is so stubborn, so stubborn on the issue of 
seniors’ care. So my question, Mr. Chair, to the Premier: why 
not at least implement targets when it comes to minimum 
standards and staffing ratios? 
 
[17:15] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 



5346 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, any time there are incidents of 
neglect — obviously this is not something purposeful done by 
any of the front-line staff in the health care system — we take it 
very seriously because these are family members and these are 
loved ones. And, Mr. Chairman, we know we need to do better 
in the system. 
 
I would posit today that though we need to do more, we are 
doing better than the days when members opposite sat here 
because, Mr. Chairman — here’s the logic — roughly the same 
number of long-term care beds today in the province of 
Saskatchewan, roughly. We’re actually adding to them. We’re 
actually adding long-term care beds when members opposite 
closed them in government. But roughly the same today. And 
750 full-time equivalents in terms of providers, more health 
care providers in long-term care facilities. So although it’s not 
where we want it to be yet, we know then logically it is better 
than where it was. And we are going to continue making 
progress. 
 
Here are the facts of the matter for the member opposite. Since 
2007 full-time equivalents’ jobs have grown in all nurse 
categories. This is for long-term care staffing ratios. Licensed 
practical nurses, up 37.4 per cent under our government; 
registered nurses, up 9.3 per cent; care aides, up 9.4 per cent. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we know there is more work to do. But I would 
offer what the folks at the Wascana Rehab have offered about 
the continuum we’re on, the continuum of improvement, when 
we were offered this quote. Actually it’s a result of questions 
with respect to lean but relative to this issue. From the Wascana 
Rehab Centre: “Ten years ago, it was not at all unusual . . .” 
 

Ten years ago, it was not at all unusual for residents to be 
left in bed for the day at the Wascana Rehab Centre [this 
would have been under your system] when we were 
short-staffed. As part of our cultural shift journey, this no 
longer happens. 

 
My point is that we still have incidents that are unacceptable, 
but I would argue because we have now more staff, 
considerably more staff, 745 more long-term care front-line 
staff, we are in a better spot to deal with these issues than we 
were when we had members opposite that quite frankly talked 
about these things but they weren’t acting on them in terms of 
deploying more nurses, more care aides into the system. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, the Premier can talk about his 
cultural shift journey all he wants. But the fact of the matter is 
Saskatchewan seniors, Saskatchewan patients aren’t getting the 
quality of care that they deserve, and the Premier suggests as 
though somehow these are isolated incidents. They’re not. 
They’re happening throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re seeing examples time and time again of families who are 
suffering, families whose loved ones are not receiving the care 
that they need. The government’s record on this, Mr. Chair, is 
not something to brag about and something to boast about. 
 
When the Saskatoon Health Region put forward their urgent 
requests they identified to provide the type of care that they 
would want to provide, Mr. Chair, that they would need 450 

care aides. Now I recognize that would be a huge jump and an 
important, a big step, Mr. Speaker, but the health region, in a 
moderate way, scaled back what they asked for from the urgent 
request fund. They asked for 38, but even that was too much for 
this government, and they only gave 19 care aids. 
 
We have examples from the Heartland Health Region, Mr. 
Speaker, where they state that they struggle to deliver 2.5 hours 
of care per day. They’re struggling to meet that mark. So this 
government, instead of strengthening the standards, instead of 
setting good targets, what do they do? They water them down. 
They gut them, Mr. Speaker, and don’t have the right targets 
and the right standards there for seniors in the province. 
 
So my question again to the Premier, Mr. Chair: why scrap, 
why scrap the standards instead of strengthening them? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — We scrapped the standards because they 
were from 1950. That’s why we scrapped the standards. And 
they were inadequate. The question is, why in the world for 16 
years of NDP government didn’t they update the standards? 
Because the old ones have been scrapped, and we have 193 
pages of standards today that speak specifically to minimum 
care. That’s the fact of the matter. 
 
It is the surprising position of this new Leader of the NDP that 
we should be operating on 1950s guidelines because he keeps 
saying, why did you scrap the guidelines? I assume he thinks 
we should still have them. Because they’re not adequate on 
account of it was 1950, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We have updated those guidelines, and more to the point we 
have added care aids. He references that. We have added 
nurses, licensed practical nurses. We have added registered 
nurses to the long-term care system, 750 full-time equivalents. 
And we know, Mr. Chairman, there is more work that’s needed. 
We know we needed the emergent fund. The member will say 
it’s not enough. He won’t say how much is enough, but he’ll 
say it’s not enough. We’ve added that fund. 
 
We know we needed to rejuvenate some facilities. I think 
within about a year of us getting elected, we moved on 13 
long-term care facilities outside of our major centres that had 
been long neglected by the previous government. In fact, Mr. 
Chairman, the work of the government, the task of the 
government early on and remains so today was, the task was 
challenging and daunting because of the situation we found 
ourselves in after 16 years of New Democratic government. For 
example, in October 31st of 2013 in The StarPhoenix, the 
president of the council on aging had this to say: “The reason 
for the LTC bed capacity problem isn’t complex.” 
 
This is not the Sask Party. This is the council on aging. Here’s 
what it says: 
 

The reason for the LTC bed capacity problem isn’t 
complex. Saskatchewan stopped investing in new 
subsidized LTC starting in the mid-1990s. [Who was the 
Minister of Health around then?] Thus the number of beds 
and dollars for staff began to fall at just about the time the 
population of older adults and others who need LTC began 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5347 

increasing. 
 

StarPhoenix. Not a politician, the council on aging. 
 

The reason for the LTC bed capacity problem isn’t 
complex. Saskatchewan stopped investing in new 
subsidized LTC starting in the mid-1990s. [Actually what 
he could add is the NDP were closing beds.] Thus the 
number of beds and dollars for staff began to fall at just 
about the time the population of older adults and others 
who need LTC began increasing. 

 
So, Mr. Chairman, what we needed to do as a government early 
on was first of all reverse the process of bed closures to replace 
some very old facilities. We also sought to add some new beds 
in Saskatoon. We partnered with a faith-based organization, the 
Catholic Health Ministry, to add new beds, including a 
dementia unit in Saskatoon because we did have — inherited — 
this bed capacity problem. 
 
And what did the member say when I think you were the Health 
critic or the critic involved in the speeches? You were certainly 
supporting Ms. Atkinson at the time in a constant opposition to 
new health care beds delivered by the Catholic Health Ministry. 
And dare I say I think the reviews are in on that particular 
long-term care facility, and the residents there and their families 
would not agree with you, the NDP, or their opposition to that 
in the first place. 
 
So we have sought to increase the number of beds in the 
province, to rejuvenate LTC [long-term care] facilities. And 
more importantly, because we will not address this problem — 
and we’re not there yet — but we will not address it to the 
extent we need to unless we have obviously the complement of 
workers that we need, and that’s why there’s 745 more full-time 
equivalents, care aids, RNs [registered nurse], LPNs [licensed 
practical nurse] working specifically in long-term care now than 
when we took office in 2007. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, it’s interesting how the Premier 
leaves out the actions that occurred in government from ’82 to 
’91 and the conditions that were placed on the government 
following that because of the financial wreck that was left. 
Interesting how he conveniently leaves that out. 
 
And I wish, I wish, Mr. Chair, I wish, Mr. Chair, that the 
Premier would spend as much time focusing on the past 
decades as he would listening to the stories that we hear now, 
Mr. Speaker. I remember talking to one husband, and he talked 
about visiting his wife in the care facility, Mr. Speaker, and 
looking at her feet. And, Mr. Chair, her toenails had grown 
around. She had horrible foot care. It was not happening, the 
proper care that she needed. He talked about the dressings, Mr. 
Chair, that were not being changed as often as they should 
because of the chronic short-staffing. So I wish the Premier 
would spend as much time listening to those stories from 
Saskatchewan families as he does looking at the decades past. 
 
Mr. Chair, I want to talk about another issue that we’ve been 
discussing here on the floor of the Assembly, and that of course 
is the lean initiative clawback. School boards have raised 

significant concerns about the lean initiative clawback, about 
how they were surprised, told one thing on budget day and then 
received a very rude awakening in the weeks following. My 
question: how can the Premier defend the lean initiative 
clawback in our education system, especially at a time when the 
needs in the classroom are so great? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, it’s not a . . . We disagree 
with the school boards and their characterization of what this is. 
It is not a lean clawback. It is an efficiency target, and we make 
no apology for that. We’ve asked the health regions to do the 
same thing. 
 
We’ve provided significant increases in operating funds to the 
school boards since we came to office. And we want all of us, 
including the Government of Saskatchewan that has now over 
the life of our own FTE [full-time equivalent] initiative I think 
reduced the size of government by about 1,800, 1,900 full-time 
equivalents . . . We have sought efficiencies in government, 
remembering we have to provide service. But we’re not 
spending our money; we’re spending the taxpayers’ dollars. We 
want all of our funding partners in health care, the municipal 
level, and in education, we want them — especially the ones we 
direct fund, we fund all of it effectively — we want them to be 
finding efficiencies, a half of one per cent of operating, that’s 
what it is, on an increase of over 2 per cent. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 2007 to 2014 in terms of the budget this year, 
Saskatoon Public enrolment’s up 15.9 per cent. We increased 
their operating by 33.2 per cent. Regina Public enrolment’s up 
5.7 per cent. They got a 30.8 per cent increase in operating. 
Regina Catholic, their enrolment is up 7.5 per cent. The 
operating dollars are up 26.8 per cent from our government. 
Saskatoon Catholic enrolment’s up 12.2 per cent. Their 
operating dollars from the government is up 32.7 per cent. The 
Prairie Spirit enrolment is up 16.9 per cent. Their operating 
dollars are up 25.9 per cent. The Prairie Valley enrolment is 
down point two per cent. Their operating is up 17.7 per cent. 
 
We want our partners to be looking for efficiencies. We need to 
ensure that it’s sustainable for the long term. And where there 
are growth challenges, as we have done in the past in an 
unprecedented way, we will allocate dollars to that. In fact 
there’s those dollars in this particular budget for those schools 
that are facing enrolment pressures. 
 
[17:30] 
 
And by the way, a couple of pieces of good news here. The very 
significant increase in operating dollars to school boards, that’s 
one bit of good news. Here’s the other bit of good news: we 
have enrolment increases in the province of Saskatchewan. In 
fact in addition to operating increases, Mr. Chair, we’ve also 
seen significantly increased capital dollars both on the 
renovation and improvement side, which were neglected for 
years under the NDP, but also in terms of new schools. 
 
In fact, Mr. Chairman, just earlier today a number of colleagues 
were talking about the new bundling schools, a bundling project 
that will build a school in the hon. member’s riding — one that 
he opposes, by the way, for ideological reasons. 



5348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

Mr. Chair, the question, there’s lean in his question. One of the 
processes we’re using to properly design these schools is 
something called 3P [production preparation process] lean. We 
used it at the Moose Jaw Hospital. We used it at the children’s 
hospital. We used it at the long-term care facility in Swift 
Current. I was at the last 3P lean event. I encourage the member 
to come, and I say this earnestly. I encourage him to participate 
in this process with front-line staff who are excited to be 
involved in the design of facilities. 
 
Well the report back this morning is I think there’s a lot of 
encouragement on the part of education stakeholders who have 
been involved in the design of the new schools as a result of the 
3P lean process. And there’ll be more news about that in the 
future. 
 
But we hope that our friends across the way, and my friend, the 
Leader of the Opposition, will they sort of set aside these 
ideological objections to things because they’re not funded the 
right way? I hope he’ll take the approach that he took yesterday 
on the private involvement of the Regina bypass. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we appreciated the fact that he would. I’m sure 
there’s many in his party that would be upset with him, that he’s 
supporting this major P3 project. The private operation of a 
highway is involved in this. But he’s agreed that it’s the right 
thing through his critic who commentated on it. He agreed 
through the critic actually of Highways, who had basically read 
the statement from the minister right after the minister read it, 
ironically enough, but it was good because he supported it. 
 
So we’re going to continue to invest in education on the 
operating side. This is not a lean clawback. This is an efficiency 
target. There’s a precedent for it in health. We’re asking our 
school boards to be careful with their dollars obviously. We’re 
asking them to find efficiencies where they can. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, the Premier says it’s not a 
lean initiative clawback, but that’s very different from what the 
School Boards Association is saying. Here’s a letter from the 
president of the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association] to the minister. And here’s a quote from the 
second page: 
 

The new efficiency factor was the issue of concern raised 
most frequently by board members. In fact at the spring 
assembly, many trustees referred to the efficiency factor as 
the lean initiative clawback. 

 
The letter goes on to say: 
 

As an association, we had no forewarning of the 
introduction of the efficiency factor and were, like boards 
of education, taken by surprise. Lack of communication 
diminishes the trust relationship that education partners 
have worked so hard to build with the ministry. 

 
And it goes on, Mr. Chair. So the Premier and this government 
has explaining to do to the SSBA when it comes to their lean 
initiative clawback. 
 

I want, at this moment, to go back to an issue that we were 
discussing earlier on. When we were discussing the expenses 
related to the Co-Chair of the Social Services Appeal Board, the 
expenses that she has submitted and the taxpayers paid for, the 
Premier pledged earlier on that that information would be 
retrieved, and it would be provided here in the Assembly. Has 
that information been received yet in the Assembly? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the Opposition 
is fond of characterizing things he doesn’t support as secrets. 
And I just want him to know and all members of the committee 
and people watching the debate to know that we were first 
talking about efficiency targets for third parties in our growth 
plan which is right here. It’s page 57. It was a public document. 
It’s accessible to the member through the Internet, or he could 
get a copy if he’s interested. 
 
Mr. Chairman, here’s what we said in the growth plan in the fall 
of, I guess it was 2012 — 2012, that’s when we said this — that 
as a part of our move towards more smaller, more effective 
government, because that’s part of the vision of our 
government, we would: 
 

Develop a two-year plan to require third parties that 
receive significant provincial funding such as health 
regions, school boards, and post-secondary institutions to 
demonstrate financial efficiencies such as joint supply 
purchasing, shared back office services, LEAN initiatives, 
and workforce adjustment targets that can be directed 
towards supporting front-line services. 

 
We make no apologies for this, Mr. Chairman. We’re expecting 
that of ourselves in government, to reduce the size of 
government, to find efficiencies, to focus on the front line, to 
have less in administration in Social Services so we can have 90 
more child care workers, Mr. Chairman. That’s the principle 
that we’re asking all of our funding partners to pursue. And 
there’s going to be disagreement from time to time with those 
partners who would like more money. We understand that, but 
the funding increases have been unprecedented. We’ve given to 
school boards and municipalities and health care, and you bet, 
we’re asking all of us, all of our partners to do something about 
efficiencies. And we’ll make no apology for that, Mr. 
Chairman. I think that’s what our taxpayers in Saskatchewan 
deserve. 
 
I understand the NDP don’t support that, and that’s fair enough. 
It again makes for at least a contrast and a debate tonight. I said 
earlier tonight we would provide members the information 
when it’s available. I don’t have it yet. I can tell members of the 
committee we’ve determined there to be one temporary foreign 
worker in governments — that’s what we’ve determined — at 
crop insurance. And we believe the individual is an IT 
[information technology] worker. It was advertised extensively. 
The rules were followed for the temporary foreign worker 
program. That’s the report I’ve been given. The number is one. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, it is the president of the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association who’s saying that 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5349 

they were caught off guard. That’s who the Premier is mocking 
when they say about the issue of it being a surprise and about 
lack of communication. 
 
The letter, Mr. Chair, from Janet Ford, president of the SSBA, 
says, “We had no forewarning of the introduction. Lack of 
communication diminishes the trust relationship.” These are the 
words of an elected school board official representing the SSBA 
in the province. So the Premier should clearly listen about 
important educational stakeholders, elected trustees within our 
school system that are saying that they were caught off guard 
because of the lean initiative clawback. 
 
I appreciate the Premier’s response with respect to the little bit 
of information about the temporary foreign workers. The 
question, in particular, was about the expense claims for the 
Vice-Chair of the Social Services appeal board, the expense 
claims that she has put forward. Surely in the close to three 
hours that have passed, someone within the many people out in 
the ministry that are watching and listening could get that 
information, provide it to the Premier, so that he could share it 
with the Assembly. Is someone right now endeavouring to get 
that information? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised by the Minister 
of Education that individual boards were made aware of the 
request for efficiencies. We’re talking about point five per cent 
of the budget. And while there was not the interaction with the 
SSBA proper, individual boards were made aware of this well 
before the budget. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the issue of education’s been very important to 
our government since we had the good fortune to get elected in 
2007. And that’s why we have significantly increased the 
operating dollars to school boards. It’s why we’re now fixing up 
schools. There is a number of projects that were just waiting 
and neglected under the NDP. 
 
And there’s a bit of revisionism going on over there, because 
the NDP want to characterize the relative wealth and prosperity 
of the province and therefore the strength of the treasury as 
starting on 2007. But we know they were sitting on hundreds 
and hundreds of millions of dollars in their fund they had, cash. 
We actually asked it to be cash. Originally it was just an 
accounting entry and then it was cash. 
 
And so there was the chance for them to do something about 
long-term care facilities, but they didn’t. There was a chance for 
them to renovate some schools, but they didn’t. There was a 
chance that they could get ready for what might be coming in 
terms of growth, in terms of school capital, but nothing was 
done. When the NDP looked for efficiencies in the education 
sector, they closed schools, Mr. Chairman. That’s the NDP lean 
initiative — one a month — 176 schools since the change in 
government. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have announced 40 new schools, increased 
renovation capital, increased operating dollars to the education 
sector. And, Mr. Chairman, you bet we’re asking our education 
partners to find an efficiency, a half a point of operating. I guess 
the NDP are opposed to that. We think it’s important that we 

treat the taxpayers’ money with the respect it deserves and that 
means asking all of the partners who spend tax dollars to do so 
as effectively as possible and to be constantly vigilant about the 
opportunity for efficiency. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — [Inaudible interjection] . . . When the member 
from Arm River-Watrous is talking about potatoes, you know 
they’re scraping the bottom of the barrel with respect to their 
lines coming across the way. 
 
Mr. Chair, well the Premier clearly has some explaining to do to 
the president of the SSBA, who’s on a very different page than 
what was just provided. 
 
But that actually wasn’t what the question was at all. The 
question was, earlier on in the estimates, the Premier committed 
to providing the expense claims for the Vice-Chair of the Social 
Services Appeal Board. He said he was going to provide it. My 
question was, is it coming to the Assembly? Can it be tabled 
now at this time? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — When I have it, I’ll furnish it to the 
member. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, this government has an army of 
individuals that are working. Every office is staffed up. When 
Premier’s estimates are on, Mr. Speaker, everyone’s on call. 
Well actually the army is in the galleries apparently, and that’s 
why they can’t get any information this afternoon. But, Mr. 
Chair, this isn’t a hard piece of information to get. It’s not a 
hard piece of information to have pulled from a file and sent in. 
We’ve had nearly three hours. 
 
My question: why on earth, why on earth, Mr. Chair, did the 
Premier say that he was going to provide the expense claims for 
the Vice-Chair of the Social Services Appeal Board when he 
doesn’t have it now? Why did he say he was going to provide 
it? Where is it? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is the same. As 
soon as I have the information, the member will have the 
information. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Is someone trying to get it right now? We have 
time left on the clock. Where is this information? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the hard work of the people of 
Saskatchewan never stops, so I’d expect there would be people 
in government that are looking at this question and others that 
have been raised by the member opposite. 
 



5350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — When will the information be provided? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Chair: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Just as soon as it’s available to me. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, what is the Premier hiding? This is 
not a hard piece of information to get. It’s not. It’s an expense 
claim from a window of time for the Co-Chair of the Social 
Services Appeal Board. We talked about it at the beginning of 
estimates. There was a very clear commitment made by the 
Premier that the information would be provided to the 
Assembly, and in the hours that have passed, they have not been 
able to track this down. Will the Premier give a firm 
commitment of a time when it will be provided? It’s not a hard 
request. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I promise this. I promise the 
member will not have to wait as long as the people of 
Saskatchewan have had to wait for him to have a single policy 
on his website. I promise they will not have to wait as long as 
they have had to wait for the Leader of the NDP to have a 
definitive explanation of what smart growth is, or where he’s 
going to get all of the baskets and exactly what eggs will go into 
those baskets. They will not have to wait longer than they will 
for the NDP to get beyond the platitudes to offer something 
substantive to the people of the province who desire quality of 
life, who want to make sure we have an economy strong enough 
to reinvest into those quality of life measures. 
 
Who will speak out for rural Saskatchewan when agriculture 
has been stressed out by a commodity backlog, Mr. Chairman? 
They’re not going to have to wait that long. As soon as I have 
the information — I expect it’ll be very, very shortly, maybe 
within the next 15 minutes, maybe later this evening we can 
courier it over, Mr. Chairman — we’ll get that information over 
to the hon. Leader of the Opposition very, very soon. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[17:45] 
 
Mr. Broten: — It’s concerning, Mr. Speaker. We have an 
instance where the Minister of Social Services has said she did 
not have contact with her good friend who was the Chair, 
Vice-Chair . . . Co-Chair, pardon me, of the Social Services 
Appeal Board, that they had not discussed matters related. 
 
We have the minister herself saying, Mr. Chair, that it probably 
would be better not to have a close friend as the Co-Chair for 
the review committee, review board, that actually looks at the 
decisions made by the minister. And we have a reluctance, Mr. 
Chair, of this government to provide the information. We had a 

clear pledge that it would be provided. Despite the many, many 
individuals who are available to get that information and 
provide it to this Assembly, it has not occurred and it ought to 
do so very soon. 
 
Mr. Chair, there have been a number of concerns around 
TransformUS. We’ve heard a lot of concerns from faculty, from 
students, from staff, and the general public about TransformUS, 
about what it means for our province’s largest university and 
what it means for our province as a whole. People are especially 
concerned about the long-term ramifications of gutting colleges, 
eliminating specialized programs, and actually shrinking our 
province’s largest university. 
 
My question, Mr. Chair, is to the Premier: does he have any 
concerns with what is happening at the University of 
Saskatchewan through TransformUS? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that the 
expense piece is coming soon. There’s personal information, 
social insurance numbers, that sort of thing that need to be 
taken care of. But if he’s looking for some sort of smoking gun, 
did the Vice-Chair talk to the minister and expense the . . . The 
answer’s yes. They were talking about general issues. The 
minister wanted to consult with her about whether there should 
be just be one board, how many boards would be most effective 
for hearing. In fact, Mr. Chairman, I could tell you that the 
Minister of SLGA has confirmed that she talks to the chairman 
of the Gaming Authority, of SLGA. 
 
There was another example as well that escapes me at this 
moment, but it’ll come back to me a little bit later on, where 
Chairs appointed by the government . . . Cases are not discussed 
with Chairs, but policy advice is sought from them, as it would 
have been the case under the NDP. So we’ll find out the 
information about the half-day expense that occurred for that 
meeting. 
 
But if you’re wondering whether the meeting happened, 
absolutely it did. And if you’re wondering what was discussed, 
it was a general discussion about the number of boards, the 
efficacy of the appeal process. And that’s precisely what we 
want our ministers to be engaged with when we’re talking to 
Chairs of independent organizations. And I’d expect if you 
turned around and chatted with the member for Lakeview, he’d 
confirm that that kind of general policy discussion should 
happen with people that are qualified to serve in these positions. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to also, in answer to the member’s 
question, point out that over the life of our government, we’ve 
increased the operating budget at U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] by 65 per cent — 65 per cent. I think by every 
reasonable measure, even his . . . And he’s tough. He’s got 
some measures for our government that are difficult to reach; 
I’m not sure we have yet. But I think even a reasonable measure 
by the Leader of the Opposition would say a 65 per cent 
increase in operating — never mind the health sciences, never 
mind the first student residence in a generation there funded by 
the government, never mind all the capital — is very significant 
to the University of Saskatchewan. 
 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5351 

They have undertaken an initiative though for the long-term 
sustainability of that excellent institution. It’s called 
TransformUS as the member has highlighted. And no doubt it’s 
controversial, because they’re looking at difficult decisions 
about the future of the institution. They are an autonomous and 
independent and venerated institution of higher learning in this 
province, one of the finest that we have in the country. 
 
And we will accord them the independence they deserve to 
make these decisions — though they may be difficult, though 
some of them may be controversial — because I believe they’re 
making them in the long-term interests of that institution. And if 
the context and the background is a government that has 
supported that institution in unprecedented ways, 65 per cent 
increase in operating funds, I think we should give the 
university the latitude to make the decisions, to look at the 
future carefully, and ensure the sustainability of the University 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, there’s a big difference between 
ensuring the right questions are being asked, listening to the 
concerns that are being raised by respected academics, by staff, 
by students, there’s a big difference between listening to those 
and taking that action, Mr. Speaker, and giving entire carte 
blanche to what is going on and saying everything is fine. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, we need to ensure that the right questions are 
being asked and that there is confidence in the process and 
confidence in the outcomes. Because when we’re talking about 
the University of Saskatchewan, and I don’t question the 
minister’s commitment to the university in a general sense, Mr. 
Speaker, but when we’re making long-term decisions, we’re 
making long-term decisions about the well-being of the 
institution, about programs being gutted, about specialized 
programs being cut, about major layoffs, about many faculty 
leaving and wanting to leave, Mr. Chair, this is really important. 
And that’s why it’s necessary that the right questions are being 
asked. 
 
So beyond saying that everything is fine, everything is good to 
go, what is this government doing in order to ensure that the 
right questions are being asked and the long-term consequences 
are being evaluated? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, this is an independent 
institution. It gets a lot of public dollars to be sure, but the 
principle upon which our universities operate, I think a pretty 
solemn and important principle, is their independence. So I hear 
what the member’s saying. He’s saying, well ask them, I think 
you’re saying, ask questions. What questions? What would he 
suggest the government do? Because questions are going to lead 
to answers, and then does the government dictate and say, well 
we don’t accept that. You’re ending that program. We reject 
that. Is that where the member is coming from, that the 
government would get that involved? 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’re not going to do that. Our job is to ensure 
there are proper funds at the University of Saskatchewan — 65 
per cent increase in operating dollars since we took office. Our 

job is to build capital projects at the university that are needed 
like the health sciences centre, like student residences, Mr. 
Chairman. Our job is to get the innovation side of that 
university as strong as possible through our capital partnership 
with VIDO [Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization] and 
InterVac [international vaccine centre]. That’s our job. 
 
And then our job is to step back and respect the process that the 
university’s undertaking, knowing that it’s not going to be easy, 
knowing that they may take decisions with certain programs 
that maybe they’ve been there a long time. Maybe enrolment’s 
down. Maybe they just think they need to take a different 
direction. Maybe there’s consolidations that need to happen. 
Mr. Chairman, the Government of Saskatchewan are looking at 
those opportunities. We’ve asked our partners to do the same. 
 
I don’t think what serves either the university or the debate is 
. . . And I wasn’t here for it, Mr. Chairman, though I know the 
member likes to ask me questions when I’m not here, but I 
heard the questions; I heard the questions that he asked. He was 
quoting a professor to be sure, but he quoted Professor Howe. 
When Professor Howe — who walked away from the process, 
by the way, didn’t complete it — walked away, that’s his right 
to do so. And it’s also his right to express an opinion which 
went something like this, and the member paraphrased, “. . . 
that we might as well at the end of TransformUS rename the 
university Meewasin Valley community college.” 
 
A couple of things about that quote. There is derision and a 
pejorative nature about community colleges in that quote. That 
they would be said by any . . . but then repeated by the Leader 
of the Opposition. As we think, community or regional colleges 
are an important part, frankly they’re an important part of 
university extension in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s 
point number one. 
 
Point number two, if you’re going to quote someone like that, 
you should be willing to stand in this House, Mr. Chairman, any 
member should be willing to stand in this House and agree or 
disagree with the characterization. Does he believe that if the 
university goes through TransformUS and makes these tough 
decisions that it might as well be Meewasin Valley community 
college? And does he agree that to characterize it in that sort of 
a derisive sense is an insult to the regional colleges across this 
province? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, that’s an absolutely bizarre line of 
comments by the Premier. Absolutely bizarre, Mr. Chair. 
 
SIAST plays an important role in Saskatchewan. Community 
colleges play an important role in Saskatchewan. Our 
universities play an important role in the province. And they 
each have unique roles. But when we have respected people on 
campus, Mr. Chair, very respected people coming to us and 
sharing concerns about what is happening, I think that needs to 
be listened to. I think we need to listen to those concerns, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
We need to ensure . . . This isn’t just a few fringe individuals on 
campus who are voicing concerns. This is a large chunk of the 
faculty, of the students, and of the staff. And it simply can’t be 



5352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

dismissed. There needs to have the right time. There needs to be 
the right consultation with the university community, with the 
city, because this has implications. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I love the University of Saskatchewan. I went 
to the University of Saskatchewan. I hope my kids go to the 
University of Saskatchewan, sorry for any of the Regina 
members in the room. But I want the best for the campus, and 
that means asking the tough questions and not simply saying 
everything is fine. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’ve heard a lot of concerns about the Health Quality 
Council essentially being co-opted to serve as the provincial 
kaizen promotion office, with the mandate greatly changed, Mr. 
Chair. My question to the Premier: why was this decision 
made? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank the 
member for the question as well. I can say that obviously lean 
through the health system is about measurements. The Quality 
Council is also about measurements. So to that extent, they’re 
going to intersect. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, so we have the Health Quality 
Council delivering programming around lean and then also 
evaluating the program around lean. My question to the 
Premier: does he see no concern with the Health Quality 
Council doing both of those things at the same time? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I’m not sure I understand where the 
member is going. I think there might be another 
mischaracterization there that the Health Quality Council is 
somehow evaluating lean. Obviously the government’s doing 
that, together with the regions. The Health Quality Council’s 
very much about measurements in health care because we want 
to see improvement. 
 
I think there has been the retainer for some academics at the 
University of Saskatchewan to provide some input into lean to 
the Health Quality Council, but we’re comfortable there’s no 
conflict here. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, looking at the Health 
Quality’s very own data, the government’s own data, a number 
of concerning aspects that we see with respect to the state of 
health care and the delivery that patients are experiencing, we 
see from the Health Quality’s very own website that adverse 
events are up. Overall satisfaction of patients is down. The 
number of patients satisfied with their pain management is 
down. The mortality rate for major surgery is up, and the rate of 
infections has jumped.  
 
Yet when we see these concerns, Mr. Speaker, we actually have 
senior leadership from the Health Quality Council tweeting up a 
storm saying, “In ’04 at Virginia Mason reported 204 patient 

safety incidents per year, today 2,450, seen by many as a safety 
exemplar.” 
 
So now we have the Health Quality Council saying that a 1,100 
per cent increase in critical incidents is somehow a good thing, 
going from 204 critical incidents to 2,450 critical incidents is 
somehow a sign of success.  
 
My question to the Premier: how can he explain that logic, and 
should we brace ourselves for a 1,100 per cent increase in 
critical incidents in our care system? 
 
[18:00] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s the consensus, 
and certainly it’s been reported to me by the Minister of Health 
that the consensuses of health systems right around the world, 
and especially in North America, is that incidents have been 
under-reported. They’ve been under-reported historically for a 
very, very long time. And what we’re seeing for those health 
care institutions that are deploying lean — things like the 
stop-the-line safety check system that Virginia Mason for 
example is doing — they’re already reporting higher incidents 
because they are very much more diligently, in a front-line 
driven way, checking for incidents. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the same is true for things like the surgical 
safety checklist. Some common sense things, people would say, 
but things that never happened without this lean initiative to 
make sure that a proper checklist was considered before 
surgeries begin. There is a likelihood that where that’s 
happening as well incidents have gone up. I think in 2004, 
critical incidents in the system under the NDP, under the 
member for Lakeview when he was the Health minister, rose 60 
per cent. I don’t think that the system was falling down at that 
point. I think what we have seen over the last 10 years is 
improved reporting of the incidents, which is actually what we 
want to get to. 
 
In the meantime it, you know, causes question period fodder, 
and so it should. But we need to have the context here. The 
context is that incidents, critical incidents, are on the rise in 
health care systems around North America, around the world as 
health care systems get better and more vigilant about safety, 
about patient care. And that is coming to a degree in these 
systems because of lean or lean-like initiatives. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, so is the Premier actually arguing 
that there were 2,246 critical incidents that were kept a secret at 
Virginia Mason back in 2004? Because these are things like 
deaths, major falls, things that would be reported. Is that what 
he’s arguing? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — It’s an interesting question, Mr. Chairman. I 
mean, we’re not going to now try to forecast what the incidents 
might be or might not be, given these certain initiatives to 
ensure greater safety in the system or what they were in other 



May 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5353 

facilities. 
 
Safe to say that over the last little while, not just here but 
elsewhere in health care systems as we have these improved 
processes in place, the reports of critical incidents will increase. 
It doesn’t change the resolve of government to do something 
about it. That’s why we deploy more front-line staff. That’s 
why we’re using lean, frankly, to help solve some of the 
problems. It’s why we’re investing in health care capital. We’re 
not accepting of these critical incidents, but it’s important to 
note their numbers are likely to increase as we get better, as the 
system gets better at identifying them, reporting them, and 
doing something about them. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Dale Schattenkirk is a 
lean black belt consultant from right here in Regina. He doesn’t 
agree with the structure of the contract that this government has 
signed and thinks that it’s strange that this government is 
spending $40 million on the JBA [John Black and Associates] 
contract. And he questions the excessive use of Japanese 
terminology and questions why this government flies Japanese 
senseis from Japan to Saskatchewan.  
 
Mr. Chair, my question to the Premier: why did the government 
enter into this fat cash cow contract that is basically a licence to 
print money for the US consultant? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. There 
was a competitive process for the lean contract, Mr. Chair, and 
it was won by the contractor who’s currently being employed in 
the lean initiative across government. The individual the 
member quotes had an opportunity to bid. In fact he has got his 
start in lean I think because of the efforts of the former deputy 
minister of Health, currently deputy minister of lean, Dan 
Florizone, or at least been part of those initial teams. And so he 
also agrees that lean is important. 
 
And once again I will point out that we have saved more money 
than the lean contract costs, Mr. Chairman. More importantly, 
more importantly we have seen improvements in the system 
that directly affect the lives of patients. Distributing the wrong 
medication errors have been virtually eliminated because of 
lean. The mental health facility unit in Five Hills, from 17 to 
one per year. One is too many, but it used to be 17. Defects in 
blood work have been reduced by 35 per cent to zero at the 
Saskatoon Cancer Centre. Blood clot screening tools performed 
100 per cent of the time at St. Joe’s hospital in Estevan; it was 
previously only used 20 per cent of the time. 
 
There’s a long list of leaning out the appointment process so 
people aren’t languishing on a wait-list just to get a diagnosis. 
We know what it’s done in terms of blood inventory 
management. It’s why Manitoba is looking at lean. It’s why 
WestJet announced today that they’re going to lean out their 
system, and yes there is an application. Large organizations, 
commercial organizations that want to serve people will use 
lean. Large government organizations that want to better serve 
people will use lean. 
 

His NDP friends in Manitoba have understood this. The 
corporate sector has understood this. Leading hospitals that 
we’ve already talked about in the debate in the United States are 
using this. The money we’ve saved is greater than the cost of 
the contract. Care is being provided. And, Mr. Chairman, I 
think it’s probably why, in terms of issues raised this spring 
sitting, this particular issue has not actually made it much 
beyond the walls of the Legislative Assembly. There are 
concerns. We’re careful to monitor them. We want to improve 
the lean process. 
 
Well they should check with the people of the province. Check 
for those who are pretty happy about the blood work 
improvements at the Saskatoon Cancer Centre. Check for those 
who are pretty happy, including front-line workers, about a 
reduction in the distribution of the wrong medication, which 
was happening. These are all lean initiatives. We’re going to 
continue with the process that’s meant to find some efficiencies, 
but actually it’s meant to provide a better patient care 
experience in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There may be adjustments down the road. We’re listening to 
front-line workers. But we’ll not stop on this issue. We’ll not 
stop, Mr. Chairman, investing in human resources in health 
care, building new health care capital, and constantly seeking to 
improve care, albeit more efficiently in terms of health care in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — Seeing no members wishing to ask questions, 
we will now vote the estimates. (EX01), central management 
and services in the amount of 5,824,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. (EX07), Premier’s office in the amount 
of $600,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. (EX04), cabinet planning in the amount 
of $975,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX05), cabinet secretariat in 
the amount of 654,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Subvote (EX03), 
communications office in the amount of 3,342,000, is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX08), the House business 
and research in the amount of $442,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Subvote (EX06), members of 
Executive Council. That’s statutory, for information purposes 
only, $133,000. That’s not voted. 



5354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2014 

Subvote (EX10), intergovernmental affairs in the amount of 
4,587,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX11), francophone affairs in 
the amount of 784,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX12), Lieutenant 
Governor’s office in the amount of 684,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31st, 2015, the following sums for 
Executive Council, $17,892,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. There being no further business 
before the committee, I would invite a member to move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Before the committee adjourns I would invite 
the Premier and the Opposition Leader to make any closing 
comments that they may have. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thanks very much, Mr. Chair. Thanks 
for your work to preside over the committee today. We thank 
the Table officers and Pages who’ve been here for this evening. 
I thank the Leader of the Opposition for his questions and the 
debate we were able to have. And I especially want to thank the 
officials that assisted me tonight, this afternoon, and as well as 
the ministers who were very much engaged in assisting me with 
some of the questions that were offered up by the Leader of the 
Opposition. Mr. Chairman, this is an important process in the 
spring sitting, the Premier’s estimates, and we had an 
opportunity to discuss a number of important matters. And I do 
owe a debt of thanks to those officials and to my colleagues and 
to the member opposite for his questions. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ll add my word of 
thanks to you for your role in ensuring that the afternoon goes 
smoothly, thank the Premier for the responses that he provided, 
thank all members in the Assembly for their participation this 

afternoon either through the odd heckle or the odd word of 
advice perhaps, and thank all the officials that are here also 
serving in what they do. It’s a shame it’s only three hours. I’m 
told back in the day it used to go a lot longer. So with that, Mr. 
Chair, I wish everyone a good evening and once again thank 
everyone. 
 
The Chair: — The Committee of Finance is adjourned. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. It being past the hour of 5 
o’clock, this House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow 
morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 18:14.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5315 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 5315, 5316 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5315 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5316 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5316 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5316 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5316 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5316 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5316 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5316 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5316 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5317 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5317 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5317 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5317 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5317 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5318 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5318 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Day to End Bullying 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5318 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5318 
 Steps for Life Fundraiser 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5319 
 Nuit Blanche Arts Festival 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5319 
 Long-Term Care Facility Opens 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5319 
 Trades and Technology Centre Sod-Turning 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5320 
 Mental Health Awareness Week and Maternal Mental Health Day 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5320 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Health Care and the Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5320 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5320 
 Living Skills Program 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5322 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5322 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5323 
 Food Services in Corrections Facilities 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5323 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5323 
 Bill of Rights for Seniors’ Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5324 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5324 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5325 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5325 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5326 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5326 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


