




















































Hansard: November 04, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 8A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5705 

 November 4, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you, I’d like to introduce a good friend of mine seated 

in the west gallery, Mitch Graw. Mitch, you’d like to give us a 

wave up there. 

 

Mitch has been a friend of mine for many years, along with he 

and his parents. He’s a fourth-year student at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan], soon to graduate. Mitch is a 

tireless worker, Mr. Speaker. He is an excellent, very 

personable young man. And he worked last year in the building 

for Exec Council and got to know a lot of us then. We 

appreciated all his hard work he did, and we know that he’s a 

young man that’s got a very bright future ahead of him. I’d ask 

all members to join with me in welcoming him to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the legislature, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce some guests in your gallery. We have here today 

Carrie Klassen, Kevin Klassen, Lynne Seaborne, Don 

Gunderson, Verna Hauck, Rose Donovan, Bob Starkey, and 

Marie Starkey. These folks here are here today who recognize 

that this government’s drop-in-the-bucket approach last year did 

very little to solve the seniors’ care crisis here in this province. I 

just wanted to point out that Marie is a former care aid, and 

Marie and her husband, Bob, came all the way to Regina from 

Estevan to advocate for better seniors’ care. 

 

With that, I ask all my colleagues to join in welcoming these 

guests to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

House today, 19 grade 10 students from Melville 

Comprehensive. I’ll have the opportunity to meet with the 

students here a little bit later, and we’ll get our picture taken. 

They’re accompanied today by their teachers, Stuart Wilson and 

Brandon Needham. And I ask all members to welcome them to 

their legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member from Melville and briefly welcome these 

students. I met with them briefly as they came through the 

doors. 

 

But particularly I’d like to welcome my friend Stuart Wilson 

who is certainly a strong community leader, a great teacher, and 

also of course — she’s not here today — but his wife, Theresa 

Wilson, who’s a school board member for Christ the Teacher 

and a strong community leader in the region there as well. 

 

So I ask all members to welcome these students and these 

teachers to their Assembly. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce in the west gallery Ms. Beth Kidd who’s joining us in 

the Assembly today. Beth is the senior manager of external 

relations with AstraZeneca. And I know many of us will have a 

chance to chat with her later this evening at the reception being 

hosted by Canada’s research-based pharmaceutical companies. 

So welcome to your Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 

Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 

fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. 

 

And this is what a local political commentator had to say about 

this when the government allowed a private developer to default 

on a fixed-price contract. And I quote: 

 

It is the latest indication that [the] Premier . . . seems 

unwilling to do anything to displease business . . . even 

when he knows business is dead wrong and even if it 

means his government is failing on its promises to deliver 

low-income housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, essentially this allows government to let private 

developers back out of fixed-price contracts without any 

penalties and setting a dangerous precedent for this type of 

default. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 

in our province, and to immediately reverse its policy of 

now allowing private developers with whom the 

government has close relationships to, to default on 

fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 



5706 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

the unsafe conditions created by that government on Dewdney 

Avenue by their lack of planning of traffic and causing 

Dewdney Avenue to be inundated with dangerous heavy-haul 

trucks that quite simply shouldn’t be on Dewdney Avenue. 

They’re calling on that government to, of course, get those 

trucks off of Dewdney Avenue. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 

Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 

well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 

and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 

the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 

and be developed through consultation with the city of 

Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents in Regina. I 

so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ care in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. The folks who have signed this 

petition point out that families have spoken out about staff 

shortages resulting in a lack of staff to help their loved ones 

with basic needs while in care facilities; that this government 

has removed the regulations requiring a minimum standard of 

care for seniors; that the chronic understaffing in seniors’ care 

facilities resulted in unanswered calls for help, seniors being 

left unattended on toilets, and infrequent bathing for residents. 

These are just a few of the things that the folks have pointed 

out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 

improve the quality of seniors’ care, including creating 

more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 

standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 

home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ 

care facilities; restoring regulations that provide minimum 

standards of care; and providing more support to help 

seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 

as they deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks in Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to present a 

petition that condemns this government’s dangerous smart 

meter program. The undersigned residents want to bring to the 

attention of the Assembly the following: 

 

Whereas this government knew about major safety 

concerns related to its smart meter project; whereas the 

government ignored those safety concerns and plowed 

ahead with its program; and whereas the safety of 

Saskatchewan families was put at significant risk, the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

They respectfully request that this Legislative Assembly 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to take responsibility for its failure to act on 

readily available information about safety concerns with 

its smart meter program, including through the immediate 

resignation of the Minister Responsible for SaskPower, 

and a fully independent inquiry into the concerning chain 

of events that severely compromised the safety of 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the 

city of Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Remembering Sister Jean Leier 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to honour 

an outstanding citizen of Prince Albert, Sister Jean Leier, who 

sadly passed away on October 29th. A funeral service was held 

for her yesterday in Prince Albert. 

 

Sister Jean was born on March 30, 1939 in Mildred, 

Saskatchewan. She spent her early years with her family on 

their farm near Mildred. In 1960, she joined the Sisters of the 

Presentation of Mary. Sister Jean then spent her time teaching 

in Prince Albert as well as in The Pas and Laurier, Manitoba, 

eventually becoming the principal of St. Mark School in Prince 

Albert just prior to my attending in 1976-77. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sister Jean took on many roles in the community, 

most notably helping to open Marion Aquatics in 1977 and then 

managing the public pool until she recently fell ill. She will be 

remembered as a motherly figure who gave her love and time to 

the students she taught both in the classroom and in the water. 

Sister Jean will be remembered as firm but fair, also funny and 

kind. 

 

When Marion Aquatics faced financial challenges in 2012 

following a temporary closure, Sister Jean became the reluctant 

face of a fundraising campaign which saved the pool. Marion 

Aquatics and the service she lovingly provided to her church 

and the people of Prince Albert will be Sister Jean’s legacy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in honouring the 

great contributions Sister Jean made in her community and in 

offering condolences to her family and friends. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5707 

Saskatoon Tribal Council Vampire Gala 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 30th I 

had the pleasure to attend the Saskatoon Tribal Council’s 

Vampire Gala at TCU Place in Saskatoon. This event supports 

the Home Fires Foundation and the White Buffalo Youth 

Lodge. 

 

This was one of the best events I have ever been to. The hall 

was amazingly decorated. The food was great. The dancing and 

entertainment was fantastic. And it was most impressive to see 

so many people out to support such an important initiative. 

 

White Buffalo Youth Lodge is located in my constituency and 

the work they do to engage youth in the core neighbourhood is 

truly remarkable. They understand that connecting with young 

people requires a multi-faceted approach that provides 

academic, cultural, and spiritual support. Their vision for a city 

where everyone is able to prosper is one that I’m sure all 

members here can agree with. 

 

The Home Fires Foundation is an important project that has 

been started by the Saskatoon Tribal Council that seeks to 

improve the quality of life for children, youth, and families in 

Saskatoon. Their mission is to help families challenged by 

social and economic hardships and to make their own safe 

places, their own home fires. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in 

congratulating Tribal Chief Felix Thomas and Tribal Vice-chief 

Mark Arcand and all the staff and volunteers at the Saskatoon 

Tribal Council on their ghoulishly delightful gala, and thank 

them for all the great work they do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

2014 Hill Business Dinner 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 30th I, 

along with the members from Regina Northeast and South, had 

the pleasure of attending the Hill Business Dinner, the largest 

event with the Paul J. Hill School of Business at the University 

of Regina. With over 500 in attendance, the night attracts 

students, corporate representatives, faculty, alumni, and 

government leaders. This 41st annual event was filled with 

good food, socializing, as well as networking opportunities for 

students. 

 

Last week’s dinner sold out in only nine days and provided a 

great crowd for the keynote speaker, Donald Walker, CEO 

[chief executive officer] of Magna International. Also fitting for 

the business dinner’s theme, Road to Success, Don shared 

stories of perseverance within the business world, as well as the 

importance of a technical education. Don was also able to share 

his insights into the business side of the manufacturing sector, a 

sector where many of the students present could someday be 

employed. 

 

Yet even more importantly, opportunities such as the Hill 

Business Dinner brought together the current business leaders 

of the day with the future business leaders of tomorrow. Events 

such as this dinner allow students to meet with prospective 

employers and start to forge very important relationships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the students that are going to keep our 

economy moving forward and keep Saskatchewan strong for 

generations to come. I’d like all members to join me in 

congratulating the Paul J. Hill School of Business for their very 

successful 41st annual dinner, and look forward to seeing the 

students of today become the leaders of tomorrow. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Mendel Art Gallery Celebrates Golden Anniversary 

 

Ms. Sproule: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday I had 

the pleasure of attending the golden anniversary celebrations for 

the Mendel Art Gallery in Saskatoon. The theme for the 

evening was Bewitched, and indeed many magical memories 

were recalled and created. 

 

Gregory Burke, the executive director and CEO of both the 

Mendel Art Gallery and the Remai Modern Art Gallery, 

recognized the generosity and vision of the founders: “These 

founders and supporters include patron Fred Mendel and 

family, then mayor Sidney Buckwold, the city of Saskatoon, the 

Mendel Art Gallery Foundation, and many hundreds of board 

members, volunteers, staff, donors, and sponsors — and not 

least, artists — over five decades of the life of the gallery.” 

 

There was much excitement in the air with talk of the Remai 

Modern Art Gallery, the next step in Saskatoon’s commitment 

to a thriving public art scene. It will certainly be a crown jewel 

on Saskatoon’s lovely riverbank when it opens in 2016. 

 

The gala featured three homegrown Saskatoon musicians, Jon 

Ballantyne on jazz piano, Thomas Yu on classical piano, and 

my good friend, Karrnnel Sawitsky, on fiddle. 

 

I would like to congratulate organizers Darrell Bell and Ineke 

Knight and their outstanding committee for creating such a 

memorable event to pay homage to the important role the 

Mendel Art Gallery has played in Saskatoon’s history. 

 

Funds raised at the gala will support an exciting new annual 

lecture program at the Remai Modern. And of course a huge 

thank you to the patrons, both past and present, without whose 

generous philanthropy these important institutions would not 

exist, in particular Fred Mendel and Ellen Remai, who through 

their vision and generosity inspire all of us. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Better Together Food Drive 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Halloween 

night I had the opportunity to volunteer alongside the Moose 

Jaw Generals hockey team in the ninth annual Better Together 

food drive. More than 400 volunteers from across this city 



5708 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

worked for five hours on Friday night to collect, sort, package, 

and load food donations for the Moose Jaw and District Food 

Bank. 

 

This Halloween tradition in Moose Jaw is an important event, 

typically supplying 50 per cent of the food that the food bank 

will use in a year. Food collection from all areas of the city 

began at 6 p.m. and by 11 p.m. all of the food donations had 

been sorted, packaged, and loaded into semi-trailers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that this year’s food drive was 

once again a great success, collecting more than 54,000 pounds 

of food for the food bank. It is incredible how much the 

volunteers accomplished in such a short time. 

 

Organizers are already looking forward to next year’s food 

drive, and spokesperson Karen MacNaughton said, “That will 

be our 10th annual. So we should be celebrating 10 years of 

success and generosity in our city.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Better Together food drive is a great event 

which highlights the spirit of giving and the kindness of all 

Moose Javians. I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

donors, sponsors, and volunteers who made this year’s food 

drive another success. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Celebrating Seniors Volunteer Awards Banquet 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October the 

5th, I had the opportunity to bring greetings on behalf of the 

Minister of Health to the Celebrating Seniors Volunteer Awards 

Banquet hosted in Regina by the Saskatchewan Seniors 

Mechanism. 

 

The Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism plays a vital role in 

raising the profile of issues that are important to seniors in our 

province. The Celebrating Seniors Volunteer Awards celebrate 

the many positive contributions seniors make in our province 

and the dedication demonstrated by the many seniors who 

improve the overall quality of life in our communities through 

their volunteer efforts. 

 

Twenty-eight outstanding volunteers were nominated for 

awards in 10 different categories. Of particular significance to 

me was the nomination of Ms. Elsie Mironuck in the 

centenarian category. Ms. Mironuck was my principal at then 

Sherwood Elementary School in Regina, now Elsie Mironuck 

Elementary School. Mr. Speaker, aside from the children, no 

greater, no greater honour to an educator than to have a facility 

named for them. 

 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor presented pins to each of 

the award recipients. Following the awards reception and an 

excellent dinner, Jim Hopson, president and CEO of the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders, described the journey of 

transformation for the Saskatchewan Roughriders and how our 

Roughriders have become the pride of the CFL [Canadian 

Football League]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in recognizing the 

important work of the Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism and 

congratulating all of the award recipients. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Smart Meter Discussion 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] can’t seem to get any traction 

with the truth, so they have started to make stuff up. Yesterday 

they did it twice. First the Leader of the Opposition 

misrepresented what was said in the smart meter report. And 

then just a few minutes later, the NDP member for Nutana 

completely misrepresented what the minister said in committee. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition kept repeating the false claim that 

the government didn’t order the smart meters to be removed 

when it says right in the report, on page 40 and 41, that the 

government ordered the removal of the meters on July 30th. 

 

Then the member for Saskatoon Nutana quoted the minister as 

saying in committee that the smart meter project was “going 

quite well and running according to plan.” Mr. Speaker, as it 

turns out, the minister didn’t say either of those things. He 

didn’t say the project was going quite well. The CEO of 

SaskPower did. And the minister didn’t say the project was 

running according to plan. The chief financial officer of 

SaskPower said that. 

 

It kind of reminds me when their old leader, Dwain 

Lingenfelter, spliced together two clips of the Premier to create 

a completely made-up quote. Mr. Speaker, day after day we see 

an increasingly shrill, angry, and desperate opposition. And 

now they are even reverting to the same dishonest tactics that 

were so soundly rejected in the 2011 election. Mr. Speaker, they 

may have a different leader over there, but it’s the same old 

NDP. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Smart Meter Program 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the SaskPower 

minister was adamant that he did not know about safety 

concerns with smart meters. He said this over and over again, 

Mr. Speaker. Only after we brought out proof that he did know, 

Mr. Speaker, the minister admitted, yes, he did know. And 

actually he did know that they sent officials down to 

Philadelphia in 2012, Mr. Speaker, to investigate concerns. 

 

But the opposition and the media, Mr. Speaker, have had to 

drag out every bit of information from this minister. And 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier defended the minister for 

repeatedly saying he hadn’t heard anything about major safety 

concerns. The Premier said the minister was answering — get 

this — on a go-forward basis, so it was fine to completely 

neglect to mention what he actually knew. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is specifically for the Premier. What 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5709 

does it mean if the minister is now answering on a go-forward 

basis and that’s why he wasn’t forthcoming with what he knew? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I am so glad that the Leader of 

the Opposition has raised that scrum. That scrum was 

precipitated by questions he would have authorized from the 

critic, from the member for Nutana who stood up in the House 

and implied very clearly — and attributed, frankly, through that 

implication — a quote by the minister in committee, Mr. 

Speaker, to a question on the efficacy of the functioning of the 

smart meters. 

 

So we checked Hansard, as we should. Whenever these 

members say anything, you need to check the record. And 

here’s exactly what happened that day in committee. That 

member was asking a question actually about the budget for 

smart meters. The answer she quoted didn’t come from the 

minister at all. It came from Robert Watson, the president of the 

company who has since, Mr. Speaker, resigned as a result of the 

issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she knew, she knew very well that the minister 

didn’t say those things in the first place. Oh yes, she did. She 

also knew she was asking not about the efficacy of the 

functioning of the meters but whether it’s on budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we got these tactics from Dwain Lingenfelter in 

the past. We thought the era was over, Mr. Speaker. We thought 

that, given that there’s only nine of them over there, they would 

have learned. Obviously they haven’t learned a thing. Does the 

Leader of the Opposition find those kinds of Lingenfelter tactics 

acceptable today in the Legislative Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier was 

whether or not it is acceptable for ministers to answer on a 

go-forward basis, and is that the rationale that allows a minister 

to not be forthcoming with what he knows. Mr. Speaker, I 

wouldn’t expect that kind of behaviour from my toddler, let 

alone a minister of the Crown, let alone the Premier of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the minister have been hiding 

behind the difference between the 3.2 version of the meter and 

the 3.3 version of the meter. My question to the Premier: does 

he actually know the physical difference between those two 

versions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the House the 

member from Nutana said very carefully — she’s a lawyer, she 

would know what she could say and not say in terms of the 

rules of the House — she said, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I asked in committee for updates in 

how the smart meter program was going, [by the way, we 

know now that wasn’t her question] the answers I received 

included, “It’s going . . . [actually quite well.]” “The 

project is running to plan.” 

Her quote continues: “Not once did the minister bother to reveal 

that he was aware of major safety concerns with Sensus . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we checked the Hansard from that committee 

meeting. She never asked, she was never answered to those 

questions by the minister. The minister never said those words. 

The president of the Crown that has since resigned said those 

words, Mr. Speaker. Her inference of course is something 

different. She would like the public, she would like the media to 

believe — she didn’t hand out the Hansard — she and the 

Leader of the Opposition would like the media to believe that 

the minister said those things. He did not. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition would like to forget the opening 

to yesterday’s question period when he was caught doing 

exactly the same thing. Mr. Speaker, no wonder there’s nine of 

them over there. There are lots of questions to ask about smart 

meters without having to make them up on the other side of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Smart Meter Field Tests 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, time and time again that Minister 

Responsible for SaskPower has sat on his hands, has not told 

Saskatchewan people what he knows, has not told the media 

what he knows, Mr. Speaker. And the Premier now is covering 

up for the minister not telling the full story. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier was whether or not he 

actually knows the difference between the 3.2 and the 3.3 

versions. They’ve been hiding behind this fact. Well the fact of 

the matter is, Mr. Speaker, there is no physical difference 

between the 3.2 version and the 3.3 version. They are physically 

identical. 

 

PricewaterhouseCoopers’ report says the 3.2 version of the 

meters used in Philadelphia were “. . . identical to those used in 

the Hanley field test . . . physically identical to the meters 

eventually installed in the 105,000 Saskatchewan residences.” 

So the 3.2 version of the meter that was starting on fire in 

homes in Philadelphia, Mr. Speaker, was physically identical to 

the meters that this government installed on houses. 

 

 Now my question is for the Premier, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not 

asking for his bizarre, go-forward rationale explanations of 

what’s going on. I’m asking, Mr. Speaker, for the whole truth, 

and he knows it, Mr. Speaker. When did the Premier and the 

SaskPower minister know that the meters that were installed on 

the homes in Philadelphia that were lighting on fire were 

physically identical to the meters that they installed on 105,000 

Saskatchewan homes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the meters, 

according to the Pennsylvania media reports, the fires started in 

2012 in March. SaskPower became aware of the fires the first 

week of September through industry media coverage. 

 

The pilot in Hanley started in June of 2012, prior to 

SaskPower’s knowledge of the issues in Pennsylvania. The 



5710 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

meter installation was completed prior to September. 

SaskPower wrote to Sensus and sought assurances which they 

received with respect to that. 

 

The meters that the member opposite is referencing, Mr. 

Speaker, the manufacturer went on to add a device to detect hot 

sockets in the 3.3 version, model, which gave SaskPower 

further assurance that the manufacturer believed that the socket 

and other issues related to the meters had been addressed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the engineer’s report says that 

there were major flaws with the physical design of the Sensus 

3.3 meters, which again were physically identical to the 3.2 

version that the minister knew were catching on fire in 

Philadelphia. Now this is important, Mr. Speaker. The biggest 

flaw is that the meters were not properly sealed to keep 

moisture and dust out and there was no way for moisture to 

drain. 

 

The engineer’s report says, “. . . we are of the opinion that 

moisture and contaminants within the meter has been a major 

factor in the meter failures and ensuing fires.” But the level of 

due diligence, Mr. Speaker, has been so pathetically weak from 

this minister and from this government, Mr. Speaker, that they 

just took the manufacturer’s word that everything was fine. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: when did he 

learn that the meters installed on the homes in Philadelphia that 

were lighting on fire were physically identical to the meters that 

they were installing on 105,000 Saskatchewan homes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Hanley 

tests that were done, SaskPower removed the 3.2 meters earlier 

than they originally planned. It was always the plan to replace 

the 3.2 version with the 3.3 version. SaskPower pulled early 

because they heard of hot socket incidents from people. As a 

result, SaskPower’s due diligence, they removed and tested the 

meters from Hanley. 

 

Those meters were certified, reached industry standards, and 

also survived a tornado in July. There were no issues with the 

meters tested, which gave SaskPower confidence that the PECO 

incident was a hot socket and not the meter itself. SaskPower 

went one step further, Mr. Speaker, and sought written 

assurances from Sensus with respect to the meters. The 

manufacturer, Mr. Speaker, added a hot socket device to ensure 

that they were safe, Mr. Speaker, and that was the best advice 

that was given at the time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, once again this minister does not 

have his facts straight and is not actually saying what the 

concern is here. Here’s the report, Mr. Speaker, from the 

engineers: “. . . we are of the opinion that moisture and 

contaminants within the meter has been a major factor in the 

meter failures and ensuing fires.” And yet, Mr. Speaker, this 

government installed the physically identical meters from the 

Philadelphia experience here in Saskatchewan. 

[14:00] 

 

On October 10th, 2012, the Philadelphia Electric Company 

announced it was abandoning Sensus entirely and going with 

meters from Swiss company Landis+Gyr instead. Clearly 

PECO in Philadelphia knew there were major problems with the 

Sensus meters so, Mr. Speaker, they listened to advice. They 

asked the right questions, and they switched meters to a 

completely different company. 

 

You’d think, Mr. Speaker, that would have been a wake-up call 

to this minister. You’d think he would have turned on his brain 

and started asking some questions that needed to be asked, Mr. 

Speaker. This government actually sent a delegation to 

Philadelphia to look into the problems that they were 

experiencing. 

 

My specific question to the Premier, and again I’m not asking 

for his go-forward analysis here, whatever that means. I’m 

asking for the whole truth. When did the Premier and the 

SaskPower minister learn that PECO had completely abandoned 

Sensus? When did they learn that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the incidents that the member 

references took place in 2012. SaskPower became aware of 

those concerns in 2012 in September. The pilot project for 

Hanley started in June of 2012, and the meter installation was 

completed prior to September. SaskPower wrote to Sensus and 

got written assurances from them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskPower pulled the meters early because of the 

hot socket incidents that were reported by PECO and, as part of 

that due diligence, they removed and tested the meters from 

Hanley. The meters had been certified. They had reached 

industry standards, and they had survived also a tornado, with 

respect to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They were judged to have no incidents, no issues with the 

meters that were tested. And as a result of that, SaskPower 

moved forward in an appropriate manner. They also then 

received assurances that there was a device had been added to 

the 3.3 model that gave SaskPower further assurance, Mr. 

Speaker, that the manufacturer believed it to be a socket issue 

and not a meter issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister sends officials 

down to Philadelphia to look into fires, when he’s been briefed 

on this in 2012, when he knows there are concerns, you think he 

would ask some tough questions. You think he would be 

concerned, Mr. Speaker, that the meters they’re installing in 

105,000 homes are physically identical to the meters in 

Philadelphia starting the fires. 

 

According to PricewaterhouseCoopers’ report, SaskPower 

actually started testing Landis+Gyr meters as an alternative 

supply. And that started in October 2012, exactly around the 

time that PECO completely abandoned Sensus and went with 

the Landis+Gyr meters instead. But for some reason, Mr. 

Speaker, this minister, this government just took the 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5711 

manufacturer at its word, saying everything was fine. 

 

The government knew the meters were dangerous, and they 

installed them on 105,000 homes here in Saskatchewan. Again, 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier, and I’m asking for 

whole truth, not the go-forward rationale that he has now 

condoned coming from that minister, which is a shocking new 

precedent from this government: why did the government start 

testing the meters in October 2012? And why did it ultimately 

choose to stick with the Sensus meters, knowing that they were 

physically identical to the meters that caused problems in 

Philadelphia? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve 

answered this question twice just previously with respect to 

this. The meters, while they may be physically identical, the 

meters also had a device that was added to them to detect hot 

sockets, Mr. Speaker, which gave SaskPower further assurance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the members opposite want to try 

and twist this to somehow suggest that the Government of 

Saskatchewan sent people down to Philadelphia, when indeed 

the government didn’t at all. SaskPower officials sent people 

down to take a look at that, and they also received all of the 

assurances that they required to make sure that they were 

comfortable going forward. And that’s exactly what they did 

and that’s exactly what happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, can the Premier please 

explain what role the Minister for SaskPower had in choosing 

and selecting the Hanley field test location? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it would be based on the 

advice that SaskPower would give with respect to any testing 

program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the 

Premier, not to the minister. In June 2012 that government 

announced that Hanley was chosen as the location for the smart 

meter field test. According to PricewaterhouseCoopers’ report, 

“Hanley was selected over the locations initially proposed and 

was decided with ministerial input.” I repeat, ministerial input. 

 

The Premier shouldn’t answer this on this new go-forward-basis 

nonsense that he’s evading accountability on. He should be 

providing the whole truth. Can the Premier please explain why 

there was ministerial input on the selection of Hanley for the 

smart meter field test in which this government strapped 

dangerous smart meters on the homes of Saskatchewan 

families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, any time that the officials 

from SaskPower would come forward with recommendations 

around anything related to smart meters, whether it be options 

about test locations or any of those kinds of things, we would 

simply expect and be advised by the SaskPower officials as to 

what their best view of where these tests should take place. Mr. 

Speaker, that would be exactly what would happen. Then we 

would take a look at the information based on it and we would 

approve it, based on the fact that SaskPower officials were clear 

in their test facilities and clear in terms of making the 

recommendation to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not asking 

hypothetical questions and we’re getting hypothetical answers 

from the minister. We’re asking, what actually happened, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

It’s clear from the report that the choice of Hanley was chosen 

with the minister’s input. That’s what it says in the report. So 

when you have the SaskPower minister rejecting proposed 

locations and actually selecting the current field location, or 

what was the field location, it’s pretty clear that that minister’s 

fingerprints have been all over this from the get-go. 

 

Again, this Premier shouldn’t be answering this in his new 

evade-accountability, go-forward basis. He should be providing 

the whole truth. Can the Premier tell us what other locations 

were recommended and why did the minister overrule those 

locations in favour of Hanley? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when asked that question 

about a . . . It’s interesting. The member opposite when he’s 

asked questions that he would consider to be of a technical 

nature he said, those questions should not be answered by a 

politician. But when the shoe is on the other foot, when you 

apply a different standard that the NDP always want to apply in 

these situations, Mr. Speaker, when they want to apply a 

different standard, it’s a totally different situation. It’s not how 

they would do it, it’s how someone else would do it based on 

the advice of officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan, based on the 

information always provided by SaskPower, always made the 

same decisions based on that information, which was to go 

forward, which was always the recommendation given by 

SaskPower. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question to the minister was pretty 

straightforward. No answer. But we know in June 2012 the 

SaskPower minister was so hands-on on this smart meter file 

that he overruled initial proposals for the field test location, and 

the minister selected Hanley. But when physically identical 

smart meters were lighting on fire in Philadelphia and when a 

Philadelphia electrical company was scrapping its deal with 

Sensus and going with a different smart meter manufacturer 

instead, and providing direct warnings to Saskatchewan, the 

minister was nowhere to be found. It doesn’t make sense and 

it’s not believable. 



5712 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

To the Premier: how is it acceptable that that minister was so 

engaged on the selection of Hanley as a field test location, but 

was entirely negligent when he learned of major safety concerns 

with the meters he was strapping to hundreds of thousands of 

peoples’ homes all across Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Hanley tests 

were judged by the SaskPower officials to be successful for a 

number of reasons. The meters had been reporting the hourly 

readings by 90.4 per cent of the time. Mr. Speaker, there were 

220 times when a meter didn’t respond to a reading given in a 

given day. Out of a possible 28,654 meter days, that’s over a 

99.2 per cent achievement. And of course that was the reason, 

Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower was again recommending to the 

Government of Saskatchewan to go forward with respect to any 

kind of program around smart meters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that information would be provided to the 

government of the day. The government of the day would 

simply take a look at that information, act upon the 

recommendation by SaskPower officials, and move forward, 

which of course is exactly what they did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Provision of Care for Seniors 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Last week, a continuing care aid in Saskatoon 

wrote that seniors in care were still “Missing baths for up to 

three weeks in a row.” No bath, Mr. Speaker, for three weeks in 

a row. That is completely unacceptable, and it’s time for this 

government to take that seriously. To the minister: how can he 

explain that seniors are still missing baths for up to three weeks 

in a row? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m aware of a facility of Saskatoon for a two-week 

period of time where there were issues with trying to fill some 

staffing positions because of some sick time that was taken by 

some of the existing staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were accommodations that were made to 

residents who did miss their regular scheduled bath either to be 

given a different date for their bath during that two-week 

period. As well, Mr. Speaker, the staff has informed the 

ministry, the ministry has informed me that during that period 

when there were regularly scheduled baths that were missing, 

that a sponge bath was provided each day, morning and night, 

for every single one of those residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are striving to provide better care for residents 

within long-term care facilities in this province. I think the 

public will know that over the last seven years, over 700 

full-time equivalent positions in long-term care alone have been 

provided. The funding has been provided for this government, 

and we’re also embarking on renewing the existing facilities 

across this province, 15 long-term care facilities either in 

planning or already built by this government. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this minister can pretend that 

this is an isolated incident, but we know this is widespread 

across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here is what James Ford, the continuing care aid from 

Saskatoon says, “If the government is actually serious about 

seniors’ care in Saskatchewan, it must immediately solve this 

embarrassing problem. Allowing seniors to spend weeks lying 

in filth is a grotesque human rights abuse.” Carrie Klassen and 

the others who have joined us today agree with that. 

 

This government has no end of money for its toxic lean pet 

project: $40 million for one American lean consultant, $3,500 

per day for each Japanese sensei, $2,000 for travel for each 

Japanese sensei, $600 per day for each Japanese interpreter. But 

this government is completely neglecting the most basic aspects 

of seniors’ care. 

 

To the minister: does he think it’s acceptable for seniors to 

spend weeks at a time lying in filth, yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the public will know that in terms of the investments 

that we’ve made in long-term care over the last seven years, 

certainly we have moved forward with replacing 15 facilities 

across this province. Nearly 10 per cent of the long-term care 

facilities in this province have either been replaced or are 

currently under construction to be replaced. 

 

We’ve also invested dollars to the point where, despite the fact 

that the number of long-term care beds have remained fairly 

static over that seven-year period, 437 care aids have been 

hired, full-time equivalent positions; 195 LPNs [licensed 

practical nurses]; and 113 RNs [registered nurses], Mr. Speaker. 

There is no doubt that this government has invested to the point 

where over 700 more full-time equivalents are providing care 

for the same number of residents within the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also ensuring that we are investing $10 

million in one-time dollars, 700 pieces of equipment, into 

long-term care that will go straight to providing additional care 

as well as additional training for those staff members, Mr. 

Speaker — a far cry from what the NDP proposed for long-term 

care when they were in government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — This government’s approach to seniors’ care 

is absolutely appalling, Mr. Speaker. In the Throne Speech, 

there was nothing new for seniors’ care — problem solved. 

Instead this government just patted itself on the back, talked 

about its grossly inadequate one-time payment fund from last 

year, and pretended that all is well. 

 

When residents, families, and front-line staff are telling us that 

seniors are still not getting baths for weeks at a time, that 

they’re lying in filth, that their basic needs are being neglected 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5713 

because of short staffing, that should be a wake-up call for this 

government, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: how many concerns 

does this government need to hear before it will finally stop 

neglecting the basics in seniors’ care? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, one only has 

to refer to a letter to the editor that was drafted a year ago by the 

Saskatchewan Council on Aging and Age-Friendly Saskatoon 

where they say — and I quote, and I wish the members would 

acknowledge this — I quote: 

 

The reason for the LTC bed capacity problem isn’t 

complex. Saskatchewan stopped investing in new 

subsidized LTC starting in the mid-1990s. Thus the 

number of beds and dollars for staff began to fall at just 

about the time the population of older adults and others . . . 

began increasing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the solution for seniors’ care in this province 

under the NDP was this: they closed 19 long-term care 

facilities. They closed 1,200 beds in this province, and they 

proposed to radically jack up the rate that seniors would pay in 

this province to the point where seniors would have to go on 

welfare because they wouldn’t be able to afford senior care. 

That’s seniors’ care under the NDP, not under this government. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Cancellation of Reception 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to 

announce that the reception for Ron Kruzeniski has been 

cancelled today. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 32 through 41. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 32 through 41. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Tochor, seconded by Mr. 

Lawrence.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon following question period to enter into this debate, a 

debate, as the Clerk pointed out, which has been going on for a 

few days here in the Assembly. And over the course of the 

days, Mr. Speaker, I’ve appreciated the chance to hear from 

quite a few of the members. 

 

Not surprisingly, I’ve especially appreciated the comments 

from members of our caucus on the New Democratic side, in 

hearing their views on the Throne Speech, but more importantly 

than that, hearing how they view the Throne Speech through the 

lens of their constituents, through the concerns and the priorities 

that they have for the people that they represent, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think that’s an important way for us all to approach the 

Throne Speech on this occasion as we consider the aspects to it. 

 

And I’ll have to say, Mr. Speaker, it was a fairly stark contrast 

between the approach that we saw with members on our 

opposition side with the approach that we saw with government 

members in how they addressed the Throne Speech. You know, 

when we heard the speeches and the comments coming from 

government members, there was some consistent patterns that 

we saw through their words and through their viewpoints. We 

saw a whole lot of looking backwards, you know, a whole lot of 

time, Mr. Speaker, spent in the past. 

 

We saw a lot of hyperpartisan and overly ideological 

viewpoints brought forward . . . and arguments. And we also 

saw, Mr. Speaker, a real obsession, a real obsession with talking 

about us, which I think is an interesting approach that the 

members have. You know, I guess it’s fine if members opposite 

want to spend and chew up the clock and use their time to be 

talking about the opposition for the lion’s share of their 

speeches. I suppose that’s their right. But on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, we will stay focused on what matters to 

Saskatchewan people. We will stay focused on what matters to 

constituents. We will stay focused on what really counts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into some of the comments 

specifically around the Throne Speech, I do want to provide a 

few thanks yous. In this business of politics, we rely on a whole 

lot of people to support us, a whole lot of people to give 

encouragement, to give advice. And that of course is very true 

in all of our situations, but I want to express that personally. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank my team of MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly]. Any observer to the 

Assembly could know that we’re a small team at present, but 

I’m incredibly proud of our team. I’m incredibly proud of their 

dedication, of their commitment to the issues and their ability to 

work together and their support. So I thank all of the opposition 

members of the caucus. 

 

I also want to thank our staff in the caucus office who work 

tremendously hard and do a great job of supporting us. I want to 

thank our staff in our constituency offices who keep the fires 

burning at home and take care of the needs of our constituents 

and ensure that we’re plugged in to what is going on. And I 

want to thank the folks that also work in party office that work 

hard to do the parts and activities that all parties need to have 

done. I want to thank them for that, thank them for their service 

and their commitment to this province. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, I absolutely want to thank the good 



5714 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

people of Saskatoon Massey Place. It’s a true honour to serve 

them, and I’m always appreciative of the interactions that we 

have, whether it’s in the park or the grocery store or around the 

city. I want to thank the constituents of Saskatoon Massey Place 

for the true honour to be able to serve them here in this House. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, want to thank my family, especially Ruth 

and my daughters, Ingrid, Clara, and Gudrun, my parents and 

my in-laws and all of our families for their unwavering support 

in allowing us to do what we do. Ruth and the girls were down 

for the Throne Speech and it was great to have them here in the 

office and around the building. It throws a little bit of a wrench 

into the gears with proceedings, but it’s a real pleasure to have 

them here. 

 

From time to time when they’re at home, my four-year-old, you 

know, if the TV is on, will sometimes ask to see the legislature 

channel as I’m sure members on both sides of the House can 

relate to when kids are younger and want to see dad or see 

mom. My four-year-old is interested now and then and will 

watch it for a little bit, but I have to confess the last time the 

legislature channel was on, it took about a minute and then 

Clara said she wanted the channel changed to Bubble Guppies 

in short order. So I won’t divulge, Mr. Speaker, which member 

of the House was speaking when that request came in. But I will 

say, on the off chance that the girls are watching — I guess it’s 

close to nap time or quiet time — but on the off chance that 

they are watching now, it’s of course fine to change the channel 

now to something that might be a little more interesting to them 

at this point in life. 

 

The Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to stand and 

talk about this government’s Throne Speech because in a lot of 

ways, Mr. Speaker, it’s almost as though we didn’t have a 

Throne Speech from this government. And I think a big part of 

that is simply how vacuous the government’s Throne Speech 

actually was. Now that’s definitely a big part of it, that there 

wasn’t a whole lot of meat on the bones, and there weren’t a 

whole lot of bones, to be perfectly frank. 

 

But an even bigger part, I think, in the lack of attention that 

there has been around the Throne Speech is that it hasn’t been 

the issue or the topic that Saskatchewan people are talking 

about. Increasingly, Mr. Speaker, what Saskatchewan people 

are concerned about and talking about are the scandals that we 

see coming out from this government and from its Premier and 

from these ministers. And that’s what’s dominated our 

discussion, Mr. Speaker, here in the Assembly, and it’s what 

dominates the discussion outside of this Assembly as well. 

 

And we can think of this government’s unreal fascination that it 

has with its lean pet project, that it is spending $40 million on 

one US [United States] consultant. It’s $3,500 per day for 

Japanese senseis that it continues to be determined to fly from 

Japan to Saskatchewan to go into hospitals. But, Mr. Speaker, 

as the minister has sort of explained from time to time, the 

senseis just can’t do their job because they don’t speak English, 

so now this government’s actually recruiting Japanese 

translators as well to allow the senseis to do their job, and those 

translators of course are paid $600 per day. 

 

And what’s fascinating to me and what’s puzzling to 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, is this government’s 

obsession and determination to go down this path with the 

contract with John Black and Associates in the face, in the face 

of evidence that continues to build day after day after day. 

 

At first, Mr. Speaker, it was the front-line health care workers 

that said, you know, I’m not being respected. My opinion isn’t 

being taken into consideration. This isn’t helping the work 

climate, and it’s not helping me provide better patient care. And 

then, Mr. Speaker, we have the facts from the Health Quality 

Council who said, if you look at the facts of the important 

indicators like mortality rates, infection rates, patient 

satisfaction, those are all going in the wrong direction at the 

same time as we’ve seen the wholehearted obsession with the 

lean pet project through JBA [John Black and Associates]. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, more recently we have actually had 

criticism from some of the senior administrators within our 

health system, VPs [vice-president] from the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region giving comments saying that it 

would actually be an improvement to get out of the JBA 

contract, saying that the only problem with getting out of the 

JBA contract would be the concern around optics. 

 

It’s unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, that in the face of all that 

evidence, in the face of what health care workers are saying, 

senior administrators are saying, the evidence is saying, that 

they are plowing ahead and continuing to pay that US 

consultant $40 million. 

 

So we have the lean scandal and the unhealthy obsession that 

we have from this government with it. And we’ve also 

discussed extensively in this House and throughout the 

province, and this really has taken the place of discussing a 

vacuous Throne Speech, is this government’s failed smart meter 

project. 

 

This isn’t, Mr. Speaker, simply a business deal gone horribly 

wrong but it is a situation, as we have seen in question period 

by pulling the facts out, painful piece by painful piece out of 

that government, we see that this is an instance of the 

government knowing that smart meters were dangerous, 

knowing that there were problems, being warned of those 

problems. The minister knew about them in briefings. The 

minister knew that officials were down in Philadelphia looking 

into problems. But we see them going ahead and putting those 

dangerous smart meters, smart meters that were physically 

identical to the meters in Philadelphia, we see them strapping 

them to the homes of 105,000 Saskatchewan families. That is 

unbelievable. It’s not acceptable. 

 

And for the defence that we have seen from the Premier, the 

Minister Responsible for SaskPower, the Premier yesterday, 

Mr. Speaker, when asked why the minister hadn’t been 

forthcoming with the facts, he said, oh well the minister was 

answering on a go-forward basis, a go-forward basis. So it 

doesn’t . . . therefore meaning it’s okay that he withheld 

information. It’s okay he didn’t tell us everything he knew. It’s 

okay that he didn’t admit to a briefing in 2012 until it was 

proven that he had had one. It’s okay that he didn’t talk about a 

briefing note until it was unearthed that there actually was a 

briefing note going back to 2012. It’s okay because he was 

looking forward. Mr. Speaker, what an absolutely unacceptable 

and offensive position for this Premier to take, for this 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5715 

government to take when what they should be doing is 

providing proper transparency and the Premier should be 

ensuring proper accountability to the people of this province by 

firing the Minister Responsible for SaskPower. 

 

So it’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, that in many ways the 

Throne Speech really has been mostly a flop because the issues 

that people care about, the issues that really matter weren’t 

addressed in the Throne Speech, and that is the disconnect that 

we see from this government and what families in 

Saskatchewan are actually facing. Increasingly we see actions 

from this government, Mr. Speaker, that show that it is 

increasingly working for the select few instead of everyone. 

And I think this Throne Speech also demonstrates that they’re 

not listening to Saskatchewan people. And on point after point, 

this Throne Speech really does miss the mark on the things that 

matter most to Saskatchewan families. 

 

Here are some of the things that I’ve heard that Saskatchewan 

people wanted to see in the Throne Speech and people in 

Saskatchewan are most concerned about. We wanted to see, Mr. 

Speaker, we wanted to see this government scrap the cash cow 

contract that it has with the American lean consultant, John 

Black and Associates, and put those dollars into the front lines 

of health care. That’s what workers want. That’s what family 

advocates like those who joined us in the gallery today want, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s simply the right thing to do. And what is very 

concerning is that this government had an exit opportunity. This 

summer they could have exited the John Black contract, but 

they chose not to. They chose to plow ahead even though they 

had feedback, scathing feedback from senior health 

administrators, front-line workers. And we see in internal 

documents . . . We shouldn’t be surprised, Mr. Speaker. We see 

internal documents that really show this government was just 

concerned around the optics of exiting from that contract. 

 

What’s been very telling also as we looked at the mess around 

the lean pet project with the American consultant is the fact that 

the Health minister would actually stand up and say that when 

JBA, John Black and Associates, leaves the province, well then 

we can tailor lean to meet Saskatchewan’s needs. Why on earth, 

Mr. Speaker, is this government paying $40 million, $40 

million to a US consultant who can’t even tailor a program for 

Saskatchewan’s needs? 

 

We needed to also see the end of the ridiculous use of Japanese 

senseis. Senior health administrators have said that they add no 

value, but we still see government advertising for Japanese 

interpreters. We see the senseis following people around and 

organizing supply closets. It’s not what is needed to improve 

health care here in the province. We also wanted to see the end 

of the $17 million per year kaizen promotion offices that have 

been part of this obsession that we have through the JBA 

contract. 

 

[14:30] 

 

We wanted to see improvements in health care, Mr. Speaker, in 

wait times including specialist wait times and emergency room 

wait times because they’re nowhere near good enough. ER 

[emergency room] wait times have doubled since 2010 and that 

is completely unacceptable. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, wanted to see seniors and their families 

get the attention that they need for better seniors’ care in this 

province. We were reminded of that again today in question 

period, examples of seniors going weeks at a time without a 

bath. And the minister will try to say this is a one-off situation 

but it happens throughout the province with a frequency that is 

nowhere near acceptable because of the chronic short-staffing 

that we see throughout. And Carrie Klassen and others have 

been very strong advocates in calling for a better approach. 

 

Families also wanted to see minimum care standards restored in 

care homes. This government scrapped those in 2011 and now 

we have a seniors’ care crisis that desperately needs attention. 

 

We need to see, Mr. Speaker, some clear action to reverse the 

government’s trend on bloated administration. A complaint I 

hear from health care workers time and time again is that this 

government has no shortage of new positions for more 

management, more administration, but they always, Mr. 

Speaker, claim poverty when it comes to ensuring that there are 

enough people on the front lines to give baths, to clean rooms, 

to do the important work that brings a quality of care that has 

dignity, that has respect, and that is indeed safe. 

 

We wanted to see improvements specifically around Saskatoon 

City Hospital, the rooms, Mr. Speaker, that have had the beds 

rolled out and had managers’ desks rolled in. We wanted to see 

that end. We wanted to see the beds moved back into City 

Hospital. 

 

In looking at the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, health care 

should have been a much bigger priority, but it wasn’t. It wasn’t 

because we have had this government’s obsession with a 

program through JBA, through the American consultant, that 

has proven to be toxic, that has proven to work against better 

patient care, and is proving to make the US consultant very 

wealthy, but it’s not improving health care for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

We also wanted to see new schools, but we want to see those 

schools, Mr. Speaker, built in the most effective and fastest 

way. And we want to see schools built that actually meet the 

needs that communities have, Mr. Speaker. You know, and 

what we see from this government is plowing ahead with its 

rent-a-school preference that it has with P3s [public-private 

partnership]. 

 

You know, it’s important to have a discussion around P3s with 

all of the facts on the table. It’s important for Saskatchewan 

people to be able to make an informed decision, to look at the 

true costs, to look at what benefits there could be, what pitfalls 

there could be, Mr. Speaker. In that spirit, the Deputy Leader of 

the Opposition brought forward the P3 accountability and 

transparency Act, a very pragmatic and common sense piece of 

legislation that would’ve gone a tremendous ways in shining 

some light on the lack of clarity, the lack of details, the lack of 

information that this government demonstrates with its P3 

approach. 

 

The bill called for a complete laying out of the facts with 

respect to costs, including the cost of credit upfront. It called for 

an independent watchdog of sorts to ensure everything stays 

above board. It called for a competitive bidding process. Very 



5716 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

practical things that would have allowed, would have allowed 

Saskatchewan people to actually have the facts on the table and 

make a decision about the merit of proceeding down a certain 

path. But this government, shockingly, Mr. Speaker, voted 

against a very common sense and practical piece of legislation. 

 

What I wanted to see in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, was a 

smarter approach, a more rigorous approach, a better approach 

when it comes to procurement policy that the government and 

Crowns have for Saskatchewan businesses so that 

Saskatchewan businesses, Mr. Speaker, don’t have to be in a 

position where they see trucks rolling into the province with 

jobs performed in Quebec or Ontario or Texas or California, all 

at the same time as some in the manufacturing sector for 

example are looking at giving pink slips to their workers, Mr. 

Speaker. The government’s approach that they’ve taken has 

been an incredibly lazy one, simply looking at lowest initial bid 

as opposed to looking at what the true costs are of projects and 

making an informed decision that is in the best interest of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers and Saskatchewan businesses. We 

want to see a better approach, but it appears government is 

glued into its lazy approach when it comes to procurement. 

 

We wanted to see, Mr. Speaker, and joining with agricultural 

producers and producer groups in calling for improvements to 

the grain transportation system. The government’s response to 

this has been incredibly weak, with a continual approach of 

patting Gerry Ritz on the back and of cuddling up to the big rail 

companies. We wanted to see some better action, and there’s no 

indication of that in the Throne Speech. 

 

We wanted to see a comprehensive anti-flooding strategy, 

which of course is desperately needed throughout our province 

but especially in certain areas. And we know this is an issue that 

we will face in the years ahead, and we wanted to see a real 

strategy. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, we demand an advancement on the 

unacceptable carbon emissions under this government. There 

was no discussion of that in the Throne Speech. And just 

yesterday we had the Environment minister release an 

Environmental Code with the greenhouse gas emissions chapter 

completely removed. No mention of it. Completely absent. A 

huge hole in the code. That’s unacceptable. As a 

resource-producing and a trade-dependent province, Mr. 

Speaker, it is essential that we are smart and diligent on these 

types of things, and by leaving that component out of the code, 

this government demonstrates once again that it is absolutely 

dropping the ball when it comes to protecting the environment 

and also protecting our interests here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We laid out specific items we wanted this government to 

address, and those are the things, Mr. Speaker, as we have 

travelled the province, as we’ve spoken with our constituents, 

that we have heard as their priorities. These are the things, Mr. 

Speaker, that we’ve identified, that we’ve heard from 

Saskatchewan people that they wanted to see action and 

movement on. 

 

Make no mistake. We look at the financial means that this 

government has. They have enough dollars to deliver on that. 

The government is now spending about $14 billion each year 

compared to just about $8 billion in 2007. This government, if 

they had the right focus, if they had the right priorities, could 

absolutely be delivering on what matters to Saskatchewan 

families, from health care to highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we see are priorities in the wrong place. Instead, Mr. 

Speaker, we see services that families count on, services that 

families rely on actually getting worse. While the government 

neglects the basics, while it obsesses and spends lavishly on its 

toxic and wasteful pet projects, Mr. Speaker, they have a focus 

that is not placed on the right things, not focused on the things 

that Saskatchewan families want the most. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while this government has developed a taste 

for spending on its pet projects and also on its entitlements, and 

we see that in limos to the consultants that it chooses to roll the 

big cheques out to, far too many families in this province and 

communities throughout this province are forced to make 

tougher and tougher decisions when it comes to spending, when 

it comes to the decisions that they make as a household. We 

know, Mr. Speaker, that the cost of living is rising for families. 

So many families have expressed to me, have expressed to us 

that when they look at their experience as a family over the past 

years, any advancements that they may have made as families 

have been outstripped by a rising cost of living. 

 

We hear it in example after example but we see, instead of 

addressing that in the Throne Speech as they ought to have, we 

see, Mr. Speaker, a pattern of this government asking families 

to pay extra, to pay more and more on a variety of fronts. I 

don’t think this government understands the affordability issue 

and understands the pressures that many families in the 

province are facing when it comes to cost of living and when it 

comes to the decisions that they have to make as households. 

 

Here’s a telling example of that mindset and that pattern that we 

see with this government. This government decided to walk 

away from a fixed-price affordable housing deal in order to help 

the developer, in order to help the developer to sell those units 

at a higher rate. The developer came to them, explained that 

there were problems. Despite a contract in place, Mr. Speaker, 

despite a contract that this government could have and should 

have enforced, Mr. Speaker, it just let this developer off the 

hook. And the explanation given by the minister is that they had 

a relationship with the developer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You can understand Saskatchewan people’s skepticism and 

reluctance to just go wholeheartedly down the P3 path with 

schools, when they can’t even enforce a contract, a fixed-price 

contract on an affordable housing project, Mr. Speaker. But we 

are supposed to believe that they have it all sorted out for the 

schools that need to be built here in Saskatchewan. 

 

That decision was bad enough, Mr. Speaker, that decision to 

help a developer but to hurt the families who needed those 

affordable housing units, but to add insult to injury, the 

comments and the remarks coming from that government to me 

are some of the most shocking aspects of the story. We actually 

had the minister say, “You’re assuming that there’s these 

desperate homeless people.” Mr. Speaker, that would not be an 

acceptable comment coming from any minister of the Crown, 

any member of the House, let alone, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

Responsible for Social Services. And so to me that shows a 

complete lack of appreciation for the reality that many families 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5717 

are facing, whether it’s the family that’s working hard and just 

managing to make ends meet or whether it’s the families, Mr. 

Speaker, who are falling behind, the families who are struggling 

and who aren’t making it, frankly. 

 

There are seniors, Mr. Speaker, who can’t afford the 28 per cent 

hike in their energy costs. There are families who cannot afford 

this government’s callous advice and to check the yellow pages 

if their loved one needs home care. There are students, Mr. 

Speaker, who are desperate for apartments. And yes, Mr. 

Speaker, there are homeless people in Saskatchewan who are 

desperate, who need safety. There are homeless people, Mr. 

Speaker, who have died on the streets. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

a reality that needs to be considered and it should not be simply 

dismissed by any member of this Assembly, let alone the 

Minister of Social Services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all families deserve and need to benefit from the 

good things that are happening in Saskatchewan. Our natural 

resources, Mr. Speaker, in the province and the hard work of 

Saskatchewan people have delivered. But I believe that all 

people, Mr. Speaker, all people in this province, whatever 

corner they live in, need to benefit from that. The government is 

not working hard enough in order to ensure that everyone does 

benefit. Increasingly we see an approach from this government 

where they are working for the few as opposed to the many. Mr. 

Speaker, I truly believe that politics cannot simply be about the 

province doing well, cannot simply be about cranking out 

self-congratulatory news releases. It must always absolutely be 

about people doing well. That needs to be the focus, and that is 

what is lost on this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech misses the mark. Mr. Speaker, 

it misses the mark on what families wanted. It misses the mark 

in addressing its lean pet project in a way that it needed to be 

addressed. It misses the mark in addressing the smart meter 

mess that we see before us, Mr. Speaker. This Throne Speech 

misses the mark for Saskatchewan families. I believe it is a 

disappointment for Saskatchewan people. For that reason, Mr. 

Speaker, I have supported the amendment, and I will not be 

supporting the Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to be able to enter into the debate and participate with 

respect to the contents of the Throne Speech and maybe even to 

do a little correcting in terms of what we’ve just heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, though, I would like to say that, as many of my 

colleagues in the legislature have done, that this . . . I will not 

soon forget this Speech from the Throne. They’re all fairly 

significant days in the life of a legislature and a province, but 

this one in particular was memorable for all of the wrong 

reasons, for the tragedy that was unfolding in Ottawa, the 

terrorist attack that happened there that took the life of one of 

Canada’s finest and the attempts that were made on Parliament 

Hill, and, Mr. Speaker, I’m already on the record with respect to 

those events. But I just again want to thank all of those in the 

Canadian Forces who each and every day are prepared to take 

the night shift, frankly, on the wall, Mr. Speaker, for all of us, to 

guard our securities and to guard our freedoms, and also to 

acknowledge those members of the Canadian Forces that were 

here that day and that participate in our Throne Speech 

ceremonies on a regular basis. 

 

I’m very glad that we made the decision that we would go 

ahead, that that particular important day in democracy in 

Saskatchewan needed to proceed. We needed to do so with the 

company, in the company of those Armed Forces members. We 

needed to do so in the company of the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] and police officers and members of our 

judiciary, who are truly the conveyors of the rule of law. I’m 

glad that we were able to do that and bring forward a Speech 

from the Throne on that very tragic day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had debates like this before, obviously on 

an annual basis when governments bring forward the Speech 

from the Throne, and we all know that, in the past at least, 

convention has these speeches as being really general in nature, 

not a lot of information. I remember sitting through a number of 

those while I was in opposition and hearing some . . . well 

hearing all of them, at least from 1999 forward, from the 

government, through to 2007 from the NDP government of the 

day. And there would be the odd one that would have some 

specific details as to what the government was planning but 

mostly they were platitudes. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that we have erred on the side of 

detail in all the speeches from the throne that we have done. We 

have had a lot of specifics that were announced in the Speech 

from the Throne and we’ve seen them further developed here 

even in recent days. In fact, it was the Speech from the Throne 

that referenced the fact that we were going to go to the public 

on a consultation on the future of liquor retailing in the 

province. Mr. Speaker, that announcement happened today, the 

release of an initial report and then the invitation by the minister 

responsible for the public to participate occurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not proposing any further changes now as a 

government, but we want to hear from Saskatchewan people 

and we are going to take their advice as we develop our own 

platform to present to the people before the next election. 

 

We have made one change that’s still consistent with the 

promise we made in the last campaign. In the last campaign, 

Mr. Speaker, we said we would not sell to private interests 

liquor stores in Saskatchewan, and we have not. We have kept 

the promise. We intend to continue to keep that commitment. 

But what we did say is that because of a growing 

Saskatchewan, growth that is record breaking in almost every 

sense, there are new neighbourhoods popping up. There’s a 

demographic demand for new retail outlets, for new stores, and 

so we’ve said, rather than take government money and build a 

liquor store or pay the lease costs of a brand new liquor store, 

we should rather, Mr. Speaker, put that out to the public and let 

them apply. Let them make a proposal — the companies, I 

should say, interested entrepreneurs and companies — and get 

into the liquor retailing business. And we’ve seen that unfold 

very successfully, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact, the first company, or in this case co-operative, to 

actually be successful bidding for a retail store — and I was 

there; it’s a beautiful retail store — was the Saskatoon Co-op. 



5718 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the irony of course for members of the 

House here is that of all the members in the legislature, the first 

owners of a new private liquor store is the member for 

Saskatoon Centre and the Leader of the Opposition and all the 

Saskatoon members over there because they’re all members of 

the Co-op. And I remember the ads, growing up: we all own the 

Co-op. 

 

The NDP members now are in the private liquor business, and I 

want to congratulate them on that. And I know going forward, 

should the Regina-based co-operative be successful on a retail 

basis with respect to a future private store, the Deputy Leader, 

the member for Rosemont, may well . . . I assume he’s a 

member of the Co-op here in Regina and he will now, he would 

then be an owner of a private liquor store. And I think that’s 

reasonable. It is 2014 after all. And by the way, we think 

through his proxy, we do believe that the Co-op is a responsible 

— a responsible — retailer of liquor. 

 

We have heard a debate in this province around liquor retailing 

that I hope the NDP can help with. We have seen union leaders 

— not members; leaders, public sector union leaders — come 

forward and call out organizations like the Co-op or Sobeys, 

call them out in terms of whether or not they will be as 

responsible in selling alcohol as a union member in a 

government store. I hope the . . . I have not heard the NDP 

whisper one word about this, by the way. 

 

When they could have stood up for the Co-ops in rural 

Saskatchewan that have special vendors, when they could have 

stood up for the franchise owner of Bumper To Bumper in Kyle 

who’s also got a liquor franchise given to him by the New 

Democrats, when they could have stood up for the Saskatoon 

Co-op against these public sector union leaders’ allegations that 

somehow now the private sector, the Co-op is going to be 

irresponsible and sell liquor to minors, there was silence over 

there. The reason that they were silent then and have a strange 

intervention today in the wake of the minister’s report is 

because they are so ideologically hidebound on so many issues. 

 

In the Throne Speech we talked about moving this province 

forward. We talked about the need to innovate, to do things 

differently, including in health care. We’ve already used private 

clinics, for example, to reduce the surgery wait-list. 

 

Maybe we need to have a debate about the role of private 

diagnostics. They’re not interested in that debate. We wanted 

today to engage them in a debate about how we sell liquor in 

the province. They don’t want to have that debate. 

 

They’re ideologically hidebound to this notion, from I don’t 

know what year, that the only way that you can sell alcohol in a 

major urban centre in Saskatchewan is to have a government 

store and a unionized staff. By the way, Mr. Speaker, I would 

point out, I’m not sure if it’s RWDSU [Retail, Wholesale and 

Department Store Union] or which union it is, but in the case of 

the Co-op and I think Sobeys, those are also unionized liquor 

stores. And in the case of the Co-op, I asked the question about 

what’s being paid there. It’s very comparable, frankly, to what 

was being paid by the government in terms of the stores that are 

there. 

 

So it’s one thing to be ideologically hidebound to issues, 

whether it’s private clinics shortening the wait-list in a public 

system or whether it’s the private sector being allowed to sell, 

to retail more liquor in the province. It’s quite another to just sit 

on your hands, to not say a word and stand up and defend those 

many small mom-and-pop operations that even under the NDP 

were given a franchise to sell liquor. And now the new 

organizations like the Co-op and Sobeys and others that will 

come along who are earnest and who are working to be 

responsible, Mr. Speaker, I think the NDP said a lot by their 

silence in this regard. So ideologically hidebound, so tied to 

union leadership that they simply refuse to stand up for what is 

right when it is so very clearly right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s just one example of what is in the Throne Speech in 

terms of a very specific commitment made, already kept by the 

Minister of SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority], and now we’re into a public debate. 

 

There were many other specifics in the Speech from the Throne, 

Mr. Speaker, and they have been well canvassed I think by 

colleagues on this side of the House. I’m not going to go down 

the list. I would just say in a general sense that the Speech from 

the Throne advances the government’s agenda in a general way 

with some specifics that I’ve referenced that are there and that 

my colleagues have already spoken to. 

 

And the plan or the agenda of the government has remained 

unchanged since 2007. And that is, first and foremost our duty 

is to the economy, first and foremost. Even ahead of social 

services? One might ask. Even ahead of long-term care issues? 

One might ask. Even ahead of education or post-secondary 

issues? One might ask. Our answer is, yes, even ahead of those 

issues. Because, Mr. Speaker, the only way this province, the 

only way this province will be able to afford progress for 

seniors who need long-term care, for the disabled who need the 

dignity of a residence, for lower tuition fees for students, for 

better health care, for more highways, the only way to do any of 

that is to have access to public funds that come from a tax base 

that must always be broadened, and not necessarily deepened 

but broadened, in terms of what can be afforded to the 

government treasury to do these things. 

 

And so it is the prime directive of the Government of 

Saskatchewan that we would make sure that we were not . . . we 

were doing no harm to the economy, certainly; that we were not 

getting in the way of those who create economic wealth, who 

create the tax base that funds all of the things that they demand 

every day in question period and frankly that our MLAs do on 

behalf of their constituents as well, the things that we want on 

the quality-of-life side of the equation. 

 

So this Speech from the Throne had a specific offering, and 

we’ll have more details on it down the road, of another 

new-growth tax incentive that will be revenue neutral to the 

province. This tax relief comes on top of reductions we have 

made to the small-business tax, historic provincial income tax 

reductions to the basic exemption and the child tax credit, 

historic property tax reductions, Mr. Speaker. On top of that 

what we’re saying in this Speech from the Throne is we have to 

send a message to our exporters here and those that are in other 

jurisdictions that might want to come to the province that if they 

do, there might be an incentive tied to each job they create 

related to exporting products around the world from 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5719 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I could tell the members of this House that Saskatchewan today, 

in terms of our provincial counterparts, is the highest per capita 

trader, exporter of any province in Canada. This is a relatively 

new development. We’ve always been pretty effective at 

exporting, but in the last number of years we’ve seen almost 

exponential growth in exports, a lot into Asia but also growth 

into the United States of America. 

 

We’ve also seen a diversification in the economy. The Leader 

of the Opposition, he likes to talk a lot about eggs in baskets. 

And I think what he means by that is that the government . . . 

well and the industry, the economy should be diversifying. I 

think that’s what he means by that because he’s never actually 

explained it. He just says it a lot. It’s easy in the scrum. And 

frankly the economy’s not the NDP’s forte so they’re going to 

cling to any phrase they find, and eggs in baskets happens to be 

the one. 

 

Well here’s the good news, Mr. Speaker. If you take a look at 

what’s happened to our economy since 2007, we have seen a 

significant diversification. We have seen greater job growth in 

areas that are export related, in the innovation sector, Mr. 

Speaker, in financial services than in natural resource, the 

natural resource sector. In fact the percentage of job growth that 

we’ve had, and I think it’s 70,000 new jobs since 2007, 70,000 

of them, the percentage from the natural resource sector, I’m 

going to stand to be corrected but it’s under 20 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. The growth has come in other areas. We need to do 

more though to diversify. 

 

And that’s why, in the Speech from the Throne we said, you 

know, we’re going to provide some incentives for those who are 

exporters. Agriculture value-add, manufacturers, those on the 

innovation side that are developing technologies for export 

might want to take a look at these incentives in terms of their 

plans for future investments or locationing of new plants, and 

we’ll work hard to promote that, as we have. 

 

It is an indication that the economy though, Mr. Speaker, for us 

remains the number one priority for our government because 

it’s the only way to pay for the things that we prize. Interesting 

to see what’s happening right now in terms of oil prices. I want 

to comment on them around the world because my seatmate 

was very interested in the Throne Speech debate but he’s also 

very interested as the Finance minister in what’s going on in 

terms of the province’s revenue. 

 

I want to say that it is a good thing that our economy’s 

diversified because even as we see the cycling of resource 

prices, we know, and we have seen in the past, the economy 

continue to move forward. We’ve seen 2 and 3 per cent GDP 

[gross domestic product] even at a time when revenues might 

have fallen because potash sales weren’t there or oil sales 

weren’t there. 

 

So I want to offer an encouraging word to Saskatchewan people 

today that in our province — and we’ve seen it in spades since 

2007 — the treasury’s health, the finances of the province in 

terms of revenue, are quite a different matter than the economy. 

You can have lower commodity prices and continued growth. 

That has happened on at least two occasions for a sustained 

period of time since 2007. 

 

And for however long we see oil prices down a little bit, we’re 

going to watch the budget carefully. We’re going to ensure it 

continues to be a balanced summary budget, and the auditor 

wants to see that summary budget, I would say, and the 

Minister of Finance is nodding his head. We’re going to 

continue to balance it. But the message is, the economy’s 

strong, and we’re going to do what we can, including the 

new-growth incentives, to always be trying to ensure that the 

economy stays strong, knowing that government doesn’t create 

the jobs but it certainly sets the climate and it should follow a 

policy of do no harm. 

 

This is significantly different than the policy, the economic 

policies that used to exist for a very long time in the province, 

where much harm was done to the economy, where the 

government insisted, with people’s money, with the taxpayers’ 

money — involuntary venture capitalists, I would call them — 

insisted on picking winners and losers. 

 

Every year the list would be long. The Minister of the Economy 

has read some of them into the House. And I know the member 

for Wood River often highlights that list, and I forgot how long 

the list is. I mean dot-coms and an auction company to compete 

against eBay and potatoes and all manner of businesses where 

they took taxpayers’ money and they picked winners and losers. 

 

And the bad news, Mr. Speaker, is that when the NDP pick 

winners and losers, they get it half right. They got a bunch of 

losers, a long list of them that did two things. One, lost a bunch 

of taxpayers’ money, and did another thing; cast a chill over the 

economic climate of this province. That’s not the kind of 

environment businesses want, that entrepreneurs want. They 

want to know they’ve got a level playing field. They want to 

know that taxes are competitive. They want to know 

government’s taking care of infrastructure, and then leave me 

alone and stay out of the economy. That’s the change that’s 

happened, and it’s represented in the Speech from the Throne as 

well. Now that’s not to say the Throne Speech does not, and the 

government’s plan do not continue to focus in the areas that are 

very important to us, in health care and education, advanced 

education, and highways. I just want to touch briefly on it. 

 

It’s important that we summarize some of the progress in this 

area because we hear from members opposite a lot about the 

record of the government. We found out yesterday that we 

ought to, we ought to really check the facts. I mean I think we 

knew that before. The Minister of Health has been busy in 

sessions recently fact checking the Health critic, Leader of the 

Opposition’s questions that he’s been getting because often the 

premise has little to do with the facts and the truth, the premise 

of the questions being asked. 

 

We should probably talk about what happened yesterday, again 

just briefly to make that point because I don’t know if I’ve seen 

anything like it, where they lead off on smart meters, as we’d 

expect, with the Leader of the Opposition selectively quoting 

from the report that of course we commissioned and had 

released, so there’s a pretty good chance we know what’s in it, 

but somehow he leads off and selectively quotes. 

 

[15:00] 



5720 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

And his smoking gun question at that point is, who actually 

ordered the smart meters to be removed? And, Mr. Speaker, he 

then read half of a quote from the report that says the board was 

looking at removing the smart meters. The same quote in the 

same report that he read, and there is two different occasions 

where it occurs — in fact three; it’s in the executive summary 

as well — notes that the government ordered the meters to be 

removed and the board was headed in that direction, but of 

course the decision of the government was made absent advice 

from SaskPower officials. 

 

Now as he’s wont to do, he got that answer, I think, once and 

twice, but pressed on, Mr. Speaker, because if you don’t have 

the truth on your side, you should just keep asking the 

questions, apparently. 

 

Later in question period, something more grievous happened. 

And I have not seen the like of that. I can only imagine what 

would’ve happened — I was in opposition — if as a critic I 

would have done what the member for Nutana, with the 

blessing of the Leader of the NDP, this new and fresh leader of 

the NDP, did yesterday. She stood in the House, and I read the 

quote in question period today. I’m not sure if we have it; oh 

yes, here it is. Happily I still have it. Mr. Speaker, here is what 

she said. She said, and I quote, “Mr. Speaker, when I asked in 

committee for updates on how the smart meter program was 

working, the answers I received included, ‘It’s going quite well 

actually.’” 

 

She’s now quoting the answer. “The project is running 

according to plan.” That’s the end of that quote. She continues 

yesterday: “Not once did the minister bother to reveal . . .” and 

then on she goes. You see what’s happened there. Something 

that’s not unparliamentary, but a clear inference on her part, 

because she’s a lawyer and she would know how to word this 

correctly, a clear implication that it was the minister that said 

those words. A clear implication that she was actually not . . . 

that she was asking about whether or not the smart meters were 

working in their test project. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we checked Hansard. And of course the 

viewers will know that everything that’s said in this Assembly 

when it’s in session, including at the committee level, is 

recorded, and thank goodness with this bunch over there, Mr. 

Speaker. Here’s the fact of the matter. She did ask questions in 

committee about smart meters on the day she was referencing. 

She asked questions. Here, well let’s just . . . Here it is. Here’s 

the question from the same member. She’s asking specifically 

about budget. “Is it on budget or has there been extra costs 

involved with that as well?” That’s her question. 

 

She’s not asking about whether the meters work or how the test 

worked. That was her implication yesterday though. She was 

asking if it was on budget, a perfectly reasonable question. A 

perfectly reasonable question, but one that she would ought to 

remember, especially if she’s going to change the question then 

or her recollection of it in the House on her feet on the record. 

So she wasn’t asking at all about whether the pilot was working 

on terms of the technology. She was saying is it on budget. And 

what’s worse, Mr. Speaker, is the quote she read yesterday with 

the clear inference, and she knows this, that it was the minister 

that said the reply, which is here now that “It’s going quite well 

actually” was Robert Watson, not the minister. 

Now usually when the NDP . . . well, not always, but 

sometimes when the NDP do something like that in question 

period, they run out and they provide the paper for it to the 

media. I did think it passing strange yesterday that it didn’t 

happen, and now we know why. We know why. It is exactly the 

kind of tactic we saw from Mr. Lingenfelter. 

 

I remember the day when I actually heard the ad they put 

together. They would come and monitor our scrums. Mr. 

Lingenfelter’s people and Mr. Broten was involved and 

developed . . . Oh sorry. The NDP leader was involved in 

developing their campaign plan. So was the Deputy Leader. So 

was the member for Regina Lakeview sanctioning — I think the 

member for Nutana as well — sanctioning this tactic. They 

would monitor a scrum. They would take the tape away from 

something that I had said. They’d splice words together to make 

me say something I . . . And by the way, I can get in enough 

trouble on my own. But they spliced my words together to 

make something that, to make me say in an ad that I never did 

say. 

 

And they paid for that because they got caught and people said, 

have your debates in there. Ask your questions in there. That’s 

what it’s for. But do it in a manner that is respectful. Do it in a 

manner that is truthful. Mr. Speaker, that’s what the people of 

Saskatchewan would have us do. And I think some of us 

thought well, with Mr. Lingenfelter gone, that’s going to 

change. Wrong. Wrong. It’s the same old NDP. 

 

This new leader practises the same tactics as Mr. Lingenfelter 

when it comes to playing games in this legislature. I hope . . . I 

know that that honourable member from Nutana is an 

honourable member. And while there was no unparliamentary 

infraction here because the wording she made was very careful, 

I know her to be a good person. And I hope that she would at 

least consider a private note to the minister: let’s just apologize. 

You know, we went pretty far there; that was not the right thing 

to do. That’s not who I am, and I shouldn’t perhaps have 

listened to the Deputy Leader or the Leader and got up at the 

end of question period and done something like that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne also references 

education, that we are going to continue to build schools in the 

province, that we are going to continue with the P3 model. I 

think it’s fair to say that our government will not continue with 

the P3 model out of, for any ideological reasons. If we cannot 

get the number of applicants we need, the number of responses 

to the request for proposal that ensures the costs will be lower, 

we’re not going to go ahead. We’ll build it the conventional 

way. 

 

Again, compare that to the NDP who are just ideologically 

opposed to innovative ways to fund capital. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would just say this: the NDP have said, well we’re going to do 

it the way that it’s always been done in the province, and never 

mind what’s happening around the world or the rest of the 

country. I’ll tell you what, those communities that want schools 

— including the leader’s constituency, of the NDP, Massey 

Place — under the NDP, would never get a school because the 

money simply couldn’t be assembled to build them as fast as we 

need them because of rapid growth. So if we can get multiple 

proponents, if we can ensure the cost is lower, we’re going to 

go ahead. 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5721 

And, Mr. Speaker, the good news on P3s is we’ve been seeing 

some hope around the Sask Hospital and the corrections 

facilitators, some early indications that we can do this more cost 

effectively than otherwise. And we saw it front and centre in 

Swift Current for the new long-term care facility there, where 

costs are going to come in $16 million less than had we gone 

the NDP route to build it. We’re going to get, actually get the 

project done and open 225 new beds, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say that in education, we’re going to continue to invest 

in capital, and we’re going to continue to support the operating 

budget of our school boards. In advanced education, the record 

of the government stands, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s fair, it 

bears repeating. We talk about the adult basic education list in 

the Speech from the Throne and eliminating it. There’s more 

resources there. And people ought to take comfort that we 

actually do the things we say we would do in advanced 

education. Because at the University of Regina, their operating 

funding under our government is up 40 per cent, and at the 

University of Saskatchewan, their operating funding under our 

government is up 65 per cent. 

 

And capital funding in this province is way up. They can take 

us at our word when we talk about the investment that’s needed 

in the post-secondary sector. One thousand eleven hundred and 

seventy-eight new student residences in the province, project at 

the University of Regina. Mr. Speaker, that is a 2,354 per cent 

increase which says two things: (1) that we’re building a lot of 

student residences; and (2) they didn’t build any. They didn’t 

build any. I mean we had pressures even before the growth 

happened at our campuses. Nothing from the NDP again. Lots 

of talk, lots of requests. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

continue to support that. 

 

Highways. We talked in the Speech from the Throne about 

infrastructure in general. I want to say for the record I travelled 

a lot this summer, first to go to communities affected by the 

flood. We are mindful of them in the legislature in this session 

and in the budgeting process. And thank goodness we have a 

rainy day fund, and thank goodness we’ve made improvements 

to the disaster assistance program, arguably with more needed. 

And thank goodness we’re responding as quickly as we can to 

those needs. But we travelled the province in the case of the 

touring around for the floods. 

 

And then just generally as we would go around the province, 

for example we would meet in communities, and sometimes it 

would be a political event that we would actually be going to, a 

picnic. We held them all around the province. And I noted that 

they were successful and the NDP actually started doing some 

picnics. 

 

The difference by the way with their picnics is that I remember 

one particular invitation from Erin Weir who had ran for the 

leadership. He wanted to host a picnic in Regina just like our 

picnics. And I think the invitation went something like, look, 

come to the picnic but bring your own food. And we don’t have 

any chairs or anything, and if you could bring some toys for the 

kids to play with. And oh by the way, we’re going to have to 

rent the park, so could you bring some money to help pay for 

that. It’s an interesting picnic. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as we travelled the province, wherever we 

were, we heard, I heard about highways. There is an 

understanding, colleagues, out there, as you know, that we have 

invested historically in highways. They know, without maybe 

getting into the specific numbers, that it’s about $655 million 

this year, and a record. And it broke the record that was set last 

year, which broke the record that was set the year before that, 

which broke the record that was set the year before that — 

successive historic investments in highways. 

 

And yet still because of the amount of thin membrane surfaces, 

because of the amount of projects out there — and, I must say, 

because of an infrastructure deficit left behind by our friends — 

we have much more work to do. And more than that, we need to 

make sure we’re doing it as effectively as possible. 

 

And so we’ve asked the Minister of Highways, and she’s 

working carefully with the Legislative Secretary, who I want to 

thank on the record today, travelling across this province, 

meeting with our MLAs and reeves and mayors and businesses 

and looking at more thin membrane surface than perhaps even 

anyone in the Ministry of Highways has done, the officials. The 

member for Cut Knife-Turtleford, I want to thank him for that 

work. 

 

Now we’ve got to do something with that work. We’ve got to 

find out how we can do better in terms of highways investment. 

The good news, Mr. Speaker, is it is not those folks on the other 

side that are in power. Again if people are looking for hope that 

maybe we’d keep this commitment to continue to invest in 

highways and do a little better and find ways to innovate and 

make the pavement go a little farther, they should take comfort 

in the record that we’ve had in terms of those investments and 

budgets. 

 

And they should be grateful that the other guys aren’t in power 

because not only did they not do a lot when they were in power 

but the Leader of the Opposition was just on his feet talking 

about his 25 points that he wanted to see in the Speech from the 

Throne. This was his test, these 25 things needed to be 

addressed by the government, either in the Speech from the 

Throne or in the session that ensues. Guess what was missing? 

Not a word about highways. 

 

I hear the leader say he’s travelling around the province. But I 

wonder if he is because if he is travelling the province, first 

thing he will hear in rural Saskatchewan, they have other 

concerns, but the first thing he will hear are highways — this 

particular TMS [thin membrane surface], that particular road. 

What are you doing on rural roads? How are you helping 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]? 

He’ll hear it if he’s doing it, if they’re meeting with rural 

Saskatchewan, frankly, and people in the cities as well. How do 

you come out with your 25 things you demand from the 

government in the Speech from the Throne and forget 

highways? 

 

We ought not to be surprised. There are nine of them sitting 

over there because, Mr. Speaker, they spent years forgetting 

about rural Saskatchewan. They spent years ignoring . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

And so we know we have work to do. You know, right now 

there’s a by-election going on in Lloydminster. Here’s an 



5722 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

example of an investment turnaround. The Minister of 

Highways tells me that since 2007 the amount the government, 

our government has invested in highways in the Lloydminster 

constituency is up 853 per cent, which again means that we’re 

investing. And arguably we need to do more, and they really 

didn’t do much of anything at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech debate affords us the 

opportunity to hear both sides spell out what their vision is for 

Saskatchewan, what plans they have to fulfill that vision. And I 

heard the NDP suggest a few things in their 25-point thing, and 

I give them credit for that. But, Mr. Speaker, we could well be 

one year away from an election, from a general election in the 

province. 

 

Here’s how that could work. We all know that the election, 

right now as it stands, is set for April of 2016. But that’s 

predicated on the fact that our original set date in November of 

2015 had to be moved because the federal election will occur on 

that same time. We contacted the Prime Minister, who indicated 

they were going to continue with their set date, and so 

provinces in Canada have moved theirs. But it could be, it’s 

happened in the past, the federal government chooses to go 

sooner. They may choose to call an election for Canadians 

sooner than that. If it happens, we’re going to be right back at 

the original date set in law, the first Monday in November 2015. 

 

That’s not very long from now. It’s not very long from now in 

terms of having to work very hard in the months ahead and in 

the 28 days for all of us to again try to earn the trust of 

Saskatchewan people, to try to present them with the record of 

our government, highlight what we think’s worked and also the 

things that we need to do a little better on, but present those 

specific things like we did in the Speech from the Throne, and 

in the context of a vision for Saskatchewan. We need to do that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But I would argue, so do they. They have a new leader of their 

party after the Lingenfelter years, and we would understand that 

he would take some time to simply be an opposition leader, 

hold the government accountable. That’s part of the role. 

 

But as you get closer to an election — we did this, by the way, 

prior to 2007 — you need to be able to offer more than 

complaints. You must offer more than criticism. You must offer 

more than the demand for more expenditure. You must offer 

also how you would pay for the expenditure.  

 

And I believe, and it’s good for us on this side, I think these 

folks have missed an amazing opportunity, even in the Speech 

from the Throne debate, to start to do that. Because I don’t 

think — given the track record of the NDP in education, health 

care, highways, and the economy — I don’t think the people of 

the province are just prepared to accept from them, trust us. 

We’ll do better than the other guys. The track record’s not 

there, Mr. Speaker. In fact the record would speak to something 

else entirely. 

 

I want to just conclude, if I can, by referencing the theme of the 

Speech from the Throne, which was “Keeping Saskatchewan 

Strong.” And the Throne Speech lays out what we mean by that, 

but I just want to share an email, if I can. It’s a long one, so bear 

with me, Mr. Speaker, as I read it into the record. It says, and I 

quote: 

 

Mr. Wall, I need to tell you a story that happened to my 

son just a week ago and how it has changed his view of 

Saskatchewan. Here’s what happened. My son’s name is 

Dylan Stanley. 

 

By the way, Mr. Speaker, I emailed the writer and asked if I 

could please use it in the House and so I do that now. 

 

Here’s what happened. My son’s name is Dylan Stanley. 

He lives in Regina and he is dating a very nice lady, 

Carley Nemeth. Dylan was working out of town when on 

Friday, October 10, Carley called him to state that her 

grandfather had passed away of a heart attack while doing 

his harvest at Semans, Saskatchewan. 

 

Upon hearing this, Dylan returned home, changed, and 

headed to the farm to assist with the harvest and helping 

out Carley’s grandma and uncle. Dylan is only 18. He was 

excited to help. When I spoke to him, I asked if they 

needed help. Dylan said, Dad, it’s amazing to see all the 

help here. There are five combines, two semis, four grain 

carts, and a mess of people, local farmers and the staff 

from the Case store who took the time to come out and 

help with the harvest, the whole community helping. 

Farmers and families and friends taking the time to miss 

Thanksgiving to help get the fields done. The harvest was 

completed on Wednesday, October 15th, by all of the 

people that came to help this family. 

 

They’re going to say goodbye to Robert Hillis on 

Thursday, October 16th, in Semans. 

 

I just wanted to tell you about these heroes in our 

province. And to the heroes that helped get this done, this 

is what being a true Saskatchewan [Saskatchewanian, I 

think he means] is all about. 

 

My son is proud to be a part of this, as I am, sending you 

this message of when in need, we come together as family 

and work hard to get harvest done. I too am very proud to 

be from Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t know if they’re watching today, but these folks probably 

deserve a hand from all members in the House for that. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Some people might think when a 

Saskatchewan Party or sort of the free-enterprise-oriented party 

talks about keeping Saskatchewan strong, that we would mean 

the economy. And while it’s the prime directive, while it’s a top 

priority and important, it’s never what we meant. When we talk 

about keeping Saskatchewan strong, when we talk about the 

strength of Saskatchewan, we’ve always been talking about 

people like Dylan, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s why on the last page of the Speech from the Throne it 

says: 

 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5723 

Saskatchewan is strong. 

 

This strength comes from our people — their hard work, 

their determination, their ingenuity and their generosity. 

 

We owe those people the best possible government we can 

provide. Not perfect, but the very best possible government that 

we could provide. That we would offer an economic vision and 

then a plan to help it achieve its potential and then to invest in 

these things that I’ve talked about today. That is what we need 

to be mindful of. Notwithstanding what comes from over there, 

colleagues. Notwithstanding, Mr. Speaker, what we hear in 

terms of the partisan back and forth. This side of the House will 

remember that our duty is to those people, to those farmers, to 

people in the cities who desire for their province the very best 

and want from their government its very best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we are going to work hard to 

give them every single day. We have the honour to try and 

that’s why I support the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the House for an address 

to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor moved by the member 

for Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for Moose 

Jaw Wakamow: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the question as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:20 until 15:26.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas  41] 

 

Wall Morgan Duncan 

Krawetz Boyd Eagles 

McMorris Reiter Harpauer 

Toth Huyghebaert Doherty 

Moe Docherty Campeau 

Heppner Cheveldayoff Harrison 

Tell Ottenbreit Norris 

Hart Kirsch Bjornerud 

Brkich Makowsky Weekes 

Cox Draude Wilson 

Marchuk Bradshaw Michelson 

Hutchinson Merriman Jurgens 

Steinley Lawrence Tochor 

Phillips Doke  

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays  9] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the humble address, 41; 

those opposed, 9. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Carried. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 

Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services  

de l'état civil 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 

move second reading for The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 

2014. Mr. Speaker, this amendment will modernize vital 

statistics but will continue to maintain the principles of the 

original legislation. The vital statistics registry is responsible for 

registering and maintaining vital event information, therefore 

we must ensure that the way information is collected, recorded, 

and used is appropriate for this day and age. 

 

First we recognize that today’s world is different from 2009 

when the initial vital statistics Act was first introduced. What 

used to be done by paper can be done now electronically. We 

can use technology to streamline processes for customers and to 

ensure efficient operation of the vital statistics registry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will address gaps and 

create efficiencies by making it easier for people to receive 

timely access to vital events documents. While developing the 

amendments of The Vital Statistics Act, 2009, consultations 

were undertaken with, to name a few, The College of 

Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the nurse 

practitioners of Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan 

Registered Nurses’ Association. 



5724 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

[15:30] 

 

Proposed amendments to the current Act include: enabling 

nurse practitioners to sign medical certificates of death and 

stillborn, and enabling the potential future addition of 

prescribed practitioners to also perform this function, enabling 

the minister to disclose vital statistics information in unique 

circumstances not provided for in the legislation, providing vital 

statistics customers with the option of submitting birth, death, 

stillbirth, and marriage statements electronically, and 

addressing some housekeeping amendments. 

 

Under the current legislation, only a physician can sign a 

medical certificate of death, Mr. Speaker. This poses a 

challenge for many rural and northern communities where there 

may be no local physician. This results in delays for families 

wanting to bury their loved ones as they wait for a physician to 

travel to their communities or where they must transport the 

deceased to a physician for an examination. Enabling nurse 

practitioners to sign the medical certificate of death will provide 

options when a physician is not available as pronunciation of 

death is already within their scope of practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the current legislation there’s no ability for the 

government to provide vital statistics information in unique 

circumstances. For example, the missing children’s project of 

the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada requested 

death information for Aboriginal children who attended 

residential schools in Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, under 

the current legislation we are unable to provide information 

after the year 1945. 

 

The addition of a discretionary clause would allow the minister 

to act in such circumstances without requiring permanent 

legislative changes. Paper submission of statements of birth, 

death, stillbirth, and marriage are the current norm. Paper used 

to be the way records were kept. But, Mr. Speaker, providing 

customers with the option of submitting electronically will 

result in efficiencies for vital statistics customers and providers, 

but also allowing those who prefer to submit by paper. 

 

The new legislation facilitates the use of technology to make 

the process more efficient. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move 

second reading of The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved, second reading has been 

moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 148, The Vital 

Statistics Amendment Act, be now read the second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand in my place today to offer the official 

opposition’s initial comments on Bill 148, The Vital Statistics 

Amendment Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this bill is of course a very important bill. 

And I noticed there was reference made to rural Saskatchewan 

and northern Saskatchewan in terms of trying to ensure that 

there is an efficient and more modern way to record deaths, 

births, and of course stillbirths, and to allow certain 

practitioners such as nurse practitioners the ability to sign 

certain documents. 

And, Mr. Speaker, certainly there is that added aspect to the 

bill. And what we want to do in the Assembly, of course, is 

look through these bills very carefully and be sure as to the 

intent. Certainly from our perspective as the opposition, we 

think that there has to be adjustments made as a result of the 

function of The Vital Statistics Amendment Act to ensure that 

there is some efficiencies. 

 

And absolutely we agree to a large extent that in the electronic 

age, that when one looks at the information around texting, 

around cellphone use, and certainly the email opportunity and 

options that are out there now, that sometimes it’s probably 

more efficient and effective if we were to simply allow the 

electronic age to become used by many people, including 

government, to ensure that there are some efficiencies, and 

certainly point out that the cost-effectiveness are some of the 

things that we need to look at when we look at this particular 

bill. 

 

So there is advantages to northern Saskatchewan. There are 

advantages to rural Saskatchewan where distance is a problem. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I understand there may be electronic 

signatures allowed for a nurse practitioner to be able to sign the 

documentation as indicated by the minister. These are 

something that we think overall, in terms of efficiency of the 

service itself, are probably things that do merit our support. But 

as always, as we indicate at the outset of all these bills, it’s 

important to look at the bill very carefully, the wording, the 

changes that are necessary. And the opposition will certainly do 

that. 

 

And as always, as we get up and speak about the second reading 

speeches and our initial first look at the bill, Mr. Speaker, is this 

is the first time that the opposition, the first opportunity that the 

opposition gets detailed notes as to the changes imposed in 

some of these bills. So certainly from our perspective, this is 

first-time information. We want to look through the bill itself to 

make sure some of the initial comments made by the minister is 

exactly what the bill intends to do, and this is our role, of 

course, as the official opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, quickly if I can summarize what the 

minister spoke about to the folks that are listening that may 

have some interest in this. And it’s an amazing thing, Mr. 

Speaker, that it’s sometimes unusual to expect information and 

guidance and advice from some of the most strange sources, but 

a lot of organizations and people sometimes take an interest in 

some of these bills. And what we would do is of course 

encourage that, because they may have a perspective that we 

aren’t aware of, and not only in government but certainly in the 

opposition benches as well. So we would encourage those 

organizations, those people who have an interest in these 

particular bills to participate, to contact the opposition, and 

we’ll certainly incorporate some of their concerns. It is a 

standard process that we undertake with all the bills and it’s not 

going to be different with Bill No. 148. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, quickly to summarize, the bill makes it 

easier to submit birth and death certificates, for example, by 

using electronic signatures, as I indicated. It’s important to 

modernize with society’s increasing use of electronic 

documents and transactions, but as always we have to be very 

careful to ensure that these important events are tracked 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5725 

properly because as you and I know, Mr. Speaker, a lot of times 

we count on technology, and technology’s a very valuable tool, 

but there could be glitches. There could be setbacks. There 

could be problems and that’s why it’s important to anticipate 

these problems at the outset because it’ll obviously build a 

better system. And this is the purpose of us as an opposition 

vetting this bill through a number of organizations and certainly 

asking a number of people for their valuable and valued advice 

on some of these bills. 

 

There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, in my circumstance and 

certainly my current home in Ile-a-la-Crosse, that I have a lot of 

experience when it comes to northern Saskatchewan and some 

of the challenges we have. And, Mr. Speaker, we look at the 

issue of the health care challenges in the North, in particular the 

Far North, and many times electronic opportunities that may not 

exist in Black Lake or Stony Rapids or Patuanak that hinders 

and certainly doesn’t help the administration of health services. 

We have very well qualified doctors and nurses and lab techs 

and support staff that provide health services but it’s also what 

you’d call the administrative or clerical staff that have to 

undertake a lot of the . . . share the information and undertake a 

lot of the administrative duties and recording and collecting 

data of the health system that they operate under. And if it’s 

easier for them to use a particular means such as email, then by 

all means we want to be able to support that particular effort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill also allows other people other than doctors 

to be able to sign death certificates. So I know in many 

circumstances a more efficient use of technology, allowing 

other people to sign documents that where a doctor’s not readily 

available and of course to administer the costs of health care in 

the most efficient way, these are some of the common themes 

and certainly some of the common practices and understandings 

that we in the NDP opposition would want to support. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that again as I mentioned, it’s 

important to make the system more efficient. But as I sit back 

and look at some of the challenges with the health care system 

in northern Saskatchewan, efficiency’s one thing but if you 

don’t do the reoccurring work in ensuring that we have the 

proper complement of doctors and nurses and services, 

including lab techs and so on and so forth, that northern 

Saskatchewan will continue to suffer a second-rate health 

service and system. 

 

So I think it’s important that yes, while on one hand we support 

the administrative improvements that are designed under this 

particular bill, Bill 148, to allow the vital statistics and 

information attached to The Statistics Act to be able to be 

efficiently shared and efficiently, I guess, signed and certainly 

efficiently entered is always an improvement, it’s a small 

improvement to the system but we mustn’t use this as the only 

solution up in the North by making the administration more 

efficient. But you’ve got to make sure the proper complement 

of doctors and the proper complement of nurses, lab techs, and 

the list goes on as to the many professional people that help 

deliver health care throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So for rural and remote communities, rural and remote 

communities and northern communities, they continue to 

pressure the government to recruit and to retain these doctors 

which they’re really important. And while small steps of this 

magnitude, small steps of this sort under Bill 148 pale in 

comparison to the magnitude of effort that must be undertaken 

to continue to keep our doctors and to attract more. And I want 

to make sure, I want to make sure that that message is heard 

loud and clear by the provincial government and certainly by 

the minister. 

 

So the only thing that we find also very interesting in this 

particular bill, Bill No. 148, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have any 

major concerns at the outset in terms of who can sign the birth 

certificates or who can sign the stillbirth documentation. We 

don’t have any problems with nurse practitioners being able to 

sign some of the documents as well. We don’t have a problem 

being able to use electronic signatures. But one of the most 

interesting parts of this bill, and something that we’re going to 

pay an especially close watch over in this particular bill, is the 

section in there where cabinet can now approve the disclosure 

of private information to third parties. 

 

And I want to reiterate that again and re-emphasize that, that 

one part of the bill is that cabinet can now approve the 

disclosure of private information to third parties. And that’s a 

very powerful and very important change that we notice in this 

particular bill, and I wonder exactly who called for that 

particular change. And as the minister alluded to, he spoke 

about the residential school matters, and of course that tugs at 

the hearts of many people. But the question that we have is, 

who else would have access to that particular information? 

 

So a lot of people out there that don’t want their private health 

information shared with anyone, now what this bill does is it 

allows the opportunity for certain organizations and groups to 

have access to your private health care information. And, Mr. 

Speaker, despite the fact that the minister was pulling on the 

heartstrings of many people when he mentioned the residential 

school issues, the question we have is, okay, in that instance 

perhaps it’s justified. But there are many other instances that 

people may not feel it’s justified to release their private health 

information to an organization or a group. 

 

Now does this allow the government from time to time to share 

information with, for example, John Black, their $40 million 

American-based consultant? Are there other groups and other 

organizations that would have access if they approached cabinet 

to have access to that vital information on patients’ history, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

So this is something that we have to make absolutely certain 

that this is not something that’s going to be abused. And this is 

the reason why, Mr. Speaker, we pay very close attention to 

some of the bills, no matter how inconsequential that they 

appear, that we take the time to study it, to research with 

different groups that are impacted by it, and certainly try and 

find out more information from the government as to what their 

intent is. 

 

So again the point that I would raise on this particular bill is a 

point that this opposition’s going to spend a lot of time. Who 

exactly requested the disclosure of private information to third 

parties, and why did they do that? The minister gave us one 

example, but, Mr. Speaker, we’re sure there’ll be other 

examples and other justifications for sharing information, 

people’s private health information. And one example that 



5726 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

comes totally and quickly to my mind is the lean consultant 

from the States. Do they now have access to information? 

 

Now the other thing that’s important, Mr. Speaker, is that I look 

at the bill itself and the time frame of this bill. Now has any 

information been shared from this day and the past days that the 

government has already given this information out? Has John 

Black and Associates out of the American-based consultant, 

have they got any information, Mr. Speaker, from this 

government? And now after the fact they’re proposing this bill. 

 

[15:45] 

 

These are some of the things that we want to find out. And if 

they have been doing this, Mr. Speaker, have they been sharing 

information before this bill has been presented into the 

Assembly, then they have been sharing that information 

illegally and without legislative authority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I’m trying to figure out here today, Mr. Speaker, for 

what purpose, for what purpose is the minister now requesting 

cabinet approval from time to time to share and to approve the 

disclosure of private-held information of the Saskatchewan 

residents, the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker? And that is a 

very worrisome issue right there. And that’s why, and that’s 

why, Mr. Speaker, when people find their medical records 

found in the dumpsters throughout our cities, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s not careful consideration of people’s private health care 

information. 

 

And now if this government is treating, treating the care and 

protection of medical records to a point where they’re allowing 

companies to throw these into a trash can where everybody 

could read them, then they come back to us several months later 

saying, we want to disclose more information of people’s 

private health information, then we in the opposition are saying, 

hold it. There is something that may be problematic with this 

bill, so therefore we’re going to take the time and find out 

exactly what the purpose of this is. 

 

And I sure hope, Mr. Speaker, I sure hope that the minister is 

forthcoming, that we don’t have to FOI [freedom of 

information] this information as to who asked for this change. 

And what circumstances, what other circumstances will this 

government allow certain companies or organizations or groups 

access to people’s medical records here in the province of 

Saskatchewan? That is a very worrisome aspect of this 

particular bill, and we’re going to spend a lot of time, a lot of 

time researching that particular note that the minister certainly 

glossed over and didn’t speak very long about. 

 

But it’s one of the glaring, glaring examples of why in 

opposition it’s important that we reach out to organizations. It’s 

important that we pay attention to bills of this sort. And it’s 

important that we allow every member of this opposition and 

our team, our network of people out there, give them access to 

this bill and say, look, what do you see and what do you foresee 

as some of the dangers that the people of Saskatchewan ought 

to be aware of when it comes to bills of this sort. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is The Vital Statistics Amendment Act. It’s 

something that we are going to pay a very, very . . . we’re going 

to pay a lot of attention to. It’s a very, very important bill, Bill 

148. And you look at the history of how the vital statistics 

branch was together with the information or land titles branch 

to form the Information Services Corporation and, Mr. Speaker, 

they sold that. They sold one of the Crowns that was making 

money. 

 

And they also said, we’re going to hive off The Vital Statistics 

Act because we don’t want people having private information. 

And they really, quite frankly, justified their privatization of 

ISC [Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] by 

saying people’s private health information and all the statistics 

we have throughout the province of our people, well we’ll keep 

that within government control. 

 

And then all of a sudden this bill comes along, this bill comes 

along and says, well on occasion we might share information 

with different organizations and different groups. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this is exactly why it’s important that the opposition 

track down what the intent of this government is, take the time 

to focus on the issues that are being identified in this particular 

bill, and every one of the opposition members and the people 

out there that are concerned about this will be advised of this. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will certainly express our 

disappointment. We will certainly express our position on 

things that we can agree with. But, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly 

highlight the dangers of certain bills that threaten the privacy of 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

And Bill 148 is a prime example of how we have grown to 

mistrust this government, not only when they sold a Crown 

from underneath us, but they went on to, at great lengths, to say 

we’ll protect private information and then a few months later 

they come along with a bill like this saying, we’re going to 

share people’s information, held information, from time to time. 

And this, Mr. Speaker, from my point certainly speaks of the 

mistrust we have of the government and I’m sure the mistrust 

the people of Saskatchewan will come to share when it comes 

to see how this government has been handling private 

information since they have been in power. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this. We have a 

lot more to say. We’re inviting any teams out there that’ll be 

concerned about this. We’re asking the lawyers that may have 

some issues with this. We’re asking the medical professions out 

there to participate in this. And again as you look at the face of 

it, Mr. Speaker, we do not for one second trust anything that 

that particular government does when it comes to the protection 

of our Crowns or protection of people’s private information. 

They have failed miserably on both counts, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s why we’re going to take the time to study this bill. 

 

And they try and disguise it as convenient. We say, if it’s a 

matter of convenience and efficiency of the administration of 

health care, we support it. But if you’re trying to slip something 

through the process of the legislative agenda by putting in 

sections like this, we’re going to catch it. We’re going to speak 

about it, and we’re going to tell the people of Saskatchewan 

about it. And we hope to involve as many organizations and 

groups that should be concerned about this, that would be 

concerned about it, and we’ll certainly hear from them in the 

future, Mr. Speaker. 

 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5727 

So I’m putting the minister and I’m certainly putting the 

government on notice that this particular bill is going to take a 

lot of our time and attention and research. And if we find any 

evidence that they’re willing to share information with some of 

their consultants like Mr. Black, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

advise the public accordingly. And, Mr. Speaker, if there is any 

indication on how they’ve protected people’s private 

information by throwing them in dumpsters in back alleys, then 

once again people of Saskatchewan will see how disappointed 

they’ll become with this government when it comes to bills of 

this sort. 

 

So we will be very vigilant to ensure people of Saskatchewan 

know the true nature of how the Saskatchewan Party 

government has failed on many fronts, and yet they try and 

gloss over and try and move bills along to the Assembly with 

little debate and little scrutiny, and we’re going to put a wrench 

in that particular plan, Mr. Speaker. So on that note, we have a 

lot more to say. I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 148, An 

Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 2009. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 148. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 

move second reading of The Health Administration Amendment 

Act, 2014, formerly The Department of Health Act. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you and I are among the approximately 1.1 million 

people who hold Saskatchewan health cards. And your renewal 

stickers are in the mail, if you haven’t received it. Make sure 

you put it on your card when you do receive it. 

 

Those cards represent our eligibility for health benefits in 

Saskatchewan, as we are part of the health registration program. 

Earlier this year, the program functions and staff of the health 

registration program transferred out of the Ministry of Health 

over to eHealth Saskatchewan. 

 

When health registration was previously a branch within the 

Ministry of Health, the program worked closely with eHealth to 

provide support for the electronic system that runs the 

application, the online application and renewal process for 

health cards. The move to eHealth was a natural progression. 

eHealth is well suited to incorporate health registrations 

because of its robust privacy and security safeguards for 

personal health information. The function of health registration 

also aligns well with the recent transfer of vital statistics to 

eHealth. 

 

To allow for a full transfer of health registration functions to 

eHealth Saskatchewan, it’s necessary to amend The Health 

Administration Act. The current provisions of The Health 

Administration Act assign the role of registering beneficiaries to 

the Minister of Health and the ministry operating the program. 

Since the health registration program is now being operated by 

eHealth, this needs to be updated. There is a need to amend 

section 6.5 of the Act which currently refers to the powers of 

the minister to register beneficiaries. The amendment will 

enable the minister to designate a Crown corporation or an 

agency of the Government of Saskatchewan to exercise the 

powers and perform the functions of the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, eHealth Saskatchewan is helping us to modernize 

the way health services are delivered in the province, and that 

will benefit patients across the province. For this reason I am 

pleased to bring this legislation to the House today. Mr. 

Speaker, I move second reading of The Health Administration 

Amendment Act, 2014. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved 

that Bill No. 149, The Health Administration Amendment Act, 

2014 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

As I said at the outset, I’m once again pleased on behalf of the 

official opposition to offer our initial comments on Bill 149. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we see here is evidence once again of 

how a government in their haste to privatize Information 

Services Corporation didn’t take care of the necessary steps nor 

to amend the legislative Act to ensure that their agenda to 

privatize Information Services Corporation was done properly. 

So what we see, Mr. Speaker, is now they’re catching up. It’s 

only been maybe a year and a half, two years since they’ve 

embarked on this process to privatize ISC, and now they’ve got 

to do all this other work to make sure that what they said at the 

start . . . that they’d do their very best to protect the information 

of the people of Saskatchewan, their health information. 

 

Well the phrase the minister used, Mr. Speaker, was robust 

privacy. Now, Mr. Speaker, we would hope that a dumpster full 

of people’s private health information isn’t what the minister 

was speaking about when he spoke about robust privacy 

because, Mr. Speaker, that’s certainly not something that the 

people of Saskatchewan would expect from the phrase robust 

privacy. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what happening. That’s the 

common practice we see from the Saskatchewan Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s obvious at the outset that the government didn’t do their 

homework in their haste to privatize Information Services 

Corporation. And now what we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, now 

they’re catching up. They’re being probably told, you’ve got to 

do this kind of change in your Acts to ensure that all the 

information from vital statistics is able to be transferred over to 

eHealth but yes, you can still continue to sell off Information 

Services Corporation, a corporation that profited $14 million 

and counting each year to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now we want to make sure of one thing in terms of any bills 

that we see. The eligibility of benefits must be well defined. 

People have to know what they’re being covered for, Mr. 

Speaker. And it really is important I think in the administration 

of good health that people that have these particular needs, 



5728 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

people that have contributed to the economy, to the income tax 

base, and to the province overall, that in their time of need 

when it comes to health care, that the health care system is there 

for them because many times they contributed time and time 

again through a variety of sources — whether it’s a donation, 

whether it’s volunteer work, or whether it’s paying your taxes 

— that over time many of our elders, as a good example, the 

seniors, and some families impact it as well. When they do need 

the health care system, that it’s there for them, and the process 

is as efficient as possible, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the whole 

message that we have on behalf of the opposition is that we 

want to ensure that privacy, administratively privacy’s 

protected and administratively that we’re very efficient to 

ensure that people out in Saskatchewanland are being served 

well when it comes to their health needs. 

 

We’re hearing many, many examples. In particular my 

colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale has spoken of how senior 

citizens are waiting three weeks without a bath, Mr. Speaker. 

And then yet you see some of the examples of how the 

government tries to dress up their bills, talking about robust 

privacy, talking about how an agency and Crown corporation 

can now be empowered by a minister. And you look at the MRI 

[magnetic resonance imaging] debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s just tons of examples of how, when we talk about 

health care and the efficiencies of health care, of how the NDP 

have it right, Mr. Speaker. Administratively you want to make 

sure you have as an efficient system as possible, Mr. Speaker, 

so that you can concentrate all your resources, the financial 

resources that you have, on making sure that you have good 

doctors in place, making sure you have good nursing staff in 

place, making sure you have good lab techs in place, and of 

course all the other support staff that form our front line and our 

overall health services worker group, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important that people out there know that some of 

these bills that we see is a result of the Sask Party’s poor 

planning, poor thinking, and their intent to start privatizing 

some of the Crown corporations. And what this bill impacts, 

people may ask. It impacts a corporation called Information 

Services Corporation. That Information Services Corporation 

had both the vital statistics branch and the lands branch 

incorporated into one Crown corporation. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

what the Sask Party’s done is they separated them, and they 

sold off the land titles branch. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan didn’t want that. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now a couple of years later, now they’re coming along saying, 

well we have to make all these amendments to protect The Vital 

Statistics Act. And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side say, yes of 

course we should protect the private information. But now this 

bill and the bill before that indicates that they can, from time to 

time based on cabinet information, they can share some of that 

information. And, Mr. Speaker, when the minister talks about 

robust privacy, a full dumpster full of people’s private health 

information does not to me constitute the phrase robust privacy. 

 

So I think once again we want to pay attention to this. This is all 

about catch-up legislation. I know that this particular Minister 

of Health is fixing up a lot of mistakes from his predecessor. 

He’s made mistakes on his own, but he continues doing a lot of 

catch-up on the legislation and the errors made from his 

predecessor. And he continues making a number of errors on 

his part, Mr. Speaker. So we want to make sure anything that 

the Saskatchewan Party government proposes when it comes to 

health care or privatization of health services or, Mr. Speaker, 

trying to come along and saying that they’re protecting people’s 

information, on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we do not 

believe it for one second. 

 

So therefore we’re going to take the time to study this bill, see 

where the impacts would be, talk to people, vet it through our 

own system, Mr. Speaker, and tell the people of Saskatchewan 

what the intent is, and what they have to watch out for, and to 

show them the track history of this government. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the track history of this government for health services 

has been poor. The track history for protecting people’s private 

information has been dismal. And, Mr. Speaker, their track 

record for selling off the Crowns like the Information Services 

Corporation has been something that the people of 

Saskatchewan did not want, and yet they betrayed that 

particular trust, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So once again I look at the notes of Bill 149 and the comments 

that the minister had made as it relates to The Vital Statistics 

Act, that it’s important that we take the time to understand what 

is being done in this bill or any other bill. So on that note, Mr. 

Speaker, I move we adjourn debate on Bill No. 149, An Act to 

amend The Health Administration Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 149. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 

Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014. All health providers including 

pharmacists play an important role, working to their full scope 

of practice on a collaborative team. These amendments will 

expand scope of practice for pharmacists, and they will benefit 

patients through health care services that are more efficient and 

accessible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it makes sense to better meet the needs of patients 

by using the full skills of pharmacists. Due to their accessibility, 

pharmacists are frequently patients’ first point of contact in the 

health care system. This is particularly true in rural areas where 

pharmacies may be open longer hours than medical clinics or 

may be more easily accessed than the clinic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Pharmacy Act, 1996 will 

allow pharmacists to administer vaccines and drugs such as a 

flu shot and vitamin B12 shots. In addition, the amendments will 

enable pharmacists to order, access, and use laboratory tests, 

working in collaboration with a physician. As pharmacists 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5729 

move into a more clinical role, pharmacy technicians will 

assume more of the technical duties such as dispensing. To 

support this move, amendments will also regulate pharmacy 

technicians to ensure that they are able to independently assume 

many of these duties in a safe and an effective manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also bringing forward a few housekeeping 

amendments. We’re changing the name of the legislation to The 

Pharmacy and Pharmacy Disciplines Act. The name change 

reflects that once we make amendments to The Pharmacy Act, 

1996, the Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists will be 

responsible for regulating two separate pharmacy professions: 

pharmacists and pharmacy technicians. We’re also clarifying 

terminology concerning pharmacy ownership. The amendments 

are clear that pharmacists remain in control of pharmacies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our goal is providing leadership and making the 

changes needed to ensure Saskatchewan residents receive 

timely and accessible health care services. This is another 

example of how we continue to put the patient first in 

everything we do. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second 

reading of The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved 

that Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

it’s my pleasure on behalf of the official opposition to stand in 

my place today and again give a few comments on the Bill 151, 

The Pharmacy Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again at the outset we look at the 

consultation that the minister indicated that was done with the 

pharmacists, Mr. Speaker. And we look at the whole notion 

when I go into a drug store, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people that I 

line up with when you get some of your flu shots or you get 

some of your . . . On occasion we get a cough and a cold, so 

what we do is we go to the pharmacist. And I noticed a lot of 

people in that particular line up to get their medicines or cough 

syrup or whatever they’re there for, they have a lot of trust and 

they have a lot of confidence in the pharmacist. As they line up 

there’s a ton of questions, and the pharmacists seem to be very, 

very confident in the sense of being able to prescribe and give 

advice to a lot of the patients that have a wide variety of 

ailments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I look at the pharmacist as a vital part of our health services 

delivery system. It’s important that we know that they have a 

lot of, they gain a lot of trust and confidence from a lot of 

people throughout Saskatchewan and all corners of our 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, they also abide by very, very strict 

regulation and oversight from their own association. 

 

So I think, as you look at the bill itself, Bill 151, in the process 

of efficiency, I think, expanding what pharmacists can do I 

don’t think is a major challenge for a lot of folks. We know that 

The Pharmacy Act and the College of Pharmacists now covers 

more professions including the pharmacist technicians. So 

having them come under a different name or a different Act that 

deals with both the pharmacists and the pharmacist technicians 

in the new Act, being the pharmacy discipline Act, Mr. 

Speaker, we think that in the name of efficiency that this would 

certainly be probably the positive thing to do. 

 

But we do have some questions. I don’t think there are a whole 

list of questions, but we certainly want to get the information 

and input from the pharmacists themselves, and to make sure 

that the continued success that they have enjoyed in terms of 

confidence from people will continue to build in the future, and 

that as you look at the bill itself, where you’re able to order and 

access lab tests, you know, as the minister indicated, that you’re 

able to administer certain vaccines — and I’m assuming flu 

vaccine might be one of them — that they work closely with 

pharmacy technicians. The pharmacy technicians are getting 

more advanced in a more inclusive role, and of course they 

work in concert with the pharmacist themselves. 

 

So all the bill here that we see, Mr. Speaker, deals with the 

pharmacist and the pharmacist association, the College of 

Pharmacists. They obviously will be consulted. I certainly hope 

that the government has done that on their part, but we will do 

the same as well. And if we see that there’s nothing here that 

we would be concerned about and that in the efficiency of our 

health care system, that this helps that process along, then, Mr. 

Speaker, I think we would certainly look favourably on that. 

 

But until that point that we’re able to get advice and input and 

certainly approach a few agencies and groups of people, then 

we need to take the time to study the bill to ensure what the 

government says it’s intending to do with the bill, it’s followed 

through right to the point. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I would 

move that we adjourn the debate on Bill 151, An Act to amend 

The Pharmacy Act, 1996 and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts. I so move. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 151. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — And the parks. Mr. Speaker, today I 

rise to speak about The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act, which is a new Act incorporating substantial 

amendment to The Archives Act, 2004. 

 

The Archives and Public Records Management Act will 

improve the institution’s visibility as the province’s archive, 

advance government accountability for the management of 

public records, and provide the framework for effective delivery 

of the archive’s mandate, particularly in the electronic records 

environment. The legislation provides for a name change for the 

agency to the Provincial Archives of Saskatchewan. This 

change will more clearly identify the province’s archive and 

will distinguish the role of the institution as a custodian of 

Saskatchewan’s documentary history.  



5730 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

Thousands of visitors use the archives in person at its offices in 

Regina and Saskatoon or by distance through its website and 

reference tools. The archives responded to over 5,000 inquiries 

in 2013-14. Mr. Speaker, there’s pride in our province in 

preserving and researching family and local history, the history 

of government, and the social-historical development of our 

many cultural groups. Academics, genealogists, students, 

teachers, film producers, homeowners, historians, writers, legal 

counsel, and government employees use archival records. The 

Saskatchewan Archives provides that service to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The name change for the legislation reflects the important role 

of the Saskatchewan Archives and maintaining the effective 

management of public records created by the Premier, ministers 

of the Crown, government institutions, Crown corporations, the 

Legislative Assembly, the Legislative Assembly Service, 

officers of the Assembly, and the courts. 

 

In terms of public record keeping, since its creation in 1945, the 

archives has acted as a central agency providing records 

management advice to the Government of Saskatchewan. The 

Archives and Public Records Management Act continues that 

function by more explicitly defining public records. It clarifies 

the role of the Provincial Archivist in establishing policies, 

standards, and guidelines for the management of public records. 

It strengthens the prohibition relating to the destruction of 

public records other than through an approved record schedule, 

and it reinforces the role of the public records committee in 

terms of record schedule development. 

 

Since April 1st of this year, the Saskatchewan Archives has 

reviewed 656 disposal requests involving over 6,000 boxes of 

material, has authorized 1800 metres of public record for 

disposal, and has identified 146 metres of record for transfer to 

the archives for historical preservation. 

 

This legislation facilitates the important mandate of the archives 

and provides the framework for all government institutions, 

Crown corporations, the Legislative Assembly, the Legislative 

Assembly Service, officers of the Assembly, and the courts to 

be compliant with the Act in terms of records management by 

2016, as directed by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, similar to legislation in other provinces or 

territories, the bill makes it an offence to alter, remove, or 

destroy a public record unless pursuant to an approved record 

schedule. With the goal of deterring such offences, a conviction 

will carry a maximum fine of $25,000. This fine is comparable 

to that of Quebec and is higher than the maximum fine specified 

in legislation in New Brunswick, the Northwest Territories, and 

Nunavut. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public record created by the Government of 

Saskatchewan is almost entirely an electronic record and has 

specific management and preservation needs. The 

Saskatchewan Archives provides the expertise and works with 

the government to put in place the necessary protocols for 

managing electronic records. This legislation clarifies that all 

public records regardless of format are subject to the Act. 

 

In terms of electronic records, this includes the maintenance, 

updating, and migration of records as necessary to ensure 

usability and accessibility from the point of creation through 

active use and, if of historical value, transfer the archives by the 

established records retention and disposal process. 

 

Furthermore, proposed changes in The Archives and Public 

Records Management Act clarify terminology and application 

and ensure the availability of electronic record for capture by 

the Saskatchewan Archives as required by its mandate. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The bill also clarifies the role of the board of directors by 

updating the responsibility of the board in setting a strategic 

direction for the institution. This reflects current practice. The 

board examines the ways in which the key objects and functions 

of the archives can be most effectively delivered, studies 

options for long-term planning in areas of accommodation and 

operating budgets, and analyzes impacts to service delivery. 

This ensures accountable management of the annual grant 

allocation from the Government of Saskatchewan while 

exploring external funding opportunities and partnerships with 

other interest groups. 

 

Membership on the board is broadened by the bill to allow for 

academic representation from the Canadian academic 

community involved with the study of social or archival 

sciences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Archives and Public Records Management 

Act exempts certain records from The Health Information 

Protection Act, HIPA. The proposed exemption will allow for 

reasonable access to historical records of the province for 

research purposes while maintaining necessary protocols to 

avoid breaches of privacy. 

 

Since April 1st of this year, the archives has received 67 access 

requests involving the review of 60,000 pages of archival 

material. A request can include a single file or thousands of 

sheets of paper representing several metres of records. HIPA 

requirements necessitate the archivists undertake the detailed 

review of a large volume of material usually not required for the 

archival record, which in turn results in delayed response to 

access requests. Mr. Speaker, the proposed exemption will 

allow for reasonable access to historical records of the province 

for research purposes while maintaining necessary protocols at 

the archives to avoid breaches of privacy in the use of the 

archival records. 

 

The HIPA exemption includes safeguards to ensure that 

personal health information of individuals is protected where it 

exists in the archival record. The exemption does not pertain to 

any other trustees or designated archives, and it does not free 

them from their obligation to apply section 29 of HIPA to 

records in their custody. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Archives has been working 

closely with the Legislative Assembly Office, court services, 

the Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner, and 

the Ministry of Health who are impacted by The Archives and 

Public Records Management Act. Changes in terminology 

encompassing public records management are the result of 

detailed and ongoing consultation with records managers and 

government legal advice and discussion by the public records 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5731 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Archives and Public Records Management Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport has moved that Bill No. 141, The Archives and Public 

Records Management Act be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I again, 

once again, am pleased to stand in my place today and offer 

initial comments on Bill 141. 

 

I think it’s important to note that there is a lot of issues that 

were raised as it relates to the provincial archives and how, as 

the minister has alluded to, that we do an effective recording of 

the information that the people of Saskatchewan deserve as a 

result of our history. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that 

a lot of people out there certainly think that the value of keeping 

a lot of recorded information is very important and that the 

Archives Board, being the custodians of that Saskatchewan 

information and documentation and historical data, is 

something that a lot of people in Saskatchewan certainly see as 

a good investment that must be supported in every which way it 

can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I notice from the initial comments that 

there’s 5,000 inquiries and, Mr. Speaker, it would be nice if the 

minister would be able to break down those inquiries as to 

who’s using the archive services, Mr. Speaker, the range of 

services that the 5,000 inquiries asked for, and how satisfied 

they were with the information that they had asked for and 

hopefully got. 

 

So I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker. Those 5,000 inquiries 

really give us a good glimpse of which people are using this 

information. It’s a great sense of how they use the information 

and how it’s helpful. And I think it’s really important. It is 

something that we would like to see happen because obviously 

if you have 5,000 inquiries, is it based on the media? Is it based 

on university people? Is it business? Is it people from different 

families? It’d be nice to have a breakdown as to which of those 

5,000 inquiries, you know, where are they from and who they 

represent. 

 

And the reason why I’m saying that, Mr. Speaker, because as 

the minister spoke about some of the changes, he also spoke 

about clarifying the role of the board. And he also talked about 

external representation being on the board. And I’m assuming 

that when you invite external representation on the board, and 

I’m sure that was also mentioned, that they’re also asking 

people to be, to participate by way of financial support towards 

the activities of the Archives Board. 

 

So we need to clarify that as well. Yes, we believe clarifying 

the role of the board is important, but we also want to know 

what the minister meant by external representation on that 

board, and who would they be inviting. This is some of the 

information that we need to speak about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in this day and age when we look at the 

whole notion of . . . We spoke about it early, the electronic 

records, the texting, you know, things like the tweeting services, 

Mr. Speaker, or the email that is happening, the cellphone calls, 

Mr. Speaker, or pictures taken on cellphones nowadays. The 

minister spoke about the fines for altering or changing or 

destroying some of that history. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, where is the fine line difference between 

notes that somebody may have taken at a meeting with an MLA 

or whether the notes of somebody who may have texted some 

information to a member of this Assembly? Is that considered 

public information? 

 

These are some of the things that we have to really find out and 

ask questions about because it’s important, as I mentioned, that 

we do have an effective protection of a lot of the information. 

But how much information is necessary to achieve what the 

people of Saskatchewan want in their archives collection versus 

private discussion and private information? 

 

So it’s really, really important that we define that as well. So 

the minister’s talking about altering or removing information in 

various formats. These are some of the questions that we 

certainly have to ask. And I’m glad he didn’t mention the HIPA 

situation because obviously there’s a lot of private information, 

health information that you don’t want to share too much with 

people. 

 

And it’s just all this access to information, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

phenomenal as to what Saskatchewan can expect in the future. 

And given the technology, we can almost see that there’s all 

kinds of formats of information that this bill could certainly 

impact, whether it’s a photo on your camera or whether it’s a 

text or an email. All the technology that is out there, Mr. 

Speaker, we have to make sure that we distinguish the role of 

the Archives Board to do an effective collection of the 

information and protect that historical information, but at the 

same time not be frivolous in trying to get information from 

private conversations and certainly private exchange of 

information, if it’s electronically or written. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also important we look at the actual 

cabinet itself. I know a lot of ministers that have a lot of 

information, and how does the archive collection system 

coincide with the cabinet confidentiality issue that governments 

enjoy? And when I say governments enjoy, there’s a lot of 

information shared in cabinet, sometimes handwritten 

information, sometimes notes passed between two members. 

And a lot . . . that information, is that considered public 

information? Are any of the cabinet documents considered 

public information? Like what exactly is the bill trying to 

achieve when we are speaking of access to ministers or access 

to the Premier’s office in terms of what was discussed and so on 

and so forth? 

 

So there’s a lot of confidential, highly classified discussions 

cabinets have on a wide variety of issues, Mr. Speaker. And 

how does this bill impact that particular aspect that sometimes 

premiers and cabinet folks have discussions of the sort of nature 

that are highly confidential? Does this Act contradict that? We 

need to ask those questions, Mr. Speaker, and see exactly where 

this is going. 

 



5732 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

So I think it’s important that we look at the bill itself and we 

give it careful, careful scrutiny. Who is using the archives? 

What does the minister mean by external partnerships? 

Questions of how it impacts the various formats of 

communication in today’s technology. And the list goes on and 

on in terms of what information we need from this bill, and 

that’s why it’s important we take the time to study it. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 141, An Act respecting the Provincial Archives of 

Saskatchewan, Public Records Management and making 

consequential amendment to other Acts and Regulations. I so 

move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 141, The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records 

Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 

2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Archives and Public Records Management Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I also rise to speak about The Archives and Public 

Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

which provides updated references in both The Evidence Act 

and The Education Act. These bills are bilingual and therefore 

require a separate Act to make consequential amendments. 

 

The change to The Education Act, 1995 is required to 

accommodate the name change of the institution to the 

Provincial Archives of Saskatchewan. The change to The 

Evidence Act reflects the name change of the legislation, The 

Archives and Public Records Management Act. To conclude, I 

am pleased to move second reading of The Archives and Public 

Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 142, The Archives and Public Records Management 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m pleased to offer initial comments. And we noticed 

that this particular bill, Bill 142, is actually a complementary 

piece to the bill that I spoke about previously, Bill 141. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I understand that there is a language issue 

that needs to be clarified in this particular consequential 

amendment Act, and that certainly that as we look at The 

Archives Act, there is some overflowing of information that 

needs to be shared from a variety of different departments and 

in this case the Education department, the Justice department. 

And we look at the consequential amendments of this particular 

Act as a normal course of business when you’re making wider 

changes to a main Act and that Act of course being Bill 141. 

 

So on that note, we certainly concur that any overlapping and 

any coordination with other bills impacted are important, and if 

there’s a language provision in this particular consequential 

amendment Act, that we must entertain that and support that. 

And so on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 142, An Act to make consequential amendments 

resulting from the enactment of The Archives and Public 

Records Management Act. I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 142, The Archives and Public Records 

Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise this afternoon to move second reading of Bill 

No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014. The 

Degree Authorization Act has been in effect since October 29, 

2012, and aims to enhance post-secondary education in 

Saskatchewan. It will do this by offering the opportunity to 

expand degree-granting authority to post-secondary institutions 

other than the two universities, provided they meet the 

standards required by a quality assurance review process. 

 

This legislation holds three key components. One, it provides 

greater accessibility for students in our province. As our 

population and economy continue to grow, so too do our 

opportunities. It remains vitally important to stay receptive to 

the needs of students and their future aspirations. This 

legislation provides a framework for our post-secondary system 

to acknowledge these needs and deliver a response. 

 

Two, it ensures a robust quality assurance process. Increasingly, 

outside jurisdictions, both nationally and internationally, are 

moving toward establishing quality assurance bodies. These 

bodies provide the necessary expertise to assess and evaluate 

new degree proposals. The quality assurance process gives 

learners here at home and those coming to Saskatchewan 

confidence in their decision to attain their post-secondary 

education right here. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And three, Mr. Speaker, this legislation protects the 

long-standing reputations of the University of Regina and the 

University of Saskatchewan. As we engage and enhance 

relationships with other jurisdictions, our institutions are 

building new partnerships. The legislation ensures these 

partnerships are both legitimate and complementary. 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5733 

Overall this legislation not only provides new opportunities for 

Saskatchewan institutions, students, and communities. It also 

ensures that Saskatchewan post-secondary education maintains 

the high level of quality it is known for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation allows post-secondary institutions 

other than the universities to apply for authorization to offer a 

degree program. Each degree must be authorized under this 

legislation. To be authorized, an institution must undergo the 

quality assurance review process. The process assesses an 

institution and its proposed degree program using nationally 

accepted quality standards published by the Council of 

Ministers of Education in Canada. 

 

In the first stage of the application process, the ministry reviews 

the program proposal to determine how it fits in the 

Saskatchewan post-secondary system and how it will benefit 

students. Mr. Speaker, it is then determined if the proposal will 

be referred to the Saskatchewan Higher Education Quality 

Assurance Board, or otherwise known as SHEQAB, for a 

quality assurance review. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the SHEQAB is an arm’s-length board appointed 

by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. The board has expertise 

in quality assurance and has extensive experience in both 

academic and administrative post-secondary education. 

 

Through institutional self-assessments and expert panel 

reviews, the board assesses an institution’s capacity to offer 

degree-level programming as well as the quality of the proposed 

degree program. They will then make a recommendation as to 

whether to support or to refuse an authorization of the degree 

program. 

 

If granted, Mr. Speaker, an authorization will be only for a 

certain period of time, after which the institution must apply for 

re-authorization. This will involve the institution having to 

undergo some or all of the quality assurance review process 

again. The authorization to grant degrees may also have terms 

and conditions attached to it in order to ensure accountability. 

 

Although funding is outside the scope of the Act, I would like 

to add that any institution requesting public funds must request 

it through the normal government budget process. And it is a 

legislative requirement that any private institution make 

financial security arrangements to ensure students are protected 

in case the program ends or the institution closes. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan and the SHEQAB place a 

high priority on providing Saskatchewan students with a quality 

post-secondary education that will enable them to succeed in 

the labour market and pursue further studies. Mr. Speaker, the 

provincial government understands the importance of 

post-secondary education, and we want to be responsive to the 

needs of our post-secondary institutions, our students, and our 

province. 

 

The amendments we will be discussing have been consulted on 

with stakeholders including SHEQAB, the institutions that will 

be directly impacted by the proposed amendment of the 

legislation, and the broader Saskatchewan post-secondary 

sector. Overall stakeholders are supportive of the amendments. 

 

The collaborative approach used to inform the content of Bill 

143 ensures that the province’s legislation is fair and balanced 

and does not adversely affect any of the stakeholders or 

institutions covered by it. Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank each 

individual and organization in the province who took the time 

to provide input on this very important piece of legislation. 

 

I would like to provide an overview of the contents of the 

proposed amendments to The Degree Authorization Act. The 

key changes, Mr. Speaker, to the legislation are removing the 

grandfathering period from the Act and adding a 

regulation-making power to specify the date only in the degree 

authorization regulations. Grandfathering is the means of 

temporarily exempting institutions from the application of the 

Act, and providing them with the time to come into compliance 

with the Act if they need to do so. 

 

When the Act was proclaimed in October 2012, it was 

acknowledged that some institutions would require time to meet 

the requirements of the Act so as to not negatively affect 

students. In particular two institutions, Briercrest College and 

Cape Breton University in partnership with Great Plains 

College, required this consideration. There were also two 

institutions, Athabasca University and Lakeland College, with 

whom the ministry needed to engage in more extensive 

discussions to determine whether any of their degree-granting 

activities were subject to the Act. These four institutions were 

grandfathered to provide them and the ministry with time to 

address the new requirements outlined in the Act. 

 

Currently, the grandfathering period ends November 30th, 

2016. Both the Act and the regulations currently specify the 

grandfathering period end date. We are proposing that the end 

date be removed from the Act and specified only in the 

regulations. To do this, subsection 4(3) of the Act needs to be 

amended by replacing the specified deadline of November 30th, 

2016 with “until a prescribed date.” Then a regulation-making 

power needs to be added to section 23 authorizing the 

prescribing of a date. 

 

Once the bill is passed, the ministry will bring forward 

proposed amendments to the regulations, which is expected to 

occur in 2015-16. One of the proposed amendments is 

anticipated to extend the grandfathering period. If another 

extension to the grandfathering period is required in the future, 

the change can be made more expediently by amending just the 

regulations. Mr. Speaker, we are amending the Act and 

regulations to give grandfathered institutions more time to come 

into compliance with that, while assuring students are not 

negatively affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to explain why it has become 

necessary to extend the grandfathering period, and what the 

impact will be for Briercrest, Cape Breton University in 

partnership with Great Plains College, Athabasca University, 

and Lakeland College. 

 

Briercrest currently offers 10 degrees that are named in a way 

that does not meet the nomenclature requirements for 

theological degrees as specified in the regulations. Presently, 

only one of these 10 degrees is grandfathered. The other nine 

degrees will be grandfathered when the regulations are amended 

as part of a separate regulatory amendment proposal. Briercrest 



5734 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

can come into compliance in three ways: first, it can apply for 

authorization of some, or all, of its 10 grandfathered degrees; 

second, it can change the names of some, or all, of the 10 

degrees so that the new names comply with the naming 

requirements for theological degrees in the regulations; and 

third, it can suspend some, or all, of the 10 programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Briercrest’s preferred path to compliance is 

authorization. However, with only two years remaining in the 

grandfathering period, this is just not feasible, based on the 

process for degree authorization. Extending the grandfathering 

period is the best option. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to Athabasca University, when the 

Act was proclaimed in 2012 it was not clear whether certain 

aspects of Athabasca’s outreach model might be subject to the 

Act. The extended grandfathering period will give Athabasca 

more time to address any compliance issues that it identifies. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Cape Breton University partners with Great 

Plains College to offer a Master of Business Administration 

degree in our province. Cape Breton University must apply for 

authorization if it intends to continue delivering this program 

beyond the grandfathering period. The Saskatchewan Higher 

Education Quality Assurance Board has recently developed 

quality assurance standards to assess graduate level programs. 

These standards were approved by the previous minister in May 

of 2014. 

 

The extended grandfathering period will give Cape Breton 

University a more reasonable period of time in which to apply 

for authorization now that the graduate standards are in place. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the ministry has determined that there 

is no longer a need to grandfather Lakeland College. Lakeland 

was originally grandfathered to allow sufficient time to 

determine if Lakeland College had a physical presence in our 

province. It has been determined that Lakeland College has no 

physical presence in the province related to any offering of their 

degree programs. As a result, we will propose that Lakeland be 

removed from the list of grandfathered institutions in the 

forthcoming regulatory amendment package. If Lakeland’s 

degree-granting activities change in the future so that the 

legislation applies to it, the college will be required to comply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to emphasize that these are the only 

changes to the Act being proposed at this time, and I’m happy 

to speak to these amendments today. Mr. Speaker, I move 

second reading of Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization 

Amendment Act, 2014. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m pleased to stand in my place to offer initial comments 

on this particular bill, Bill 143. It talks about The Degree 

Authorization Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I notice with, you know, a lot of enthusiasm 

that the minister spoke about the path to compliance. And 

certainly I’m assuming that the path to compliance are being 

undertaken by the various institutions that he made reference to. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the biggest impediment 

and certainly the biggest blockade, I think, on the path to 

compliance is the ability of that government to follow through 

with their commitment that they made to these number of 

institutions several years ago. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this basically shows that this government 

didn’t do their homework properly. They didn’t have their 

proper consultation. Now they’re coming back after the fact, 

and it really involves a number of organizations and 

institutions, and yet it seems once again, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

back to the drawing board with this minister and this particular 

government. 

 

When they make comments and they make commitments out 

there, part of the commitments that you make is you must do 

your homework, whether it’s on smart meters or whether it’s on 

hiring lean consultants from the states. You also want to make 

sure that you do the proper work that’s necessary to achieve 

what the minister identified as his three priorities as a result of 

this bill, which is greater accessibility for Saskatchewan 

students, which he says ensures a robust degree-granting 

process and also protects the U of S and U of R [University of 

Regina] in terms of their status and stature throughout our 

province and throughout our country. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he went on to explain the process. He talked 

about self-assessment. He talked about the re-authorization 

option. And, Mr. Speaker, he also spoke about a number of 

issues that pertain to the history of some of these institutions 

and how they can be grandfathered in. And what happened, Mr. 

Speaker? Clearly the government didn’t do their homework, 

and as a result of that we’re back to Bill No. 143 that talks 

about degree authorization, something that occurred back in 

2012 as is indicated, and now we’re here, an outside time frame 

of 2016, so four years to get your homework done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank goodness that they weren’t in charge of the institutions 

themselves to seek degree authorizations, because I’m sure 

these institutions would have been much ill-served by advice 

from this particular government. And that’s one of the things 

that we see in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s catch-up. It’s 

the fact that the government didn’t do their homework. And 

now as a result of that, Athabasca and Cape Breton, Great 

Plains and of course Briercrest are impacted. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a bit of time with Lakeland 

College. Lakeland College, I’m assuming that they have been 

taken out of the Act. Now obviously they probably achieved or 

wanted to achieve the whole ability to authorize degrees within 

their institution. So now they have been taken off the particular 

list of institutions that may have been given the authorization to 

grant degrees. And, Mr. Speaker, the question I have is, how 

did they get into the mix to begin with? Because obviously 

Lakeland is based, I’m assuming, out of Lloydminster. How did 

they fare in terms of the discussions? Was this a pet project of 

one of their MLAs that couldn’t deliver, Mr. Speaker? Now that 

they’ve been taken off the list, Lakeland College is no longer on 

what the minister made reference to, the path to compliance that 

the Lloydminster Lakeland College — I’m assuming that’s the 



November 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5735 

one he’s making reference to — is no longer able to achieve the 

degree-granting option for their institutions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s again a lot of questions here that we 

have. And he mentioned the fact that many of these 

organizations, it doesn’t indicate that there’ll be some financial 

support for them from the province. It doesn’t compel the 

province to provide financial support, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

why it’s important. That’s why it’s important to see what 

options are there for them in the future, and if those options 

come at the cost of other institutions and other entities that 

provide educational supports to our students and to our people 

of Saskatchewan. We need to know those questions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now obviously if you look at the U of S, you know, and the U 

of R, they have been world-class leaders in providing the 

university-setting training and education. And it’s certainly 

important, we think on this side of the Assembly, that the U of 

S and the U of R are really very solid organizations that have 

served our province well through time and through history. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at the universities and the status 

and the stature that they have achieved for themselves over the 

many years that they have provided a tremendous environment 

for teaching and for assisting Saskatchewan people and many 

people throughout the world, a world-class education in a 

higher learning setting. Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously the U of S 

and the U of R need to have heavy involvement and heavy 

consultation on this whole notion of authorizing degrees by 

some of the other organizations that wish to achieve it, namely 

Athabasca and of course Cape Breton, at Great Plains, and 

Briercrest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it is obviously important to see how the U of S and U of R 

are engaged in this whole process. I think that since they’ve had 

and they’ve led the particular effort to grant degrees for 

decades, Mr. Speaker, that they’d be a great source of 

information how to clear the barrier and how to clear the path to 

complying by some of the organizations that are applying to be 

able to authorize the degrees that the minister is speaking of. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So quite frankly and quite clearly, if you want to provide 

greater accessibility for students throughout the province by 

granting some of these institutions the ability to grant a degree, 

then do your homework as a government. That’s the first 

message that we have for you as a result of this process. 

 

If you want to ensure a robust degree-granting process, then 

make sure you seek advice from those that have been doing it 

for decades, and that’s the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina. These organizations and these institutions 

have a proud history of how to handle degree-granting 

opportunities. And we need to make sure that they’re engaged 

and that they can give as much advice to not only the 

government but to those that wish to seek a degree-granting 

option as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the third component the minister speaks 

about is the protection of the U of S and the U of R. And as I 

said at the outset, they are a key player in this whole process, 

and do they feel that . . . And I’m assuming that they do not feel 

diminished in any way, shape, or form because obviously there 

are an intelligent lot at both the university levels. So they are 

probably embracing this, studying this, and trying to find out 

how they can be of assistance because I don’t see how they 

would be threatened by this. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think once you begin to water down the 

degree authorization process, it would be of a concern to the 

higher institutions of learning. And this is why it’s important 

that I tell the minister today, when you didn’t do your 

homework from day one, you ought to do your homework 

better from this day to make sure you have proper engagement 

with the U of S and the U of R because they have the ability to 

give you some key advice. And, Mr. Speaker, half of being 

intelligent — I use that phrase on myself on a continual basis — 

half of being intelligent is knowing what you’re dumb at and 

then you go seek advice from those that are in the know, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So quite frankly from the evidence that we’ve seen, this 

minister and this department and this government did not do 

their homework to allow the smooth transition of degree 

authorization for a number of smaller institutions throughout 

our province. So we don’t take their advice, nor do we take 

their word that part of the effort under this bill is to provide 

greater accessibility for students. 

 

They say the nice things but, Mr. Speaker, when it comes down 

to time to do the homework and get things done, the 

Saskatchewan Party get a big fat F from this opposition on this 

front, Mr. Speaker. And once again we see, Mr. Speaker, that 

they try and blame a number of institutions and a number of 

organizations on how they have made a mess of this process, 

and they need more time. 

 

And now they’re simply sitting back and praising themselves 

for not doing their homework, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of 

the things that we want to make sure that we expose to the 

people of Saskatchewan on this particular bill. 

 

So we continue, we continue to watch how they have 

mismanaged one issue after another, of how they’ve made a 

mess of one problem after another. And they continue to be in 

denial in the sense that they don’t want to admit their mistakes, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if they make a mistake, they come back a few years later, 

as evidenced in this particular bill, saying, oh well, we made a 

mistake. So now we’ve got to put another Act in place. We’ve 

got to put another series of steps in place. But we’re going to 

make it all sound good because we didn’t know what we were 

doing to begin with, but now we’ll make ourselves look even 

better by getting more time to figure out what we agreed to and 

more time to figure out how we can make commitments without 

doing homework and, Mr. Speaker . . . or their homework. 

We’re seeing evidence of that under this particular bill, Bill 

143. 

 

So I would point out to a lot of the organizations that are 

listening that it’s important. It’s important that we pay attention 

to these particular bills because there’s a lot of explanation of 

the process. 



5736 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2014 

There’s a bit of issues I have with the whole notion of 

self-assessment. Obviously we want to make sure that the 

organizations that have the degree-authorization ability have 

good consultation with those that have done it before, such as 

the U of S and U of R. And, Mr. Speaker, it worries me that a 

government that can’t get their homework done on such an 

important issue, that’s who some of these institutions have to go 

back to for reauthorization. So, Mr. Speaker, these are some of 

the initial comments I have on this particular bill. 

 

We want to make sure, we want to make sure that all the issues 

that are presented in this particular bill are thoroughly 

researched by the opposition, that we have good consultation 

with the people that are impacted, and that the net effect for the 

people of Saskatchewan and the opposition is that we put 

together a good process, a process that people understand and 

that we remove as many obstacles, as many obstacles on that 

path to compliance to ensure that the degree-authorization 

option, as described in this bill, is achievable for many 

organizations like Briercrest and Athabasca, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So from that point on, we need to make sure we get advice. We 

don’t need advice from a government who doesn’t know what 

they’re doing. We need advice from the U of S and the U of R 

and people in the know. And that’s what I would encourage 

them to do today is to put his fate in that process, help this 

minister along and this government along, and we’ll certainly 

look forward to some of that advice that you may have for the 

opposition as it relates to this bill. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 143, An Act to amend The Degree Authorization 

Amendment Act. I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment 

Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:51.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5705 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5706 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5706 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering Sister Jean Leier 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5706 

 Saskatoon Tribal Council Vampire Gala 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5707 

 2014 Hill Business Dinner 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5707 

 Mendel Art Gallery Celebrates Golden Anniversary 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5707 

 Better Together Food Drive 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5707 

 Celebrating Seniors Volunteer Awards Banquet 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5708 

 Smart Meter Discussion 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5708 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Smart Meter Program 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5708 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5709 

 Smart Meter Field Tests 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5709 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5709 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5711 

 Provision of Care for Seniors 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5712 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5712 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Cancellation of Reception 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5713 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5713 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5713 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5717 

 Recorded Division (motion) ....................................................................................................................................................... 5723 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l'état civil 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5723 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5724 

 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5727 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5727 

 Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5728 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5729 

 



 

 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5729 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5731 

 Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5732 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5732 

 Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5732 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5734 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


