
























































Hansard: November 24, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 17A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5985 
 November 24, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier today the member from Saskatoon Greystone and myself 
had an opportunity to make an announcement at the University 
of Regina with respect to international education strategy. 
 
And joining us today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are a number 
of students representing various post-secondary educational 
institutions here in the province, along with some of their 
advisers, who were with us at the announcement earlier this 
morning. Many of them are dressed in traditional wear from 
their respective home countries, Mr. Speaker. Many of them, I 
had the opportunity . . . They’d come up and have a 
conversation with me and told me their personal stories with 
respect to where they come from and what they’re studying here 
in Canada, in Saskatchewan, and what their plans are for the 
future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
students in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, who hail from such 
countries as Pakistan, Iran, Korea, Nigeria, Brazil, Saudi 
Arabia, China, Mexico, Bangladesh, Thailand, India and the 
Philippines, and I’m sure there’s some others we might have 
missed, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask all members to give them a very 
warm welcome to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister in welcoming these international 
students to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly it seems to have been a good announcement this 
morning. And by looking at all those bright, smiling faces in the 
gallery I can tell, and not just from the experience here, Mr. 
Speaker, but certainly in some of the classes that I have the 
privilege to attend at the University of Regina, I know about 
that diversity that is brought from around the world via our 
international students to us each and every day. So it’s good to 
see these individuals here at the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. I join with the minister in welcoming them here 
today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to 
the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to welcome, sitting in the west 
gallery, a group of 37 grades 5 through 8 students from St. Peter 
Elementary School. Joining them today are Ms. Goodon, Mrs. 
Klein — just give a little wave — Ms. White, and Mr. Chabot. 

It’s always a great opportunity to introduce a group of students 
in one’s own constituency, and I look forward to again, every 
single time, getting stumped in questions after question period 
today. But I’d like to ask all members to join me in welcoming 
this group from St. Peter today to the legislature. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the member opposite in welcoming these 
students from St. Peter School and these teachers that have 
joined us here today. And proud to as well recognize their 
incredible Day of Dignity activities and then the exceptional 
efforts that the school has taken on, and individual students, in 
setting goals and bringing about acts of dignity that certainly 
strengthen our community. 
 
I want to thank the remarkable Ms. Karen Goodon, Ms. Klein, 
Ms. White, Mr. Chabot for their leadership. It’s a pleasure to 
have them here today, and I ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming these students, these teachers to their Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while still on my feet, seated in the west 
gallery, to you and through you it’s a pleasure to introduce Ms. 
Sandi Urban-Hall, a school board member for Prairie Valley 
schools, someone this Assembly knows well, someone who’s 
provided a lot of leadership to her community, to education in 
this province, and to our province as a whole. 
 
Ms. Sandi Urban-Hall has also served as the president of the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association, the Canadian School 
Boards Association, and very rightfully was recognized with a 
lifetime achievement recognition at the SSBA [Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association] conference. In fact, it was the first 
conference that brought together SSBA, LEADS [League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents], 
and SASBO [Saskatchewan Association of School Business 
Officials] together, and it was a tremendous evening to honour 
someone who’s given so much to her province. So I ask all 
members to recognize Ms. Sandi Urban-Hall. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the government, I’d like to join with the opposition member in 
welcoming Sandi Urban-Hall to the legislature. She’s made a 
strong contribution to education in our province in a number of 
different capacities, most recently as president of SSBA, and is 
somebody we enjoyed working with, passionately committed to 
bettering education for students in . . . [inaudible]. And when 
you get a Lifetime Achievement Award, it’s usually because 
you’ve worked for a lifetime. So I won’t make any comments 
about age, but congratulations, best wishes, and welcome to the 
legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister and the member opposite in welcoming 
Sandi to her Legislative Assembly. Sandi and I sit on the board 
of Equal Voice, and I’ve enjoyed her fellowship but also her 



5986 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

leadership. So thank you very much for attending today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. 
 
We know that this past September, this government walked 
away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable housing 
project in Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take 
control of and then rent the units at full market price. And when 
asked to explain how this, how the government could allow the 
developer to back out of a fixed-price contract without any 
penalties, the Minister of Social Services said, and I quote, 
“You’re assuming that there’s these desperate homeless 
people,” showing how disconnected this government is from the 
realities within our community. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our 
province; and to immediately reverse its policy of now 
allowing private developers with whom the government 
has close relationships to default on fixed-price contracts 
for affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again in the Assembly to present petitions on behalf of 
concerned citizens as it relates to the unsafe conditions created 
by that government on Dewdney Avenue. They recognize the 
safety concern is something that requires urgent action. 
Certainly a west bypass is an important long-term solution, 
something we’re going to continue to push for in a timely way. 
But immediately there needs to be actions taken to ensure safety 
and frankly get the heavy-haul trucks off of Dewdney Avenue 
where they shouldn’t be. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of . . . 
Actually all of the signatories here today live directly on 

Dewdney Avenue. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of Creighton, Denare Beach, and area. Many residents 
in these communities are struggling with disabilities and 
currently do not have the supports and services they need and 
deserve. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government of 
Saskatchewan to establish and build a residential day 
program in the Creighton/Denare Beach region to support 
the immediate and ongoing needs of the community and so 
that persons with intellectual disabilities thrive in their 
respective community. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of the 
North. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
once again proud to stand in my place today to present a 
petition in reference to the second bridge for Prince Albert. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to guarantee that a second bridge that 
serves central and northern Saskatchewan, and as well as 
the city of Prince Albert, will receive a commitment from 
senior governments. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from Moose Jaw. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present a petition today in support of safe staffing levels in 
long-term care. Those who’ve signed the petition point out that 
many aspects of long-term care are deteriorating under this 
government; that the Government of Saskatchewan actually 
recognize the need for safe staffing levels to provide hands-on 
care to residents; that the government is failing to fix the basics 
in long-term care, including rejecting the further urgent requests 
from long-term care facilities for increased and needed staffing 
levels; that the government has removed the regulations 
requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, resulting in 
neglect; that chronic understaffing in long-term care facilities 
results in unacceptable conditions, including unanswered calls 
for help, infrequent bathing, and a rise in physical violence 
amongst residents; and that fixing the basics and achieving a 
real improvement in long-term care services requires a firm 
commitment to actually listen to front-line health care workers, 
residents, and their families, as opposed to failing to properly 
listen to their concerns. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5987 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to commit to the 
creation of safe staffing levels for all valued members of 
the health care team and to reintroduce actual numbers of 
staff to match the level of care needs and the number of 
residents under their care in long-term care facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Saskatoon and 
Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition condemning this government’s dangerous smart meter 
program. In the prayer that reads as follows the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to take responsibility for its failure 
to act on readily available information about safety 
concerns with its smart meter program, including through 
the immediate resignation of the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower and a fully independent inquiry into the 
concerning chain of events that severely compromised the 
safety of Saskatchewan families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
Weyburn, Saskatoon, and Langham. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present a petition on 
behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who are opposed to the 
privatization of jobs in the correctional service. The government 
wants to privatize jobs in the food service, doesn’t recognize the 
fact that these jobs provide a supplement to the care and further 
development of young people who are caught in the 
correctional system or in the young offenders system. And so it 
reads: 
 

We, in the prayer, respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan may be pleased to cause the 
government to cancel its privatization in the corrections 
and young offender facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 
This is signed by people from Regina and area. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Transgender Day of Remembrance 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House to 
recognize the passing of a very solemn occasion, the 
Transgender Day of Remembrance. Transgender Day of 
Remembrance is an annual observance on November 20th that 
honours the memory of those who have been murdered through 
acts of transgender violence. 
 
I, along with the member for Saskatoon Greystone and 
Saskatoon city councillor, Charlie Clark, was honoured to 
attend the ceremony organized by the USSU [University of 

Saskatchewan Students’ Union] Pride Centre at the University 
of Saskatchewan last Thursday evening. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, transgender people are among the most 
disenfranchised. Trans people are often pushed to the fringes of 
our society and face many barriers. Trans people face 
homelessness, depression, interpersonal violence at rates greater 
than the general population. 
 
I’ve called many times for amendments to the Human Rights 
Code to include the terms gender identity and gender 
expression, but the government has refused to adopt these 
amendments. These protections are badly needed and would 
help to prevent violence and hatred in our communities. I hope 
that in the spirit of Transgender Day of Remembrance, all 
members will keep a pledge to end violence against 
transgendered people close to their hearts. Together we can 
build a better world, one without the evils of transphobia and 
homophobia. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Canadian Western Agribition 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today to announce Canadian Western Agribition 
kicked off this morning at Evraz Place. From November 24th to 
29th, Regina will be hosting Western Canada’s premier 
agricultural marketplace trade show and rodeo. Each year 
Canadian Western Agribition attracts more than 125,000 
visitors from more than 50 countries. This prestigious event 
happens over six days, showcasing some of North America’s 
finest livestock, agricultural equipment, and an impressive trade 
show. It has more than 1,400 head of the best livestock in North 
America and 250,000 square feet of trade show space. Mr. 
Speaker, this gives some 400 vendors from around the world 
the opportunity to showcase their own small businesses. 
 
This year Agribition has also added some new events, including 
eight national beef shows, an indigenous agricultural summit, a 
grain expo conference, and for the first time, a thinkAg career 
education expo for high school students to learn about careers 
in agriculture. 
 
There is truly something for everyone at this year’s event as 
Agribition also features more family and entertainment events. 
These include the junior rodeo competition, the stock dog 
competition, the Canadian Cowboys’ Association finals rodeo, 
as well as the new event, full contact jousting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all of my colleagues in this House to take 
the time out of their busy schedules to check out this 
world-class event hosted right here in Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Promoting Dignity for All People 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly 
today to bring recognition to some very impressive students and 



5988 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

teachers from St. Peter School here in Regina. 
 
On October 15th, I had the honour to address the students and 
staff at St. Peter School for their Day of Dignity. Other 
presenters included the Multicultural Council, Amnesty 
International, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], 
storyteller Simon Moccasin, and Elder Mike Pinay. 
 
At the Day of Dignity, there were lots of discussions taking 
place about injustice around the world as well as locally. There 
is so much more that we all need to do to make sure that every 
child and every person is treated with dignity and respect. The 
219 students at St. Peter School accepted my challenge and 
committed to 219 acts of dignity of their own, and are showing 
real responsibility and resolve to make their world and our 
community a better place for everyone through their meaningful 
actions. 
 
I would like to specifically thank Ms. Karen Goodon for all of 
her work organizing this exceptional day, as well as all of the 
other presenters and students and staff who helped make the 
Day of Dignity such a great success. I hope that all members 
will join with me in congratulating the St. Peter’s students and 
teachers who are here with us today for their great work to 
promote dignity for all people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Advancing Housing Solutions in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
in the House today to talk about National Housing Day, which 
is recognized every November 22nd across Canada. It’s an 
opportunity to recognize the importance of housing and our 
collective achievements in advancing housing solutions in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This day was marked in Saskatoon on November 21st with a 
luncheon sponsored by the Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation, Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, city of 
Saskatoon, and the Saskatoon Housing Initiatives Partnership. 
Housing is a key priority, and we all must work together to 
ensure that people have access to shelter that fits within their 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is doing its part. Since November 
2007, we have invested over $520 million to develop or repair 
more than 11,600 homes around the province. That’s 11,600 
families who can have a better quality of life. 
 
Housing starts has been above average across the province. 
Retail housing starts are strong. The average provincial vacancy 
has reached a balanced level, and housing affordability is 
improving. This is very good news for our province, Mr. 
Speaker. We know that there is still much left to do; however, it 
is important to recognize our progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work closely with our partners 
to take steps to ensure the sustainable housing environment for 
all, especially those who need the most help. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Health Foundation Festival of Trees 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 
the member from Moose Jaw North and myself had the pleasure 
of attending the sold-out gala event of the holiday season, the 
Moose Jaw Health Foundation’s Festival of Trees. Mr. Speaker, 
this year’s event did not disappoint, with almost 500 guests 
attending. I’m pleased to announce that the evening raised 
$269,970 for the Moose Jaw Health Foundation’s capital 
equipment campaign for the new regional hospital. 
 
This year’s theme was Romance Me, and the night was filled 
with amazing decor, delicious food, and a gala auction and 
dance. 
 
I would like to say thank you to the Moose Jaw Lions Club for 
matching the auction’s first $50,000 in bids. Also a big thank 
you to the JGL [Jameson, Gilroy, and B & L Livestock Ltd.] 
Group of Companies who announced their pledge of $500,000 
over the next five years to the capital equipment campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not mention all the work 
that went into making this event. I would like to say a special 
thanks to my own constituency assistant and the Festival of 
Trees committee Chair, Laurie Axten Kosior, and to all the 
Festival of Trees committee members and volunteers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 
thanking all the volunteers, sponsors, donors, and attendees for 
their contributions to this great cause. I would also like to 
congratulate the Moose Jaw Health Foundation on another 
spectacular event. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Moose Jaw Team Wins Provincial Football Championship 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
congratulate the Moose Jaw Peacock Tornadoes on winning the 
Saskatchewan High School Athletic Association 3A provincial 
football championship. 
 
The win was an exciting finish to another excellent season for 
the Tornadoes, as they have won 19 straight games for their 
second consecutive undefeated season. The Tornadoes cruised 
to a 63 to 13 victory over Regina Luther Lions at Mosaic 
Stadium to secure their second consecutive provincial title. 
Peacock took control in the early game, but they faced much 
more adversity earlier in the playoffs, having to come from 
behind to beat Yorkton in the league finals. They made an 
incredible comeback to defeat Saskatoon’s Marion Graham 
Falcons on a wild final play in the provincial semifinals. The 
provincial final was a special victory for all of the graduating 
players who were able to end the high school football career 
with a provincial title. 
 
Of note was quarterback Sawyer Buettner, who completed 13 of 
16 pass attempts for 258 yards and three touchdowns. Buettner 
also ran for 51 yards and a touchdown. Along with his 
accomplishments with the Tornadoes, Buettner was named 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5989 

MVP [most valuable player] for Team Saskatchewan, leading 
them to victory to the Football Canada Cup back in August. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the Peacock 
Tornadoes players and coaches, led by Coach Blake Buettner, 
on another excellent season and repeating as Saskatchewan high 
school 3A provincial football championship. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Fundraiser Supports Scholarships 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to speak about a wonderful fundraising event I 
attended last Thursday for the Canadian Federation of 
University Women, Regina. Myself as well as Virginia Jedlic 
co-chaired this event. Catered by the restaurant, Spices of 
Punjab, this fundraising dinner was well attended and provided 
funding for the annual scholarship given to two female students 
at the U of R [University of Regina]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is educated women such as this who continue to 
make Saskatchewan strong. CFUW [Canadian Federation of 
University Women] is committed to the pursuit of knowledge, 
the promotion of education, and improving the status of women 
and girls. CFUW has supported equality for women since 1919 
and has worked actively for the betterment of society for all. 
 
This non-profit organization has a long and stable history in 
Saskatchewan, as the first club met here in Regina in 1915. The 
Regina chapter is also part of the national CFUW, which is 
comprised of almost 9,000 members across Canada. 
 
Events like this not only support the pursuit of higher education 
for members but showcase the strong female fellowship that is 
present in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join 
me in thanking those who attended the dinner last Thursday as 
well as a special thank you to Lily and Zoe Jedlic for the jobs 
they did in helping us in this event. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Care for Seniors and Investigation of 
Long-Term Care Facility 

 
Mr. Broten: — My question is for the Premier. When very 
serious concerns are brought to the Health minister about a poor 
quality of care, what does the Premier expect the Health 
minister to do? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
answer to the member’s question is that we would want all 
members of the government, MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and ministers, to be able to investigate as quickly as 
is possible any concerns brought forward and then respond 
accordingly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — In June, the Health minister received a letter 
signed by 49 workers at the Santa Maria seniors home here in 
Regina, the same facility where Margaret Warholm spent her 
last awful few months. That letter, Mr. Speaker, was signed by 
49 workers, and it raised very serious concerns about the quality 
of care in that facility. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t even bother to respond. 
He had an official write back saying the province only provides 
some funding for seniors’ care, but all decisions about staffing, 
about resident care are left up to the health regions and the 
individual facilities. My question to the Premier: does he think 
that’s acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I’m told by the minister that upon receipt of 
the letter, action was taken with respect to direction to the 
region to work with the concerns that were being raised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s been noted as a part of the recent 
debate over the very, very tragic loss, the unacceptable loss of 
Margaret’s life and the circumstances surrounding that loss, that 
the particular institution has been making some investments, 
will be making continued investments in terms of improving 
care. 
 
But I understand that the minister did take action for the work 
to be done with the staff, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what we 
would expect the Health minister or any other minister to do 
when concerns are raised. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when a letter is signed by 49 
front-line staff at Santa Maria, that should have set off alarm 
bells for this minister. It should have caused a lot more action, 
Mr. Speaker, than a form letter being given out by a ministry 
official. 
 
Concerns that were stated included poor quality of care because 
of chronic short-staffing, broken-down equipment, and bloated 
administration. And it’s unbelievably frustrating to keep 
hearing the Premier and the Minister of Health just dismissing 
the crisis in seniors’ care no matter how many concerns they 
hear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Health minister claims, repeated here by the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker, that things in Santa Maria have improved since 
Margaret Warholm’s awful premature death. My question for 
the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is this: what evidence does he have 
that anything has improved at Santa Maria? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know, and I 
was in conversation with the Health minister while I was in 
India and this issue came to the forefront, the members of the 
House will know that the Health minister has encouraged and 
requested the Ombudsman to look at this particular case and be 
open to other cases that might come forward so that not only 



5990 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

can all of the facts be known about any of these concerns and 
complaints, Mr. Speaker, these very serious concerns and 
complaints, but also that we can be advised on potential 
improvements by the Ombudsman. 
 
I note in the letter that the hon. member refers to, the minister is 
the one who has directed the action to occur, Mr. Speaker. And 
what I must categorically do is reject the premise of his 
question. Because early in his question, he said this government 
is, the implication is, wilfully ignoring seniors’ care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this government has invested, 
invested unprecedented resources in seniors’ care, in health care 
across the province. There are more care aids in Saskatchewan 
today. There are 400 more doctors practising today; 2,000-plus 
nurses practicing today. Mr. Speaker, this government is the 
one that stopped closing long-term care beds. That was what 
opposition members did in government. We’ve been opening 
long-term care beds, modernizing facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have indicated to this House and on the public record that 
more needs to be done. But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let’s be 
clear about the record: more personnel, more capital, Mr. 
Speaker, more funding for resources in the health regions for 
long-term care and acute care across the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, all the minister did was to direct a 
ministry official to reply to a letter signed by 49 people and 
then said, work with the region and figure it out. That’s this 
government’s definition and understanding of what action is 
when 49 workers come forward. My question to the Premier 
was, Mr. Speaker, what evidence does he have that anything has 
improved at Santa Maria? What is the evidence? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is a letter dated 
November 6th, 2014 from Santa Maria that highlights the 
specific actions that have been taken, beginning with the 
minister’s request to the region and the ministry that something 
be done. We can get into the details of what they’re reporting 
out, Mr. Speaker. We are going to be watching very carefully 
the progress on improvements that are expected of that 
institution with respect to this case and other concerns that 
might be coming forward. We can get into the specifics of 
what’s in this letter; there are a number of them. We look 
forward to the next question from the member. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, today workers at Santa Maria are 
speaking out. They say they’ve had enough of this 
government’s spin. The workers, Mr. Speaker, the workers say 
that nothing has improved. The workers even contradict the 
minister’s earlier claim that additional training has been 
provided. They say that that is not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is for the Premier. Is it acceptable for him that his 
Health minister is saying that the situation in the facility has 

actually improved when those on the front lines say that that is 
not true and that it is actually getting worse? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure we’d like to hear that 
input directly from the workers, the front-line workers at the 
institution, and we would respond accordingly. The report we 
have from Santa Maria, in terms of changes that have been 
undertaken as a result of the request by the minister that there 
be an intervention from the region, include engaging the 
University of Saskatchewan to provide training to licensed staff 
and physical assessment for those staff who have not taken the 
course. If that’s not been happening, we’d like to know why, 
and we look forward to hearing from the staff if that’s the case. 
 
They’ve engaged the Saskatchewan Association for Safe 
Workplaces in Health to provide comprehensive retraining to 
all staff in the area of transfer, lift, and repositioning. They were 
in the process of assessing best practices among special care 
homes in the province, Mr. Speaker. Within the collective 
bargaining structure, they have begun setting out clearer 
expectations to staff with respect to accountability within the 
residential family-centred philosophy. They’ve moved to a 
consistent assignment of staff which will assign staff to some 
group of residences for longer periods of time. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s several other points. 
 
If the hon. member is aware of, because he’s been in contact 
with staff, that these changes have not been made, that 
improvement’s not been made, then we would like to hear about 
those specific concerns. Because, Mr. Speaker, the record of 
this Health minister and the record of the government is, when 
the concerns are presented, they are earnestly pursued with a 
view to improved care for seniors. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, the facts are that since we took 
over from the NDP [New Democratic Party], we have made 
massive investments in long-term care. That’s the fact. And 
they want to heckle from their seats about something this 
serious, they can go ahead and do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have made record investments in health care 
specifically in the area of long-term care. There are more 
front-line staff. There are more care aids. The members talk 
about standards of care. We’ve acted on it by providing 
additional front-line staff, even while the total complement of 
beds have not increased significantly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if the hon. member has some information from staff that we 
should be aware of, that these changes reported to the 
government by Santa Maria are not under way, he should 
provide it, and the government will act. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government, this minister 
should take this seriously, should listen to those on the front 
line. When we listened and hear from those on the front lines, 
Mr. Speaker, they see massive investments in bloated 
administration while there is poverty, Mr. Speaker, when it 
comes to having enough people on the front lines to provide 
care to our loved ones here in Saskatchewan. And this 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5991 

government knows it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The workers who are speaking out today talk about bandages 
covered in feces and urine. These are bandages, Mr. Speaker, 
that are covering bedsores and other wounds. And these are 
bandages that are not being properly changed because the LPNs 
[licensed practical nurse] are stretched way too thin, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is happening at Santa Maria, according to the 
workers. And they say, Mr. Speaker, the response we just heard 
from this Premier tells a very different story and does not match 
up with what those on the front lines are experiencing. 
Bandages not being changed properly with feces and urine on 
them — that is disgusting and that is not anywhere near 
acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: why is this happening? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we look forward to hearing 
directly from the front-line staff that the hon. member is 
referring to. With respect to the staff complement in the 
province of Saskatchewan, I will report to members of the 
House and the people of this province that since 2007, since our 
government was elected, full-time equivalents in nursing, in 
care are up in every single category. 
 
There are 37 per cent more licensed practical nurses practising 
in the province providing care for people, 37 per cent more than 
were in existence under the NDP with roughly the same 
complement of long-term care beds. With respect to RNs 
[registered nurse], 9.3 per cent more than were practising when 
the NDP actually had a chance to do something rather than to 
just talk. There is 9.7 per cent more care aids today, right on the 
front line, providing care to Saskatchewan patients, including 
those in the long-term care facility. 
 
We’ve recognized that there are some specific needs in 
long-term care. They’ve been responded to by an Urgent Issues 
Fund. Mr. Speaker, the response, it will continue. 
 
The best indicator of past behaviour on the part of resourcing 
from the government, or the best indicator of future behaviour 
is what we’ve done. And what we’ve done is, in all of these 
categories, rather than talk about them, rather than simply raise 
questions in the legislature, we’ve acted: 400 more doctors, 
2,000-plus more nurses, 37.4 per cent more licensed practical 
nurses. That’s the group that he’s just mentioned in his 
question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We would like to hear directly from the staff at Santa Maria as 
to the allegations that have been made now on the floor of the 
House. We’d like to hear about progress that we expect to be 
happening there based on the report from Santa Maria, based on 
the work of the ministry directed by the minister. And we look 
forward to getting that information. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they did hear from those on the 
front lines. They heard from 49 of them who signed a letter and 
had it sent to the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. They knew 
about this, but the response from this government was just 

sloughing it off, was to get a ministry official to give a letter 
and say, sort this out with the ministry. We’re awesome — 
that’s this approach that we see from this Premier and from this 
government right now. 
 
But if they actually spoke to those on the front lines, Mr. 
Speaker, if their CEO [chief executive officer] tour actually 
listened to those on the front lines who provide the hands-on 
care on a day-to-day basis, they would hear a very, very 
different story, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that doesn’t match up, Mr. Speaker, with their so-called 
action fund, a one-time drop in the bucket where we see much 
of the money still sitting and hasn’t even been rolled out, not to 
mention, not to mention the requests that were denied by this 
government, Mr. Speaker.  
 
The workers, the 49 who signed the letter, Mr. Speaker, the 
workers at Santa Maria, they talk about feeding seniors 
disgusting food — gross, constantly recycled leftovers. That’s 
the information that they share. Even mouldy muffins, food that 
is mouldy, Mr. Speaker. My question to the Premier: what does 
he have to say about that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve taken the approach, Mr. Speaker, when issues 
were raised in long-term care, that this government would take 
the approach of an unprecedented $10 million injection into 
long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member opposite references the fact that not all of the 
dollars have actually been allocated to all the regions. Mr. 
Speaker, that wouldn’t be the case. The regions have received 
the dollars, but obviously when you’re purchasing 700 pieces of 
equipment — lifts, slings, mattresses, overhead lifts, for 
example — it takes time to hire the contractors to put those in 
place. But, Mr. Speaker, I expect by the end of this year all of 
the $10 million will have been allocated and accessed, Mr. 
Speaker, and that will give us an opportunity to evaluate to the 
extent that the $10 million went to the front lines, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as the Premier mentioned as well, it’s not just equipping the 
facilities with equipment, it’s also equipping them with staff. 
And the Urgent Issues Action Fund provided for over 50 
full-time equivalents on top of the 700 full-time equivalents that 
this government added in just seven years, Mr. Speaker, 
compared to the members opposite when they were in the 
government, when they had the opportunity to improve seniors’ 
care. Mr. Speaker, this side, we’re about action. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have a government that sits 
and stands and brags all at the same time as there are shocking 
and disturbing stories coming from the front lines. My question, 
Mr. Speaker, was about mouldy food being offered, being given 
to residents and constant leftovers recycled, meal after meal. 
My question to the Premier: what does he have to say about 
mouldy food being given to residents in long-term care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



5992 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, we will be checking on that to 
ensure, Mr. Speaker, that that is not happening. I don’t think it 
is up to, frankly, the government or the Minister of Health to 
tell a staff member to not feed mouldy food to a resident in 
long-term care. If that is something, Mr. Speaker, that we do 
have to instruct in long-term care, then certainly we will take 
that step. But, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people that work 
in long-term care know that that is not appropriate, Mr. 
Speaker, and that our residents shouldn’t be treated in that 
manner. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what this government should be 
doing is ensuring that the right resources are put onto the front 
lines so that good food is given to residents, so that residents 
don’t go three weeks without a bath, so that there are enough 
care aids to help someone to the bathroom, Mr. Speaker, and 
enough LPNs to ensure that bandages are changed when they’re 
covered in feces and urine. That’s what this government should 
be ensuring takes place in our health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the staff that work at Santa Maria also tell of two 
care aids looking after 49 residents, including residents with 
Alzheimer’s and dementia. Many of these residents don’t sleep. 
They need assistance. They’re sick. They wander and 
sometimes they fight. My question is to the Premier: does he 
think it’s acceptable for two care aids to look after 49 people 
with dementia? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
certainly we have a mixed complement when it comes to 
long-term care. We will have, ensuring that there’s coverage 
from an RN, we’ll also have a complement of LPNs and we’ll 
also have care aids within long-term care, Mr. Speaker. The 
time that those staff are on in terms of the different 
complement, in terms of the different staff mix, obviously 
would depend on the time of day, Mr. Speaker, and the needs of 
the residents. Mr. Speaker, Santa Maria would not be I think 
unlike other facilities that provide good care in this city in terms 
of the complement of LPNs, care aids, and RNs, Mr. Speaker.  
 
But in terms, just with respect to what the member, what the 
Leader of the Opposition has raised, if that is the case, Mr. 
Speaker, of staff members providing food that is mouldy, in this 
case, as the member opposite has raised, if that is the case, Mr. 
Speaker, then I hope that we would have the support of the 
members opposite. I hope we would have the support of the 
region, of the administration of this facility, and of the union 
leadership, Mr. Speaker, that action would be taken so that that 
is not the case, Mr. Speaker, and that employees, Mr. Speaker, 
would not be treating our residents in that fashion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the workers say they threw out 
the mouldy food because, yes, it was mouldy. The question is, 
Mr. Speaker, how it is, how it is that this government puts 
health regions, puts care facilities in a place, Mr. Speaker, 
where they are short-staffed, where mouldy food is offered, 

where bandages aren’t taken care of? And we see a continuing 
approach from this government, Mr. Speaker, where they 
dismiss. They blame. They say it’s other people who should be 
doing their job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well when 49 people write to the minister, Mr. Speaker, and 
say that there are major problems, they sign their name to a 
letter, that warrants a lot more, Mr. Speaker, than the minister 
directing a ministry official and giving them some letter saying, 
please sort this out with the health region. It’s really not our 
problem. This is the attitude we see from this government day 
after day. What will it take? What will it take for this 
government to realize that there is a crisis in seniors’ care and 
that their response is failing miserably? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — So, Mr. Speaker, just a few minutes ago, 
we heard from the Leader of the Opposition that staff were 
feeding mouldy food to residents in long-term care. Now all of 
a sudden the story changes, that the staff apparently, I hope, did 
the right thing by throwing the food away before it reached the 
residents, Mr. Speaker. Time and time again, what we hear 
from the Leader of the Opposition, we have to check on this 
side, Mr. Speaker, because the facts don’t exactly add up, Mr. 
Speaker, after it comes from the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But we take these cases very serious. That’s why this 
government from day one has invested in new long-term care 
facilities: 13 in this province, Mr. Speaker, in fact 15 when you 
add in Samaritan Place, which the members opposite opposed, 
and Swift Current, which is a P3 [public-private partnership], 
which they opposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve added 750 full-time equivalents, 700 pieces 
of equipment, over $1 billion put into health care capital in this 
province, much of that into long-term care — much different 
from the members opposite when they were in the government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that response that we just heard 
from the Health minister is absolutely disgusting. And once 
again, Mr. Speaker, it is a track record that we see of this 
government of minimizing the crisis. It is a track record of 
blaming other people. It is a track record, Mr. Speaker, of not 
listening to concerns when families and those on the front lines 
come forward. 
 
[14:15] 
 
And for the minister to say that these health care workers that 
are speaking out, Mr. Speaker, have their facts wrong, once 
again shows they’re not concerned, Mr. Speaker, with getting to 
the bottom of this. They are concerned with saving face. And 
that minister and that Premier should be ashamed of their 
approach in dealing with the seniors’ care crisis here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the workers at Santa Maria also talk about a very 
serious matter, as all these matters have been. They talk about 
other premature deaths that have happened because of falls, and 
they say that management hides the truth from families. My 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5993 

question is to the Premier. Will he immediately commit to a full 
investigation of this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Any time there are concerns that are raised by family members 
in terms of the care that’s provided within our care that we 
provide, Mr. Speaker, we take that seriously. Obviously, 
forwarding this most recent case to the Ombudsman is an 
indication that we take this serious, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also very concerned about falls in long-term 
care. That’s why going back, Mr. Speaker, to 2011, this 
government in working with our regions and our facilities put 
together a Saskatchewan Falls Collaborative that was developed 
with the aim of reducing falls and injuries from falls in our 
long-term care facilities.  
 
Mr. Speaker, while we still have more work to do in terms of 
reducing the number of falls, I can report to the House and to 
the public, since the collaborative was put in place in 2011, 
we’ve seen a 25 per cent reduction in falls in long-term care and 
a significant reduction in injuries, Mr. Speaker. But we still 
have obviously more work to do to prevent falls in long-term 
care. We know the serious nature and the complications that 
they can cause. But, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that we’ve 
been taking seriously since 2011. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, enough with the talking points 
already coming from this minister. We have workers at Santa 
Maria who say that there have been falls that have led to 
premature deaths. These workers, Mr. Speaker, say that families 
have not been told the whole story and do not know the truth 
about these falls. These are serious allegations coming from the 
workers. And my question is to the Premier. Will he commit 
right now to have an investigation of these very, very serious 
concerns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the 
Ombudsman will be investigating this most recent case that was 
before the House late last week, Mr. Speaker. But obviously the 
Ombudsman does have the latitude in looking at Santa Maria 
and looking further beyond Margaret Warholm’s particular case 
and that situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If there are findings greater to that specific case that relate to 
Santa Maria, obviously we will take any recommendations 
seriously from the Ombudsman. But that is why, Mr. Speaker, 
we did forward this situation on to the Ombudsman and look 
forward to her work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, with this minister, with this 
government, it’s always someone else’s job to get to the bottom 
of what’s being concerned. There are health workers speaking 
out who say that premature falls, that falls have led to 
premature deaths, Mr. Speaker. And this government should be 

taking that seriously and should be willing to investigate that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The workers speaking out today are clear that Santa Maria is 
not an outlier. It is not a unique facility in any way. The 
problems at Santa Maria, Mr. Speaker, happen at other facilities 
in Regina and happen throughout the entire province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker . . . See, they’re dismissing it 
right now. This is the track record. It takes 49 people, Mr. 
Speaker, writing a letter to the minister, and still no action. It 
takes Margaret’s family coming to the legislature, heckles from 
the other side, and no action. It takes health care workers 
coming forward, Mr. Speaker, and no action from this 
government. They don’t take this seriously, Mr. Speaker. They 
just heckle. They just put the blame on someone else, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What is clear in all of these stories is that at the heart of the 
problem, at the heart of the seniors’ care crisis is short-staffing 
and the absence of minimum care standards. That’s why we 
have these problems, Mr. Speaker. My question to the Premier: 
does he think Santa Maria is some unique outlier, or will he 
finally recognize that these are concerns throughout the entire 
long-term care system in Saskatchewan? What is his opinion of 
that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure, but I think in the 
hon. member’s preamble to his question, he is not comfortable 
with the Ombudsman doing the investigation of this case 
through Santa Maria. Well he just said in his preamble that it 
was the minister’s attempt to deflect this, to blame someone 
else. 
 
What we’re going to do in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, is 
have the Ombudsman investigate it. And obviously if there’s 
other concerns, and there may well be, then the scope of the 
Ombudsman will be to investigate Santa Maria, Mr. Speaker, 
the facility in general and every single case that comes forward. 
And if there are systemic problems and recommendations that 
flow from that, we will act, Mr. Speaker, because we have a 
track record of acting . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. 
Speaker, well he says no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he needs to turn around and ask his colleague, the 
member for Lakeview who was the Health minister, ask him 
why the NDP closed long-term care beds in the province of 
Saskatchewan, bed after bed after bed. Turn around and ask the 
Health minister, why did we not staff the system properly? Why 
were we short 1,000 nurses? Why were there not enough care 
aids in the province under the NDP? Where were the LPNs, Mr. 
Speaker? That’s the question he needs to turn around and ask 
his Health minister, his former Health minister, because that’s 
the record of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007 this fact is being turned around. We’re 
now opening long-term care beds. Mr. Speaker, we’re investing 
in human resources. We’re hiring 2,000 more nurses, 400 more 
doctors, 37 per cent increase in LPNs, more care aids, Mr. 
Speaker. Because after 16 years of them talking about better 
health for seniors, it’s time for action; that’s what we’re 



5994 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

engaged in on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, with more to 
come. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 
Education. 
 

International Education Strategy 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
international education is important to our province and to our 
economy. It gives students the opportunity to develop a global 
perspective and supports our province’s efforts to engage on the 
international stage. 
 
We know it provides a unique opportunity for Saskatchewan to 
build relationships in other parts of the world, to encourage 
students to study abroad and learn from other cultures, and 
welcome international students who bring global perspectives 
into our classrooms and into our communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is why international education and engagement is an 
important part of the Saskatchewan plan for growth. It is also 
highlighted in the final report submitted by the Asia Advisory 
Council. We want to strengthen Saskatchewan’s connection to 
the world and develop new partnerships to help build our 
province’s innovation future. This helps to grow our economy 
at home and build a better life for all Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And that is why today, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to announce 
the international education strategy at the University of Regina. 
The strategy will help us respond to the targets and the plan for 
growth, and addresses the recommendations of the Asia 
Advisory Council. It will focus on three main goals, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, increasing global engagement, which 
means creating more opportunities for Saskatchewan students to 
study and work abroad. It means bringing the world to 
Saskatchewan. We want more post-secondary international 
students to choose Saskatchewan for their place of study. And it 
means growing global research partnerships, increasing the 
number and value of Saskatchewan international research 
partnerships. 
 
To accomplish these goals, Mr. Speaker, we will implement a 
number of initiatives. We will re-establish a post-secondary 
international education council to facilitate ongoing 
conversations and collaboration between government, 
post-secondary institutions, and industry. We will implement an 
international future scholarship. In its first year, we will send up 
to 20 students abroad annually for business-focused studies in 
priority markets. 
 
In partnership with the Ministry of Economy and Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership, we will develop a provincial 
marketing strategy to brand Saskatchewan internationally and 
encourage more Saskatchewan people to study and work 
abroad. And, Mr. Speaker, we will partner with organizations 
like Mitacs to attract exceptional international undergraduate 
and graduate students. Mr. Speaker, our government has 
consulted extensively with many stakeholders on this strategy, 
and all have been very supportive. 
 

Mr. Speaker, last week our province joined over 100 countries 
around the world in celebrating International Education Week. 
Today at the University of Regina, I was pleased to announce 
our international education strategy. I want to take this 
opportunity to thank all those that worked with us to help 
develop this strategy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 
like to, off the top, thank the minister for providing me with an 
advance copy of his remarks so that I might better inform my 
response to them. 
 
But certainly the three goals, as stated under the international 
education strategy, would seem to be making good sense in 
terms of increasing global engagements, bringing Saskatchewan 
to the world, and the growing global research partnerships. 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, it’s a global village that we operate in, a 
global marketplace. And if we’re to succeed in that atmosphere, 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan must realize that it’s a two-way 
street in terms of that engagement, in terms of that partnership 
that must go on with the world around us, and also bringing the 
world around us right here to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ll be very interested to see the specific measures that 
help flesh out the goals that are iterated here, Mr. Speaker. But 
on the face of it, it would seem to be a good set of 
announcements and we’ll look forward for more news to come. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 

Centre of Responsibility Opens in Saskatoon 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to bring the attention of this legislature to the launch 
of our province’s second centre for responsibility, or COR for 
short, in Saskatoon on Friday, November 21st. This new COR 
and recently launched Saskatoon Hub make up the Community 
Mobilization Saskatoon. These initiatives bring together 
government, the education system, community agencies, health 
care, First Nations, and police to improve the well-being and 
safety of Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Since launching in April of this year, the Saskatoon Hub has 
intervened in more than 100 situations involving issues such as 
drug addiction, homelessness, poverty, truancy from schools. 
While the Hub addresses the immediate concerns, the COR will 
take this information and apply it to long-term improvements 
with a focus on community safety and wellness. This data will 
provide recommendations on how to better address the causal 
factors of crime and victimization in Saskatoon and across the 
province. 
 
The Prince Albert Hub and COR was the first to get off the 
ground four years ago. Since then the community of Prince 
Albert has seen a 38 per cent drop in violent crime rates, a 23 
per cent decrease in youth arrest rates, and the creation of a 
regional alcohol strategy. 
 
The launch of the new Saskatoon COR is an important part of 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5995 

the province’s building partnerships to reduce crime initiative 
which is a key component of the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s child and family agenda. And to show our 
support, Corrections and Policing is pleased to provide 475,000 
in annual funding to support the operation of the COR in 
Saskatoon. Collaboration is the foundation upon which these 
initiatives are built and we are proud to be working with our 
partners to keep Saskatoon and Saskatchewan strong and safe. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join in 
congratulating the minister and the ministry and the city of 
Saskatoon and the area in developing the COR program for 
Saskatoon. It’s very important that this be identified as a 
collaboration that is led with money from the ministry that 
allows for many of the community organizations to spend their 
time and effort looking at how crime can be prevented. 
 
I know that the leadership shown from the police force in 
Saskatoon, together with Justice but also other ministries 
including Social Services and Health, but also the education 
system and community agencies, all of these groups working 
together can provide some good services for the community. 
And I know that the Prince Albert COR has shown some very 
positive results. I know also that when the minister was in the 
city of Regina police force, she was working along with others 
in the Crime Prevention Council which are basically 
grandparents or great-grandparents of these kinds of initiatives. 
 
So what we know in Saskatchewan, when you get resources 
into the right places, you’re able to deal with some of the very 
difficult issues. And I’d like to thank the minister and the 
ministry for this good work. Thank you. 
 
[14:30] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 332 through 346. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 332 to 346. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my brief 
remarks here today, I’ll be moving a second reading for The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. 
 

The proposed amendments considered today will clarify the 
licensing authority for scientific permits to ensure that wildlife 
research is conducted responsibly. It will also improve the 
legislative authority to manage vendor responsibility for 
hunting and angling issuance, and it will implement additional 
hunting suspensions to increase the protection of our wildlife 
resources here in Saskatchewan. It’ll also lengthen the amount 
of time wildlife officers have to bring charges forward for 
wildlife violations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Wildlife Act, 1998 and associated regulations 
currently prescribe licensing provisions for scientific or 
research purposes that require the taking or disturbing of 
wildlife. Many research surveys, especially those involving 
species at risk, use non-obtrusive detection efforts such as 
monitoring songbirds, passive wildlife observation, or the use 
of presence/absence surveys. The Act and regulations don’t 
speak to the authorization of these types of surveys. The 
proposed amendment will ensure these surveys are carried out 
in a responsible and undisruptive manner. 
 
Our government has entered into an agreement to deliver the 
Saskatchewan automated hunting, angling, and trapping licence 
sales. Responsibility of this contractual agreement is authorized 
by The Wildlife Act, 1998. Currently, The Wildlife Act, 1998 
mandates the suspension of hunting privileges for most wildlife 
violations, including one-year suspensions from hunting or 
trapping. Individuals who are convicted of a wildlife offence are 
prohibited from purchasing a hunting or trapping . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, on both sides of the House. The 
minister is trying to give a second reading speech and we have 
conversations going back and forth across the floor. Take them 
outside if you want to do that. I recognize the Minister for the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 
currently The Wildlife Act, 1998 mandates the suspension of 
hunting privileges for most wildlife violations. This includes 
one-year suspensions from hunting or from trapping. 
Individuals who are convicted of a wildlife offence are 
prohibited from purchasing a hunting or trapping licence for a 
period of one year from the date of their conviction. 
 
A key message from hunters during the red tape reduction 
committee, which took place in the spring of 2012, was for 
government to do more to conserve our wildlife resource. Our 
government proposes to increase hunting suspensions to ensure 
that the most serious conservation offences will carry an 
automatic two-year suspension. People who fail to pay 
wildlife-related fines will be prohibited from buying a licence 
until their fines are paid, and individuals who are suspended 
from hunting activities in another jurisdiction will not be able to 
purchase a licence in the province of Saskatchewan. Those 
convicted on three separate occasions for wildlife offences, they 
will have a lifetime ban prohibiting the purchase of hunting 
licences. 
 
Our government’s new automated licence system will more 
effectively administer and deliver these hunting suspensions by 
electronically blocking a licence purchase. This automation 



5996 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

creates opportunities to co-operate with other agencies and 
other databases. 
 
The final measure proposed to demonstrate commitment to 
protecting our resource is to lengthen the amount of time 
wildlife officers have to bring forward charges for wildlife 
violations. Wildlife violations are challenging to investigate 
because they often occur in unpopulated areas and often without 
a witness. In addition, poaching gangs are becoming more 
sophisticated and more difficult to catch, often requiring 
undercover operations to collect evidence to support 
prosecution. The proposed amendments will give officers an 
extended amount of time to investigate these violations more 
thoroughly. 
 
This past spring our government made significant changes to 
the fine structure for unlawful hunting and fishing activities by 
doubling the fines for the most serious wildlife conservation 
offences. In doing so, Saskatchewan penalties are now equal to 
or slightly higher than the fines for comparable violations in 
other jurisdictions. 
 
And finally, the Minister of Justice has advanced legislation 
that will deny persons who are in arrears for maintenance 
payments the opportunity to purchase a hunting or angling 
licence. This is an example of cross-jurisdiction potential of an 
automated licensing system. 
 
These amendments to The Wildlife Act can be implemented 
without affecting existing First Nations and Métis hunting 
rights in our province and these changes will not add to 
resources or training needs for Saskatchewan’s conservation 
officers. 
 
Our government has consulted with and has the support of the 
provincial wildlife advisory committee and the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation. The proposed legislation before you 
demonstrates our government’s commitment to protecting our 
wildlife resources. Equally it will send a strong message to 
poachers that there are serious consequences associated with 
breaking wildlife laws in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I thank the government for an explanation as to what Bill 
161 entails. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a bill that we’re going to 
pay a lot of attention to for a very long time. The fact of the 
matter, Mr. Speaker, is that this bill itself has a lot of issues that 
I want to certainly express at the outset in terms of what we 
envision, you know, within the NDP opposition, and certainly 
myself as a northern MLA as to what we think is important 
when we talk about wildlife management and the different 
players that are impacted and the different demands and needs 
that we have on our natural environment, and of course on the 
wildlife as well. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s really, really important that when there are 
discussions and issues around wildlife management, there are so 
many different demands on our wildlife and on our lands, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s very, very important that we pay attention. So 
one of the things that’s really, really key on this particular bill, 
Mr. Speaker, is that obviously from the NDP perspective as an 
opposition, we don’t support the notion that poaching and 
selling animal parts is something that we should tolerate. It’s 
not something that we should be soft on, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
no question that a lot of people in Saskatchewan frown on that 
particular activity. 
 
So we would want to make sure that the intent of the bill is 
exactly that, is to make sure that those that are perpetuating 
illegal use of animal parts by selling them and harvesting 
animals, that they are actually prosecuted to the full extent of 
the law. And I want to say that at the outset, Mr. Speaker, 
because obviously that needs to be said. And this particular bill 
— seeing that this is the first opportunity for us as an 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, to see the bill — that we want to make 
sure that people out there know where we stand on the whole 
notion of poaching. And where we may disagree on occasion, 
Mr. Speaker, from the government is how we best implement 
that and how we best evaluate their proposals as indicated on 
Bill 161 as to how they wish to achieve that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of issues that I want to speak 
about. The first particular item I want to pay a little bit of 
attention to is on the aspect of this bill where the minister has 
indicated that this bill requires scientists studying animals to get 
a licence from the government. And I’m assuming when they 
say a licence from the government, they’re talking about the 
provincial government. I’m not sure if there’s collaboration 
from the federal government. Obviously there is a federal 
government role as well if we look at the, as an example, one of 
the departments that is very prevalent in Saskatchewan is the 
Department of Fisheries and Oceans. They obviously have 
some permit and licensing laws that probably many scientists 
and many different people that may be involved with studying 
of animals, they probably have their own rules and regulations 
on how to license that. 
 
So I guess my first question is, obviously we would assume that 
when a minister speaks of Bill 161 in terms of getting a licence 
to study animals, that he is making a reference to not only the 
provincial government, that there is some collaboration and 
corroboration with the federal government as well when we’re 
talking about licensing for studying of any animals in 
Saskatchewan. And one would assume that there is that 
collaboration and co-operation between the two levels of 
government. So for everybody’s sake I’m going to assume that 
there is that collaboration between the provincial and federal 
governments when the minister makes the comment that the 
people that are studying animals now must get a licence from 
the government, and the government being both the provincial 
government and the federal government. So I hope there was 
consultation done on that particular aspect of the bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that gets me to the point of the actual study 
of the animals. I’m not certain how many different 
organizations and how many different veterinarians or people 
that may be involved with the Wildlife Federation or the 
wildlife advisory committee or different organizations or 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5997 

different groups or different people of interest . . . The whole 
question is who exactly is studying the animals, Mr. Speaker. 
The bill doesn’t identify that, as to why this requirement is 
coming forward. I’m assuming it is to make sure that there is 
some rhyme and reason as to how you would control the study 
of animals because obviously there is a need to know who’s 
doing what out there. 
 
So some of the first questions we have as a result of this 
particular bill is, who is taking an interest in the study of 
animals and, more so, what animals are being studied? This is I 
think one of the key questions that we have on this particular 
bill because the different animals that are being studied, 
everything from aquatic life to caribou management, you know, 
to fish being found on different lakes that are floating on the 
surface, like who actually collects these specimens and these, 
whether it’s fish or wildlife, and who actually has an interest in 
dissecting these animals that are found dead or found floating in 
the water? 
 
These are some of the questions that we have instinctively. Is it 
the universities? Is it veterinarians? Is it people involved with 
the outfitting industry? Is it government scientists? Like it’s 
very difficult to figure out who exactly is studying some of 
these animals. And these are some of the questions that I have 
at the outset is, what is the purpose of the requirement now by 
this bill to have these people that are studying animals, you 
know, that they now be licensed? 
 
Well the first question we have is, who’s doing all the studies? 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the ministry itself directs 
different players out there to do the investigation. Say as an 
example, if they got a report from some provincial park that 
there’s a bunch of fish floating on the lake, does the department 
or does SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management] come along and say okay, well we want them 
studied? Why did they die? Who would they ask to do the 
study? And I’m assuming that the universities are involved or 
there is a veterinary association that would be able to do that. 
Or is it the private sector? 
 
So this is what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is the 
government has the data. They have the information. They 
generally have an idea as to who’s studying animals in 
Saskatchewan. They are now saying that they have to be 
licensed to be able to study these animals. And our first 
question is, who are some of these organizations that have been 
involved with the study, and what exactly is their history? And 
what animals are they studying? And what’s the purpose of 
some of the study? What are some of the concerns as a result of 
the study? 
 
So you can see there’s a lot of different information that we 
would require to ensure that we completely understand the bill 
and this component of being able to study, or to regulate the 
people that study your animals. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know from experience that in the Far 
North that there is the caribou management association and 
group that have really paid a lot of attention to, you know, the 
caribou health. The herd is something that obviously they’re 
concerned about, and there’s a collaboration amongst a number 
of organizations and provinces. I know Alberta’s involved. I 

believe the territories are involved, as well as the Nunavut and 
Saskatchewan and some of the northern Manitoba bands. So 
there is a number of organizations that really monitor the 
caribou herd and the caribou health. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that we were funding the caribou 
management team for a number of years, and I believe that the 
fund itself is still intact today. And I know they obviously have 
asked for more help and, you know, and the resources attached 
to that. So as the caribou management herd themselves begin to 
look at the health of the herd itself, would they be considered 
part of the study group? These are some of the things that we 
need to find out as a result of this bill. 
 
[14:45] 
 
This is really, really important because once you find out who’s 
studying your animals, it gives you a better perspective, Mr. 
Speaker, a better perspective of how different organizations are 
impacted and want to find out how our animals’ health is doing 
overall. So we need to know those organizations. 
 
And once you have the organizations identified, Mr. Speaker, 
then you need to go dig even further. Like what animals are 
they studying and for what purposes, and are they being 
directed to study the health of the animal from some special 
interest group? And the example I would use is, obviously if 
you look at the caribou management herd, there may be 
companies and corporations in northern Saskatchewan that have 
an interest. When you want to establish a mine or they want to 
explore for oil or gas, does this affect or impact the travels of 
the caribou herd? 
 
These are some of the issues and some of the really important 
questions that we need to ask. And that’s why I think licensing 
of those that study our animals is probably important in a sense 
that at the very least the government knows who are doing the 
study and who is being involved and who is paying for the 
study. And what are they studying, and what are they studying 
that particular species of wildlife or fish for? These are all the 
questions that we in particular have, Mr. Speaker, when we look 
at that particular aspect. 
 
The other issue I think is also important in this particular bill is, 
as you’d study the animals, does that include the study of the 
flora and fauna, Mr. Speaker? This is what we have to, you 
know, determine as well is if you’re going to study animals, do 
you study the environment around that animal? Is that all part of 
or inclusive of the study itself? 
 
Well again it gets very complicated here, Mr. Speaker, in a 
sense of . . . You see when you start evaluating and monitoring 
the ecosystem health attached to the study of one particular 
animal, it can become very complex. It can become very 
complicated. It can become very time consuming and it become 
for a period of a long time in which the study is going to occur. 
So we’re not just talking about taking samples of fish in a lake. 
We’re not just talking about a one-month migration pattern for 
the caribou, Mr. Speaker. This is a very complex and very 
complicated process. 
 
The bill itself, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, it’s 
really important that we look at the bill and we begin to dissect 



5998 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

each and every line because, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t do that, 
then obviously we’re doing an injustice to the work that many 
scientists and people that are concerned about the conservation 
of wildlife in natural spaces, well we would be doing them a 
disservice, and that’s something that we should not do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So again on the issue of identifying who’s studying the animals, 
is there a connection to those that are studying what animals 
and for what? Is there also a corresponding effort to try and 
study the natural ecosystem around those animals, as I 
mentioned the flora and the fauna of different ecosystems of our 
province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And then it begs the next question. If you’re studying the 
animals, do you also study the water which the animals are 
consuming? And that’s another thing that’s also quite 
important, Mr. Speaker, the health of our water system overall, 
like the overall quality of our water, the ability to drink some of 
the water. What’s in our water today? As we all hear about 
global warming, Mr. Speaker, we all hear about the changing 
weather patterns and all the dangers attached to the greenhouse 
gas emissions, one begins to ask the question: how’s our water 
quality? Is that having an effect on the fish? Is it having an 
effect on the ducks? Is it having an effect on the moose that do 
drink the water? How’s it affecting the ecosystem overall, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And then you ask the question about air quality. Again, are the 
people doing these studies, are they impacted with . . . Are they 
doing some of the air quality measurements necessary for the 
study of these animals? 
 
So from my perspective on one particular line, you look at the 
study of animals and being able to license those that want to 
study the animals in Saskatchewan as attached to Bill 161. This 
is a really complicated bill. It goes a long ways in terms of what 
some people want to understand. It goes a long ways into 
talking about animals’ health. But does it give us the specifics 
as to who is studying the animals, for what reason, and who is 
paying for that study? 
 
And the second part of the bill, Mr. Speaker, it’s really 
important that we pay attention to . . . or the second part of our 
critique of the bill is that are we also looking at the effect of the 
animals themselves when it comes to air quality, water quality, 
ecosystem health, flora and fauna health? The list goes on as to 
how these animals are part of the natural ecosystem. And if 
we’re just studying one component of the ecosystem, are we 
doing an injustice to all the other components? Now the reason 
why I say that, Mr. Speaker, is that as you look at Bill 161, 
again the regulation of who’s studying animals, you have to 
really begin to ask the question, and this is where I want to 
spend a bit of time, is on, who is studying what and for what 
purposes? 
 
Now I’ll give you an example that I think is really, really 
important. A number of elders in my constituency often talk 
about animal health. Many of them have lived in the North. 
They’ve fished and trapped and they’ve hunted and they’ve 
gathered things like berries and so on and so forth for years and 
years. And many of the elders noticed a change in the wildlife. 
They’ve noticed change in the ecosystem. They’ve noticed a 

change of how the world seems to operate, and many of them 
are frightened by it and concerned about it as well. So we need 
to begin to ask the elders themselves, what do you see as a 
direct challenge? So if the elders become involved in 
identifying the study of animals and thereby the study of the 
ecosystem, have they been consulted? Have they been involved 
and engaged in this, in the drafting of this bill? 
 
And that’s why I think it’s really important we don’t just take 
one particular aspect of the bill and concentrate on that. There 
are many moving parts and many people that are very 
concerned about the ecosystem generally from all walks of life. 
Northern Saskatchewan is no different when it comes to them 
or the people of northern Saskatchewan wanting to be engaged 
in these particular studies. We are not taking enough time nor 
are we paying any attention to their input and their concerns, 
Mr. Speaker. Because you hear a lot about the ecosystem health 
from the older people in my constituency. They see a lot of 
changes, and they’ve expressed those changes to me, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And they wouldn’t mind some explanation, when you start 
studying the animals themselves. And this is why I think it is 
with a lot of interest that we’re going to pay attention to who is 
actually studying the animal and why, all of a sudden is the 
government now coming along and saying, we’re going to 
begin to regulate the studying of animals and we’re going to 
want to be able to license people to do that? 
 
So what we’re assuming, Mr. Speaker, is that the study of 
animals isn’t restricted to just the animal. We’re obviously 
hoping that there’d be a lot of studies linked to the natural 
ecosystem that the animal inhabited or inhabits. And that’s why 
it’s really important, Mr. Speaker, that you look at water 
quality, air quality, flora and fauna quality, and in general 
ecosystem health of that particular animal that is being studied. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have always determined, and many older 
people have told me that in the North that they are concerned 
about the ecosystem health overall and the effect it’s having on 
animals, and the effect that it’s having not just on animal 
movement, but animal health as well. Many of the elders in the 
Dillon area, or as many would say the Buffalo River First 
Nations area and that includes St. George’s Hill and a number 
of other smaller communities around Dillon, Mr. Speaker, they 
often talk about weather patterns and the westerly winds. And 
many of the older people talk about some of the issues that they 
see on their particular land, and a number of them have really 
questioned the air quality and water quality of their region 
because of the activity happening at the Fort McMurray oil 
sands. And, Mr. Speaker, many of the elders believe that all that 
activity of the billions of dollars investment into the Alberta tar 
sands, that it is having a negative effect on the land and the air 
quality and the water quality of northwestern Saskatchewan. 
 
Elders have brought this up on a continual basis and they’ve 
been asking, what is the government doing to protect the land? 
Who’s studying all this particular information? Is there anybody 
out there collecting data? And, Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate 
answer that I give them, that I’m not aware of anybody doing 
that particular work. And now we look at the licensing that is 
necessary for Bill 161. It will give us some indication as to 
who’s taking an interest on our land from the research 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5999 

perspective and, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that many elders 
in my particular area want to know. 
 
One of the elders mentioned to me, Mr. Speaker, that he doesn’t 
eat as many ducks as he once did because some of the things 
that he’s seeing, that he has seen over time, in terms of the 
quality of the ducks that he is now harvesting, that he finds that 
some of the ducks are odd shaped. Some of them have some 
weird growth in their body. So a lot of times they won’t eat 
some of the ducks that they do harvest because it appears that 
this is not a very healthy animal. So they don’t consume it 
because it’s all part of the food chain. 
 
So they look at some of these things, and when they find 
abnormalities within the animal health, whether it’s a duck or a 
fish or a moose or deer, where do they go for that kind of help 
to find out what caused the particular abnormality in that 
particular animal? There is no venue for many of the people that 
come across some of these animals. And they are very, very 
curious, Mr. Speaker, as to why some of these animals are 
suffering from certain ailments that are not normally in their 
system overall, so a lot of them begin to speculate. 
 
And a number of elders from the Dillon area and Buffalo 
Narrows area often tell me that we’re not paying close attention 
to what is being deposited on the land and on the animals and 
on our water system from the Fort McMurray tar sands activity. 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing of that sort happening, and 
this is one of the reasons why we have constantly and will 
continually call the provincial Government of Saskatchewan to 
do a baseline study of what is being deposited on our lands in 
northwestern Saskatchewan from the Alberta tar sands project 
located in and around the Fort McMurray area. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, as long as we continue talking about 
those that are studying our animal health, we have to begin to 
pay attention on not just the animal health but all the connecting 
ecosystems, support systems that are out there, whether it’s air 
quality, water quality, and flora and fauna quality, Mr. Speaker. 
So you look at the connectivity of animals on their habitat, Mr. 
Speaker, and then you look at the environmental pressures on 
that animal in that habitat, and then you look at the harvesting 
pressures, Mr. Speaker. To be able to manage all the demands 
on our wildlife, Mr. Speaker, province-wide, is a very complex 
and very trying and difficult task. 
 
And often people in Saskatchewan, many of them like to have 
their perspective understood. And we can appreciate that, but 
when you have to listen to 10 different demands on your 
wildlife from 20 different perspectives and from 30 different 
regions, it becomes a very complicated situation, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s why when you look at the external factors on animal 
health, you have to also look on the harvesting pressure on 
those animal numbers to be able to understand exactly the 
amount of pressure that our natural ecosystem is under on a 
continual basis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, going back again to some of the discussions 
we’ve had with the older people in my particular area, we talk 
about the pressures on the natural ecosystem and what is 
happening. 
 
Now one of the older people in Dillon told me one day, you 

know we’re not monitoring what is being deposited on our 
lands from, you know, from the Alberta tar sands project. We 
get their wind because the wind, it’s a westerly wind. So any 
activity and pollution that is created on the Fort McMurray 
activity, Mr. Speaker, the westerly winds will bring that 
pollution towards our lands and our people, is what he said. 
And that’s exactly true. The plume of influence, as some people 
like to use the phrase, Mr. Speaker, it is now hitting 
northwestern Saskatchewan. 
 
And many of the people, especially the elders out there, they 
notice the change in the land, and they’re asking the 
governments to be responsible and to begin to investigate that. 
Now does the government investigate themselves, and would 
they be one of the people that they have to license their own 
activity? These are some of the questions we have on Bill 161, 
and it’s really, really important that we do that. 
 
So without any scientific research, without any help, any 
technical help, or university-trained people’s help, many elders 
are frustrated when they say to me that we know that there is a 
threat to our ecosystem health from the Fort McMurray tar 
sands activity and yet nobody seems to be doing anything about 
that. Can somebody study that? Can somebody study the animal 
health to see if they are being impacted by all the pollution and 
all the particles being dropped on our land from the oil sands 
activity in and around northeastern Alberta? 
 
[15:00] 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have those questions because 
obviously we need to have that support mechanism in place. 
And if this is what the government is proposing through this 
bill, then we need to know who the contact people are, how 
much will they be involved with this particular issue. And will 
they be available to the people of the northwest to answer 
questions or to be able to direct inquiries or to even do studies 
on animals found in the forest that may have been impacted 
negatively by this activity? 
 
So people that are listening at home will begin to ask the 
question, well if Fort McMurray is doing well, the tar sands are 
generating billions of dollars for profits for the oil and gas 
company, Mr. Speaker, and they have all this activity 
happening there, who is monitoring the westerly winds that we 
get in northwestern Saskatchewan from Fort McMurray? Who 
gets all that pollution, is the people of the Dillon area, of the 
Buffalo Narrows area, and of course of other areas that 
surround the Buffalo River First Nation. 
 
Now we know that the plume of influence, as some of the 
scientists like to make reference to, is that that plume is getting 
bigger and bigger and bigger. As the activity continues, Mr. 
Speaker, certain areas get hit harder than others. But quite 
frankly, the plume of influence is getting bigger and bigger in 
the sense that all that oil and gas activity is creating a strain on 
the natural ecosystem of northwestern Saskatchewan. And 
nobody’s paying attention to it at all. 
 
Now what we’ve been calling for, and this is where I hope Bill 
161 does indeed address this particular issue, does have the 
ways and means to direct the different interests that are out 
there to be able to check whether this activity in the oil sands is 



6000 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

impacting and affecting the natural habitat of northwestern 
Saskatchewan, and what exactly are they depositing. What 
exactly are they depositing on the land and on the fish and the 
wildlife in the water in that particular area? We need to study 
that, Mr. Speaker. And if this bill talks about that particular 
study, then we should take the time to study this thoroughly and 
not just limit it to the particular species of animal but to the 
activity surrounding the ecosystem health and the actual 
ecosystem itself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we would suggest today, we would suggest today in order 
for this bill to have merit — in particular this particular section 
of the bill where they talk about licensing of those that are 
studying animals to know who’s doing what out there — that 
we need to expand that provision. If that consultation that we 
speak about within the NDP opposition involves a wide variety 
of people, not just two or three groups because the health and 
study of animals and thus the ecosystem of our land involves 
many, many people, it doesn’t just involve one or two 
organizations. It involves many, many people and many, many 
layers of people that utilize not only the wildlife but all the 
resources on some of these lands. So we need to make sure that 
we’re inclusive and that we’re very, very open and transparent 
and accountable to those people that are being impacted by laws 
of this sort to make sure that they are involved, that they do 
have a say. 
 
And many of the elders in northwestern Saskatchewan are 
crying out very loud that they want to be engaged in this. They 
want to know what’s going on, and they want to make sure that 
some of their issues that they bring up are being handled as 
seriously as they should be. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the 
most important messages that I have around Bill 161 when you 
talk about the study of animals and thus, I hope, the study of the 
ecosystems throughout Saskatchewan, and in particular 
northwestern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Minister of the 
Environment one thing very, very clear today is that we have 
been asking in northwestern Saskatchewan for a baseline study, 
a baseline study of what the Fort McMurray tar sands are 
depositing on our land in terms of pollutants as a result of their 
activity. And if we don’t do the baseline study, we don’t begin 
to monitor the animal health nor the flora and fauna health nor 
the water quality study nor the air quality study that’s 
necessary, and the longer we put it off, the less and less 
opportunity that we will have to hold the companies, the oil and 
gas companies, accountable for all the pollution that they’re 
putting on our Saskatchewan lands, Mr. Speaker, that they’re 
putting in our Saskatchewan lakes and rivers, that they’re 
putting on our forests, and that they’re putting on our animal 
health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to make sure that that study is done right away, and 
we need to make sure that it’s done with earnest. And we need 
to ensure that the people that live in the area are also actively 
involved with the scientists and with the different interest 
groups that may be studying animal health and ecosystem 
health in any part of Saskatchewan. And I made reference in 
this particular discussion on the northwestern part of our 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, one of the gentlemen who I’ve had a great 

amount of respect for over my years was a person that worked 
in the fire suppression program. And he lived just outside of 
Dillon; his name was Henry LaPlante. And Mr. LaPlante was, 
he was the mayor of his home community at one time, and he 
was also somebody that was very active in fishing and trapping 
and hunting. Henry taught his boys how to survive in the bush, 
and he really spent a lot of quality time with his family. And he 
took his job as a fire suppression officer very seriously. He was 
there every year. He worked very hard, Mr. Speaker. And when 
he had issues that needed to be addressed, he would actually 
bring those issues forward. I can remember when I was the 
mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse, he would actually come and explain 
things to many of the mayors that are sitting around the table as 
to what he foresaw as issues that we need to be concerned about 
20 years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today, now Mr. LaPlante, rest his soul, has left us. But I 
remember him one day distinctly telling us, when it comes to 
the Fort McMurray oil and gas activity, when it comes to all the 
exploration and the billions of dollars that are being generated 
for the oil and gas companies in that particular area, we are 
having a negative environmental effect on our land. 
 
And one of the things that he would say is that he would go up 
on a tower, and a number of people that he worked with would 
tell him that when he cleaned out the windshield or the window 
in that particular tower in the morning, he would actually come 
up with some grimy, greasy cover on, you know, on the actual 
windows themselves. Because obviously when you’re in a fire 
tower, you have to monitor a large area. And when he went 
there in the mornings to do his job and to work with other 
people that were in the fire watch program, they would have to 
clean the windows on a regular basis because these windows 
had almost like a soot-like, tar-like substance on them. And, 
Mr. Speaker, he knew that that came from the Fort McMurray 
oil activity.  
 
He knew then and that’s what his biggest argument was 
20-some years ago, is let’s get a baseline study now so 20 years 
from now we can actually quantify, we can quantify the damage 
created to the northern ecosystem as a result of some of the 
neighbouring activities or the neighbouring province’s oil and 
gas activity. And if we can quantify that activity, Mr. Speaker, 
if we can quantify that activity, would it not then justify some 
legal ramification to clean up that mess being dumped on 
northern Saskatchewan land from that activity around Fort 
McMurray, Mr. Speaker? And that was his point 20-some years 
ago.  
 
And that’s one of the issues, I think, are really relevant today to 
the minister, to the minister today when he talks about studying 
of animals, that this is not something that he simply takes 
lightly and assume that there’s five or six different 
organizations that might want to study animals. We need to 
make sure it’s broad, it’s encompassing, and above all else that 
it’s inclusive of many, many people that are concerned about 
that because many, many people count on our wildlife and our 
natural ecosystems to be able to survive for the years to come. 
 
So one of the things that we often speak about, Mr. Speaker, in 
northwestern Saskatchewan, is when is that baseline study 
going to be commissioned so that we can again hold to account 
those that are polluting our land and those that are making great 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6001 

profit, great profit on their activity and yet refuse to pay the cost 
to remediate that pollution on our lands? Every single day that 
goes by, that activity in Fort McMurray continues, and the 
pollution of northwestern Saskatchewan will continue to 
accumulate until this government has enough courage to begin 
that work, as the elders have indicated they should do, to begin 
to monitor that activity on our northern lands, lakes, and forests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So my point today, my point today on the licensing aspect: that 
somewhere along the line when we talk about licensing, that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, in particular this Minister of the 
Environment, take his job seriously and say, as a result of this 
provision of being able to license those that are studying 
animals, we are going to put in some parameters that they also 
have to follow. They should begin to monitor some of these 
animals that they’re studying for any kind of pollution that may 
be associated with the Fort McMurray oil activity. 
 
They should also make a provision that they would undertake 
the study of flora and fauna health. They, the government, 
would undertake the study of water quality, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’d make the effort to study the air quality. Because some of 
the points that Mr. LaPlante raised is that if we let them do this, 
then 20 years from now we would not know where we began 
with in terms of what was there then and what is there now 
because they’ll have 23 years allowed to accumulate all that 
pollution on our lands and lakes. And that’ll have a negative 
effect on animal health, on water quality, and air quality as 
well. 
 
So Henry knew this 25, 30 years ago. He tried to educate young 
people about that, but not many people listened, and not too 
many people paid attention, Mr. Speaker. So I think it’s 
important that as we look at the study of animals, it opens a 
wide variety of responsibility in what we think on the NDP side 
is something that’s long overdue. 
 
If we’re studying animal health and we want to monitor those 
that are studying animal health through this bill, Bill 161, then 
we should be inclusive of engaging all the people and making 
sure that the studies that are being undertaken on these animals 
is far reaching, very encompassing, and very thorough in the 
sense of studying all the ecosystem, not just a single species of 
a single area on a single time frame. It doesn’t work that way, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s much more complicated, much more complex, 
and we need to pay attention to that particular challenge. 
 
Now I’ll go back to the Fort McMurray oil sands activity or tar 
sands activity, whatever the case may be. We know that they’re 
making billions and billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, from the 
sale of oil and gas. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re also seeing that 
there’s a lot of discussion on a number of pipelines that people 
are concerned about. Whether it goes to Kitimat, BC or whether 
it goes to the States or whether it goes to Eastern Canada first, 
all these discussions on how we get the Alberta oil to market, 
that’s been the fundamental argument we see in the news today. 
 
And yet it seems nobody’s speaking up for a part of the 
province of Saskatchewan that is paying the highest price, the 
highest price ever on the degradation of their lands as a result of 
the activity in oil and gas. Now if this minister wants to be 
serious about his roles and his responsibility as Minister of the 

Environment, then I think he needs to begin to research whether 
the Alberta government or whether some of the oil and gas 
companies in Alberta that are contributing to the degradation of 
our ecosystem in northwestern Saskatchewan, whether they 
have an environmental fund set up, an environmental fund set 
up and money collecting there to remediate the pollution that 
they’re putting on our land year after year after year after year. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one would assume, given today’s 
environmental awareness — and I’m sure that this is a constant 
point in discussion amongst the senior members of the 
bureaucratic team — that when do we begin to do the baseline 
study? How do we hold Alberta’s feet to the fire? And do we 
have an argument, do we have an argument today that would 
position us as a province of Saskatchewan a lot better, a lot 
better in holding the companies in Alberta responsible for 
depositing pollutants on our land as a result of the Fort 
McMurray activity? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the premise of how we want to hold 
companies responsible is all encompassing under SERM’s 
legislation when it says the polluter pays, the polluter pays. So 
if somebody’s been creating the problem in the environment, 
then the premise of the polluter pays should stand. 
 
And I can remember our discussions, Mr. Speaker, around the 
Uranium City mines, Mr. Speaker, and I think Lorado was one 
mine and Gunnar was another mine and Beaverlodge was 
another mine. All these mines around the Uranium City area, 
Mr. Speaker, were mines that were left as they were. And all of 
a sudden SERM began investigating the activities of some of 
the mines in the sense of they simply boarded up the mines, and 
they left everything as they were, and then the companies kind 
of scooted off. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if memory serves me correct, the province 
of Saskatchewan, the NDP government at the time worked very 
closely with NRCanada, Natural Resources Canada, and at the 
time I believe the minister was Mr. Goodale who was an MP 
[Member of Parliament] from Saskatchewan. Well NRCan 
[Natural Resources Canada] and Saskatchewan Environment 
began working on a joint project, and their joint project was 
simply because the Gunnar and the mines that were operating 
out there, Lorado, they were operating under a federal Crown 
corporation, I believe, Eldorado Nuclear, and all the federal 
laws applied to that particular federal Crown corporation. 
 
So during our discussions with them, we said, well why doesn’t 
the provincial government and the federal government 
contribute to a central fund, and we would work with you to 
begin to clean up all the abandoned uranium mines around 
Uranium City? Because these mines are not only dangerous to 
go to, but they also pose a tremendous environmental risk to the 
wildlife, to the local people, and to the ecosystem health. So 
these discussions went on and on for a couple of years, but we 
were bound and determined at the time to make sure that 
Uranium City’s area was cleaned up — Gunnar and Lorado 
mines, Beaverlodge, and a bunch of smaller mines, gold mines 
that scattered — the entire area. 
 
So at the end of the day we agreed. And I think at the time it 



6002 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

was a $36 million project with Saskatchewan I think 
contributing 12 million and the balance coming from the federal 
government. And we were moving our way forward. 
 
At the times of the discussions on this particular project, Mr. 
Speaker, we knew that the $30-some million that were 
identified was not going to be enough. We knew that, but we 
knew that it would be a first step in ensuring that, at the very 
least, there’s an effort to hold the parties that were responsible 
for these mines, to hold them to account, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what we wanted to do. 
 
And at the time, the provincial government rose to the occasion. 
The federal government through Natural Resources Canada, 
NRCan, also rose to the occasion because these . . . I think it 
was Gunnar that was actually a federal Crown corporation 
project, and they came to the table and said, yes, those are our 
sites and we did operate these sites, you know, as a federal 
Crown corporation, so we’re responsible as well. So we 
engaged the federal government on that project. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it took a lot of discussion, negotiation, and some 
pushing and prodding, but finally the federal government came 
to the table, and now you see, Mr. Speaker, now you see 
activity in and around the Athabasca Basin that’s actually 
beginning to resolve and to address the abandoned uranium 
mines that were around for 20 years and nobody doing a thing 
about it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s two other companies that we 
actually also engaged. And we engaged these companies from 
the perspective of saying, well look, we have this provision in 
our laws that say polluter pays, so either you guys join this 
effort or we’ll just simply, we’ll just work our way to 
pressuring you to do so. And, Mr. Speaker, the companies took 
a responsible position. Cameco assumed ownership of 
Beaverlodge, which is another mine site. They operated under 
their previous company many years ago, but Cameco took 
responsibility, and they began joining the process and joining 
this effort. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I really want to 
commend the SERM at the time, the SERM bureaucrats for is 
that they worked very hard on this project. And they found one 
particular mine, and I can’t remember the name of the mine, but 
they’d done a corporate search of this mine, and then they 
found out that this company actually transitioned out of 
uranium and into oil and gas. And I don’t remember the 
company’s name offhand, so I’m not going to try and hazard a 
guess here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this particular company, we approached them 
and they agreed. They changed their name, obviously. They 
changed their location, and they also changed their activity. But 
after we sat down and we discussed this project with them, they 
came along and said, yes, it’s a responsible thing to do; we 
would agree to be part of this. Because obviously nobody wants 
to be viewed as a company that left an abandoned mine 
somewhere that was posing environmental risk to not only the 
ecosystem but to the people that lived in and around their mine, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as a result of that today, clearly 20 years later, we’re seeing 
activities that are beginning to address and remediate some of 

the sites that some of these companies had operated, some of 
the uranium mines at around Uranium City. Mr. Speaker, this 
type of effort takes a lot of work. And that’s why today, you 
know, I can tell people as a former minister of Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management that we had a great 
team and, Mr. Speaker, they worked very hard, and they 
brought this particular project to fruition. 
 
And when the time came for the province of Saskatchewan to 
put their contribution in towards protecting the environmental 
health of animals, protecting the public health of people, and 
ensuring that the ecosystem health was going to be restored as 
best as possible, Mr. Speaker, we made, they made it, the 
bureaucrats in the province of Saskatchewan together made this 
a reality, and today we see the activity happening around some 
of these mines that were abandoned for years and years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how much longer we have, as an update, 
Mr. Speaker, how much longer we have to clean up some of 
these mines certainly remains an open question. We know that 
SRC, the Saskatchewan Research Council, have been engaged. 
We understand a number of companies . . . I think Nuna is also 
involved. And the last time I was up in the Far North a couple 
of months ago, we took a tour of a few of the sites that have 
been fixed up, Mr. Speaker. There still remains a lot of work 
attached to those projects, but at the very least the work has 
started and it’s continued. Progress is being made, but there’s 
much more work that needs to be done, and we understood all 
of that. We understood all of that, Mr. Speaker. And there is 
still a lot of different issues that have to be addressed, but at the 
very least that project is moving forward. 
 
And that’s exactly my point around Bill 161, that you’ve got to 
have an encompassing, an all-encompassing process when you 
start talking about studying animal health. It doesn’t necessarily 
mean you study one fish caught in one pond in one month by 
one person. Mr. Speaker, it is a very, very complex ecosystem 
that we’re trying to manage, and you have to look at all aspects 
of that ecosystem and how to correct it and how to engage 
people properly and get the parties that created the problem in 
the first place to come forward and accept responsibility to 
remediate that land that they had some negative effects on in 
previous years so that they can correct their actions in the past 
and thereby achieve a good public relations coup, so to speak, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s my point today about the Fort McMurray oil activity, 
Mr. Speaker, that this kind of monitoring of the pollution that 
northwestern Saskatchewan gets has not been done. And if we 
look at some of the issues, Mr. Speaker, and the Minister of the 
Economy is chirping from his chair, Mr. Speaker. He needs to 
start standing up for the people of Saskatchewan instead of big 
oil and gas companies from other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. He 
may talk about five little monitoring stations to see what the 
effects are on our water but, Mr. Speaker, my point exactly is he 
is not doing enough. He’s underperforming when it comes to 
the protection of the environment. On a continual basis, he 
underperforms. 
 
So my argument today is that if you’re going to study animal 
health and begin to license those that are studying animal 
health, then the government needs to take a big mirror and have 
a look at themselves and saying, we should get involved with 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6003 

studying animal health and not just restrict our study to animal 
health but to be inclusive of what it affects that are creating 
stress on the animal health, which is the ecosystem challenges 
that are out there, and to begin to hold those at account, hold 
those that are responsible to account to come along and be part 
of the solution as was practised a number of years ago under the 
NDP administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So Bill 161, on one particular aspect of requiring licences for 
scientists that are studying animals, Mr. Speaker, there are three 
basic comments that we wish to make. Number one is we want 
to know who is studying the animals. Who is paying for that 
study? And foremost, Mr. Speaker, what animals and what 
ecosystem are they studying? That’s the first list of questions 
that we have. 
 
The second point I want to make is that, how many other 
organizations are being excluded? We would like the list of 
organizations that have been consulted on this bill. Yes, I fully 
respect the Wildlife Federation. Yes, I fully respect the wildlife 
advisory committee, Mr. Speaker. These are good 
Saskatchewan people that come from all walks of life, and they 
do a great service to their province. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we need to be inclusive of other groups 
that could add to the solutions when it comes to our 
environmental performance as a government and as a province. 
And some of those groups that need to be involved, Mr. 
Speaker, are trappers, fishermen, people that live off the land, 
Mr. Speaker, people that are involved with the green movement 
in general, people that sometimes you don’t like their opinions 
being expressed. We may not agree, but at least they have a lot 
to contribute. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to involve these people 
immediately and to make sure that they have what I think is 
important: they have the opportunity to participate. 
 
So the first point is, who is studying? The second point, be 
more inclusive. And the third point I want to make, as I 
mentioned at the outset, is that we’ve got to start holding those 
that pollute and destroy our wildlife or our animals and our 
land, we need to hold them to account better and stronger. And 
that’s why today once again I’m encouraging that minister and 
that government to try and begin to work on a baseline study 
now and not wait another 20 years and let the oil and gas 
companies in Alberta continue dumping pollutants on our land 
and not being held to account. 
 
And people will say, well what’s the baseline study? What’s 
this dumping? How do we get all this information to the public? 
Well that’s exactly the other point that I raise in this bill, Mr. 
Speaker, is the government should be doing some of this work 
on their own because, as I mentioned, Mr. . . . or Henry, when 
he mentioned to us many, many years ago is the oil and gas 
companies drop pollutants on our land and over time those 
pollutants build up, and then if you don’t do a baseline study 
now, it’ll keep building up. Then we finally get the action point 
where we’re studying it, they would have gotten away with 20, 
30 years of dumping pollution on our land without being held 
legally responsible for it. Then how do we get them to clean it 
up? That was his point 20 years ago. And today now I want to 
say thank you to Mr. LaPlante for giving us that vision and that 

concern and that point many years ago. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
never too late to begin that process. 
 
So one of the things I would tell the minister is that when you 
want to study animals, be inclusive of many, many other 
organizations. Number two, you study the entire ecosystem 
health, not just the animal on a one-off. And number three, if 
you find evidence of pollution, which I think you should ask for 
when people study these animals, then let’s go after the ones 
that are polluting the animals and the wildlife and the 
ecosystem and get them to reclaim those areas. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s really, really important we begin that 
type of work. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So we’ve said a lot about that, the provision about the study of 
animals. We’re going to pay very, very close attention to this. 
We would encourage those that are involved with the study of 
animals to share information with the public. There’s nothing 
wrong with sharing information on the health of our animals. 
And I know that the caribou management herd does share a lot 
of information. I know that this joint committee studies caribou 
health. They do consult with the elders in the Athabasca Basin. 
They do consult with the leadership. They do consult with the 
people that harvest the elk, Mr. Speaker, or the caribou. So it’s 
important to take a lesson from them as to how to be inclusive 
and how to really communicate well with people. 
 
So under this bill, if they get the provision to license this bill, 
we want to know . . . or they have to license the people 
studying, we want to know who they are and what they’re up to. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to shift gears a bit to the second part 
of the particular bill that talks about updates to reflect the fact 
that licensing for hunting has been outsourced to a single 
electronic vendor, Mr. Speaker. Now I want to make sure that 
people out in Saskatchewan know this: that this government 
came along and they . . . 
 
We always are critical of the government of trying to outsource 
services and privatize the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They done a 
great job, they done a great job on things like right now the 
liquor store debate that’s out there in the public. And they want 
to get rid of the liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of 
their processes is to diminish the earning capacity and to 
diminish their importance so they can actually begin to see the 
sale of liquor happen in stores and in confectioneries, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The other Crown corporation that they did sell off, Mr. Speaker, 
is Information Services Corporation, the same corporation that 
made 15 or $16 million a year for the province. Well this 
particular government is selling that Crown corporation. So 
now we come along, and we argue as an opposition that the sale 
of some of these Crowns is not acceptable to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and you’ve got to stop privatizing services. And 
that goes back to the bill, Bill 161, Mr. Speaker, another 
example of how they’ve taken the ability of many people to sell 
licences at the confectionery stores and the different offices in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So what gets us quite upset, Mr. Speaker, is on one hand this 



6004 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

government comes along says, yes, you can sell liquor now in 
any store and confectionery, but to buy a hunting licence or a 
fishing licence, you’ve got to get a hold of a company in 
Tennessee, I think. I think it’s Tennessee. Somewhere in the 
States, Mr. Speaker. And that’s going to . . . You know, that’s 
the only place that you can buy a licence now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And some of the places in northern Saskatchewan, some of the 
companies are kind of shaking their head because they had the 
ability to be able to buy some of these licences, Mr. Speaker, 
from some of the stores and some of the vendors throughout 
northern Saskatchewan. Well now what happens, the provincial 
government single-sources issue of licensing to a company in 
the States. And they took away the opportunity, they took away 
the opportunity for some of these local vendors and some of 
these local businesses to sell licences to local people which is 
really convenient for, an example, the outfitting industry. Well 
they took away the ability for some of these vendors and these 
small businesses to issue licences, and they gave the 
responsibility to an American-based company in Tennessee to 
be able to do all the licensing permits issuance out of the States. 
But then they turn around and they’re saying, well you guys can 
sell liquor now in your store, but you can’t sell your fishing 
licence. So we’re sitting there saying, well what’s all that 
about? You know, how does that make any, any sense? 
 
So that’s one of the reasons why in opposition we look at the 
Saskatchewan Party, and they’ve underperformed. They’ve got 
their priorities wrong, Mr. Speaker, and they’re very . . . 
They’re one unsuccessful government in terms of being able to 
take advantage of all the great wealth that was handed to them 
to make a really lasting difference for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And this is what we say on this side of the 
House is really, really getting their priorities all confused and 
certainly mixed up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it is frustrating to a lot of the local, some of the local 
businesses in the North. And I look at the outfitting industry 
themselves . . . [inaudible] . . . operate some of these really 
high-priced or high-cost operations, where they come back to 
this government and they’ve got to pay higher prices to get 
permits and licences from companies they used to be able to 
walk down the street from and get them. Now they’ve got to 
phone online to a company . . . or apply online to a company 
based in the States because the Saskatchewan Party government 
thought that was the best way to administer hunting licences 
from a different country many, many miles away. 
 
And then all of a sudden the frustration was getting so strong, 
Mr. Speaker, that the former minister said, we’ve got to do 
something to correct this problem because we’re getting 
outfitters and some of the vendors out there are getting mad 
because we had this new process we put in place. And some 
guy at the cabinet table said, I know; we’ll let them sell liquor 
there. Maybe that’ll solve the problem. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we sit on this side of the House and we say, 
gee, these guys are driven by their ideology. No common sense, 
no plan, and certainly they have underperformed at the expense 
of Saskatchewan people. And from our perspective, Mr. 
Speaker, this is yet another example of how government has 
lost its way. And mind you, if you’d been in opposition for 16 
years, to try and be government and perform at your peak level, 

it takes a long time to do that. Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen no 
evidence that they have achieved that in any way, shape, or 
form. 
 
So once again, Mr. Speaker, I would point this out, that when 
you outsource, when you outsource a basic service, when you 
outsource a basic service of issuing business . . . or a licence 
and a permit to an American-based company and you sit on 
your hands and you’re saying that’s, you know, that’s the best 
you can do, that’s where we get our argument and our 
discussion about the Sask Party government has 
underperformed horribly at the expense of many Saskatchewan 
people. And this is one yet another example of how this 
government has failed miserably on many fronts. 
 
And this particular bill brought the notion forward, Mr. 
Speaker, that in their brilliance, Mr. Speaker, they decided we’ll 
outsource, you know, when people want to buy their licence for 
hunting and permits for hunting, we’ll outsource that to an 
American-based company. That’ll serve Saskatchewan best, 
they thought, Mr. Speaker. Well they got a lot of criticism. We 
know that. We’ve got copies of letters of people that were just 
absolutely angry with them, saying, what are you thinking? 
What are you thinking putting in provisions of this sort? Like 
who thought of this idea to be able to outsource, outsource the 
issuance of hunting licences to a Tennessee-based company in 
the States? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it was the Saskatchewan Party government 
that came up with that brainchild, Mr. Speaker. And this is 
where I think it’s important that we tell new ministers that are 
coming into their portfolios, you have to sing the message and 
you may not believe in the message, but what you don’t want to 
do is expose the weakness of your government and some of the 
logic that doesn’t . . . or some of the moves that defies logic. 
And this is one of the examples, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I listen with a bit of amusement to some of the criticism. 
And this one guy told me, he said to me, he said, you know, 
these guys used to talk about Saskatchewan first. They used to 
talk about Saskatchewan first, and so far they’ve sold off a 
Crown corporation that was generating millions of dollars for 
us. They sold that off. And now they are looking at selling our 
liquor stores that are making millions of dollars for the people 
of Saskatchewan, if not billions of dollars. They’re looking at 
selling that, Mr. Speaker. And now they’ve outsourced the 
permits for hunting and fishing to an American-based company. 
Well what happened to the Saskatchewan first policy they were 
touting and screaming about and crying about when they were 
in opposition? Well the moment they became government, Mr. 
Speaker, guess what? The conservative ideology come home to 
roost. 
 
And they couldn’t help themselves, Mr. Speaker. They could 
not help themselves. They stuck to their ideology and this is the 
reason why under this bill we are now asking an 
American-based company for permits and licences to fish in 
Saskatchewan. And that’s absolutely absurd, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
absolutely absurd, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what they do is they turn around now and they say okay to 
the local vendor, to the local businessman that wasn’t really 
making a lot of money on issuing permits, Mr. Speaker, because 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6005 

there’s not a lot of money to be made on issuing permits, Mr. 
Speaker, for a lot of local businesses. But it was convenient for 
some of those businesses, and it brought people to their doors to 
purchase other things like gas and groceries, so on and so forth. 
So it was an attraction to their store which helped make other 
sales. That was the point that they had, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Saskatchewan Party government couldn’t figure that 
out. They could not figure that out, Mr. Speaker. So the net 
effect is they took that opportunity to get customers through the 
doors of many of these local stores and they said, you now 
apply to a company in the States to get your fishing licence or 
hunting licence as a result of the Sask Party’s intelligence, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we sit here and we listen and we can hear the 
echoes of, oh, Saskatchewan first. That was what they used to 
say when they were in opposition, Saskatchewan first. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen evidence that there is no intent 
whatsoever to protect Saskatchewan people’s interest as a result 
of some of the rules and regulations on Bill 161, that again 
qualifies and strengthens the position that the Sask Party 
government took that they should have this company out of 
Tennessee issuing permits and hunting licences to 
Saskatchewan people, to Saskatchewan outfitters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I wonder, and I wonder how the Wildlife Federation felt 
about that, Mr. Speaker? I wonder what the wildlife advisory 
committee felt about that, Mr. Speaker? They probably thought 
it was a pretty silly idea, Mr. Speaker. They probably thought, 
what the heck are these guys doing? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the sentiment on this side of 
the Assembly. They can’t figure this out, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’ve asked them time and time again. You’ve inherited a 
booming population, a growing population, a booming 
economy, and money in the bank, and money in the bank, Mr. 
Speaker. And all we asked them is, don’t mess it up. Don’t 
mess it up. And what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They messed it 
up. They messed it up. You know why, Mr. Speaker? Because 
they don’t have a clue what to do in government. We still see 
evidence of that today in seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker, in hoping 
that a consultant from the States will solve our health care 
problems, and front-line workers are asking to be engaged with 
that, Mr. Speaker. They still stubbornly dismiss that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So once again, despite given the largesse in terms of surplus 
money and having a growing population and a booming 
economy, Mr. Speaker, they still have found a way to mess it 
up. They still found a way to mess it up, Mr. Speaker. And this 
is another example of how they’re driven by their ideology of 
saying, we the Saskatchewan Party have a better idea on how 
we can issue permits and licensing for fishing and trapping. 
We’ll get an American-based company to do it. We’ll get an 
American-based company to run our health care system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we in the NDP know and feel that once they 
begin to Americanize our country, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s 
issuing of licensing or having them direct our health care, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s going to hurt a lot of Saskatchewan people. And 
we tell people to be very, very careful. Be very, very careful 
what the Sask Party’s doing. And watch with great interest as to 

what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker, because there is a plan over 
there. It’s driven by the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. Give them 
about six, seven more months and the Conservatives on that 
side will eat up the Liberals, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what’s 
going to happen over there pretty darn fast, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So my argument, my argument today is that not only do you 
privatize certain Crown corporations that were generating 
millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, you’ve now outsourced a very 
important service to the people of Saskatchewan to a company 
out of the States to issue fishing licences and permits for 
hunting, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a shame. That’s a shame 
because it impacts, it impacts our local businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — With leave to make introductions. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has asked 
for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and thank you to all the members of the House for the ability to 
make this introduction. We have some, a couple of guests in the 
east gallery, one that may be a bit of a stranger to us, a couple 
of strangers: Stephanie, the wife of our member from Rosemont 
here — Stephanie, if you can give us a wave — and William 
Gregory Craik Wotherspoon. There he is, giving a big wave. 
Yes, so if we could all give a great warm welcome to these 
folks and that other guy that’s up there too. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
[15:45] 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to also welcome William. It gives me great confidence to 
see another fine New Democrat sitting in our galleries today. So 
I’d like to welcome William today and of course his proud, 
proud parents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that’s really important, as I mentioned at the 
outset, Mr. Speaker, is that we have got to get the people of 
Saskatchewan to realize what the Saskatchewan Party is doing. 
They are deteriorating services, Mr. Speaker. They are doing 
everything from privatizing our Crowns to outsourcing jobs and 
outsourcing services that really affect and support our local 
businesses throughout our province. And these are just two of 
the examples, Mr. Speaker, two of the examples that we are 
concerned about when it comes to Bill 161, The Wildlife 



6006 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

Amendment Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back a bit and give a few 
comments about the Wildlife Federation and of course the 
wildlife advisory committee, Mr. Speaker. As I said at the 
outset, those two organizations, these two groups of people 
have done a tremendous amount of work in the province over 
the years. I certainly have had a lot of great discussions with 
them, a lot of meetings with them. And, Mr. Speaker, I was 
always amazed and I was always pleased to see how some of 
these organizations were willing to work, they were willing to 
work co-operatively with any organization. 
 
And one of the most astounding things that I saw, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of some of the great leadership was their former 
president, and I think her last name was Lorenz. And Ms. 
Lorenz, I think it was Joyce, she was the president at the time. 
And she was very, very straightforward in the sense of what she 
wanted to represent the interests of her membership. And she 
was very strong, saying we all have to be responsible to ensure 
that we have good protection of our wildlife and of our fishing 
industry and so on and so forth. She didn’t take no prisoners 
when it came to their position and their members’ position, Mr. 
Speaker. And Joyce was really, really straightforward, and I 
really appreciated that. She was someone that you could 
certainly trust. And I admired her for her stance and her 
position, and she was not going to move a single inch from her 
position. And she was adamant — this was what we would like 
to see. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the strength that she brought to the 
table in the wildlife advisory committee as well . . . The people 
and organizations that were around the table all had the same 
interests at heart, and that is to manage the resources, protect 
the land, and to ensure people are responsible when it comes to 
harvesting animals or fish and so on and so forth. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say at the outset that I support their 
efforts in the past. I support their activity in terms of being 
co-operative. And they should be at the table when you begin to 
talk about issues of this sort. 
 
That being said, that being said, Mr. Speaker, the FSIN 
[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] should be 
involved, Mr. Speaker. The Métis Nation should be involved. 
The Northern Trappers Association should be involved, Mr. 
Speaker. A number of the environmental organizations in the 
province should be involved. The seniors in some of the 
organizations or some of the regions of the community that are 
active — and I gave the example today of the North — that are 
very active in not only hunting but trapping as well and fishing, 
we need to engage them as well. 
 
And imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, the power you would 
have in that room if we had the wildlife advisory board and the 
wildlife association, the trappers, fishermen, elders, and people 
that have lived off the land, the environmental groups, if they’re 
in the room architecting ways and means in which they could 
all participate in the one single cause of their life is to ensure 
that we have good management of the resources that the good 
Lord gave us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that that’s what some of 

the history and some of the points that I wanted to raise when 
you talk about the Wildlife Federation and the wildlife advisory 
committee, my only point on that particular front, Mr. Speaker, 
is that they have got to be more involved and engaging, more 
involved and engaging with other organizations. And then we 
wouldn’t mind seeing the list of the people that were consulted. 
 
Now what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the start 
of my comments, if you were to look at the strain and the 
pressure that our wildlife find themselves under — and the 
protection of the ecosystem is another such strain — but just in 
terms of harvesting, Mr. Speaker, SERM’s got a layer, not only 
the different users but the different time frames for different 
species. And it just becomes a really complicated management 
method that they undertake to, you know, just to manage the 
animal population of the province. And a good example, Mr. 
Speaker, is they’ll have certain hunting seasons for certain 
people in certain areas at certain times. And then next week that 
all changes; they have a different group of people that could 
hunt a different animal during different times. It becomes very 
complex and very complicated. 
 
So the job to manage our resources under the Saskatchewan 
environmental action is very complex. It’s not simplistic. It has 
a lot of demands. And for every action that you undertake, 
there’s a reaction somewhere. So you’ve got to be proactive and 
involve as many people as you can, otherwise problems will 
persist. And that’s why it’s important to note, I don’t believe the 
Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, I don’t believe that the Métis 
Nation of Saskatchewan is involved in these consultations. 
Maybe they are, but there’s no list here. I don’t know if the 
FSIN is at the table with the Saskatchewan Party on 
management of the resources. I don’t know if they’re involved, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you also have to look at the notion around, as I mentioned, 
some of the trappers in northern Saskatchewan. I know there’s a 
trappers association province-wide. There’s the specific 
Northern Trappers Association. There’s also the commercial 
fishing industry. Mr. Speaker, there’s also a bunch of people 
involved with the protection of the land. There could be 
environmental groups that would want to be engaged. These are 
the people that we should be talking to so they can become part 
of the solution instead of being rejected by the Saskatchewan 
Party, then they hit the media and then it all looks like we’re all 
fighting amongst each other which should not be the case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As an example I would use, Mr. Speaker, we talked about how 
a senior citizen in northern Saskatchewan can participate in the 
discussions on animal health. They can make a good, solid 
argument around how Fort McMurray oil activity is having a 
dramatic and negative, lasting and continual strain, and creating 
continual strain on the ecosystem health of northwestern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Every day we sit here in the Assembly, and young people can 
certainly relate to this, every single day we sit in this Assembly 
the oil and gas activity through the westerly winds is dropping 
pollution on our northern lands. And nobody is monitoring that, 
Mr. Speaker. Nobody is monitoring that. And does 
Saskatchewan get a cut of the financial action, so to speak? Not 
a penny, not a penny, Mr. Speaker. We get the pollution and 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6007 

they get the cash. 
 
So our argument today, when it comes to animal health they 
should begin to study the presence of hydrocarbons, which are 
attached to oil and gas activity, in our animals, in our forests, in 
our air, and in our water, Mr. Speaker. If you look for it, you 
will find it, and that’s our biggest argument today. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I had the unfortunate job at the time, you 
know, of being the minister for SERM when the whole issue 
around chronic wasting surfaced, Mr. Speaker. I had the 
misfortune because we didn’t want to know if chronic wasting 
disease was in the wild. We didn’t want to see if there was a 
prevalence of that particular issue with our wildlife population. 
 
And at the time I can remember it was suggested that we do 
tests on deer heads to see if the chronic wasting problem was in 
the deer animals. And the only way you can find that, Mr. 
Speaker, is if you harvest the animal, take the head in so the 
brain could be studied, and then you can determine whether 
there was the chronic wasting protein in the deer brain. And 
people might not or may know, chronic wasting in deer is 
similar to mad cow. It’s got very similar actions and a very 
similar protein that creates the continual killing of the brain, so 
to speak. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t want to find that out. There was 
apprehension from a lot of different organizations. And at the 
end of the day, I thought it would be appropriate that we begin 
studying harvested animals, have their heads collected by a 
number of offices within SERM to see if there was a prevalence 
of chronic wasting in the animal population attached to deer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the first 4 or 5,000 head that we studied I 
think at the time came back clean. There was no chronic 
wasting disease in the first 4 or 5,000 head that we collected as 
a result of people keeping the heads of the deer that they shot. 
And then, Mr. Speaker, we got a couple hits. Then we got a 
couple more positive tests and a couple more positive tests. And 
then all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker — I don’t know what created 
the first batch not having any positive tests — all of a sudden it 
became very apparent that there was chronic wasting disease in 
the wild. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, some suggested the old shoot, shovel, and 
shut up theory behind planning about whether chronic wasting 
disease was existing in the animal health, Mr. Speaker. Well 
that wasn’t the approach. The responsible approach by many 
people around the table was, we need to find out, we need to see 
what the prevalence are. And then once we do find out if it is or 
it isn’t in the wild, then we need to take appropriate steps. And, 
Mr. Speaker, there were steps taken. As to what the update is 
today, we simply don’t know. 
 
So we know that there’s a lot of stress and strain on animal 
health, and chronic wasting disease is one of the most trying 
challenges to the deer population. And the intent that they plan 
to find out, Mr. Speaker, was to ensure that people were aware 
of that danger and that they weren’t harvesting wildlife and thus 
transferring that particular problem to their children or to their 
families. And that’s really, really important at the time to find 
out. 
 

A very, very tough choice at the time, and the choice that I 
certainly concurred with at the time, was to continue the testing 
to see the prevalence of chronic wasting in our deer population. 
At first it didn’t look like there was a problem, but a continual 
effort, we ended up finding it, Mr. Speaker. And people in 
Saskatchewan now know that the chronic wasting disease issue 
is in our deer population, and we would certainly encourage 
them to take the proper precautions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we had good support from many people 
around the table. We had to find out, and find out we certainly 
did. So this is the value of having different organizations at the 
table, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s important that you look at, like I 
said, at the Wildlife Federation, if you look at the wildlife 
advisory committee, you look at SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities], look at SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], all these 
organizations certainly gave good advice. Nothing wrong. We 
obviously can’t govern involving every single person, but it’d 
be nice to have as big attend as possible. And that’s where we 
see this particular government lacking at times, is that there’s 
two areas that we’re very concerned about when they talk about 
consultation. One is, who did you consult with? And number 
two, consultation does not constitute agreement, you know. And 
what kind of consultation was undertaken? 
 
These are some of the issues I think are really important 
because the Saskatchewan Party government like to say to 
people, oh we consulted with 10 organizations and all 10 
organizations were happy. Well we tell the people, when the 
Sask Party government says that, you know, they could say they 
consulted them, but did they get that group’s agreement? And 
they can interpret them being happy by one person smiling in a 
corner. That’s what they would do, the Saskatchewan Party. So 
when they say they consulted groups and organizations, beware 
of that, because consulting people and getting their agreement 
are two different things. You know, they are two different 
things, Mr. Speaker. And there are many examples I’d like to 
share with you as to what the difference is between consultation 
and agreement, but I’m not going to get into that, Mr. Speaker. I 
just want to tell the people of Saskatchewan that be very, very 
careful. 
 
And so again this Bill 161, it just changes . . . it just continues 
putting more emphasis on the fact that we have to get our 
licence and our permits from an American-based company. 
Consistent with the Saskatchewan Party on other fronts, 
whether it’s the lean consultant they’re paying $40 million to, to 
tell us how to run our health care system instead of talking to 
the front-line workers. Now we see, Mr. Speaker, they’re now 
outsourcing the permits and licence to a Tennessee-based 
company instead of working with our small businesses 
throughout our small communities. And that affects our 
outfitters, our lodges, and of course people that enjoy fishing, 
hunting, and trapping. And now we’ve got to go online to an 
American-based company to get a permit to do so. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that’s really important is the 
bill also increases the limitation period for prosecution to three 
years, and what the logic there is that it gives the province more 
time to press charges against poachers. Now as I said at the 



6008 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

outset, we are not concerned when poachers are prosecuted to 
the fullest extent of the law. If you find an animal carcass and 
only the antlers are harvested or certain body parts, this really 
upsets a lot of people, Mr. Speaker. And from our perspective, 
you know, we’re taught as young people not to waste, not to be 
greedy, not to waste. 
 
And you see animals being harvested for one or two body parts. 
That is something that needs to be discouraged, Mr. Speaker, 
and nobody on the NDP opposition is going to argue with being 
tough on poachers, Mr. Speaker, because they are the reason 
why, you know, we’re seeing a lot of stress on certain animals 
is they’re poaching them for profit. And anybody poaching for 
profit ought to be ashamed of themselves, and we wouldn’t 
stand in the way of people being prosecuted for poaching, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that you obviously 
have to go through the proper process for legal reasons, and is 
two years to three years, is that a longer time frame? Is that 
enough time? Is there enough preparatory time for some of the 
CEOs that are preparing cases to extend for a year? Where does 
that year come from, Mr. Speaker? Was there consultation with 
the legal community as to why the difference between two 
years and three years? Is there a particular logic for that and 
who did they consult?  
 
Again as I go back to my earlier point, if you look at the 
consultation process, it’d be sure nice to say, why did you 
increase from two years to three years? And you say in the bill 
it’s because it allows you to prosecute, gives you more time to 
prosecute poachers. Well we would have instinctively asked 
well, what . . . why a one-year time frame? Did you get 
consultation and did you get advice from the legal community? 
Is one year good enough? Like why is it one year? Why can’t it 
be four years? Like is there some things that are . . . There’s all 
these arguments and discussions that we want to find out about, 
and that’s why it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we look at the 
whole notion of why we’re extending from two years to three 
years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other issue brought forward in The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, and I know we’re going to be sitting 
with the minister in due time on this front, is the whole notion 
of licence suspension. And I’m going to hold my comments on 
that particular issue, Mr. Speaker, until I meet with the minister 
to get good discussion on what that means and what is 
considered a hunting infringement. And the reason why, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the . . . As I said before, it’s a complex job to 
try and manage the harvesting of animals, of wildlife, and of 
fish. It is very, very complex in the sense that we have a lot of 
people that want to do it, and we have the contrasting view that 
they should make it easier to hunt and fish and trap because a 
lot of young people aren’t taking up that pastime anymore, and 
some people are being concerned about that. At the same time, 
we see that there is activity continuing in terms of harvesting 
these numbers. 
 
And because it’s so complex, Mr. Speaker, you have to make 
sure you have good consultation because as I mentioned, it’s 
layered. Different people have different times and different 
needs for different animals and different seasons and different 
ways. And I’ll give you an example. If you like to hunt deer 

with a bow — there’s a lot of people that hunt animals with a 
bow — you can do so in a certain area at a certain time only and 
if you’re caught anywhere else, Mr. Speaker, then that problem 
would be there.  
 
But because it’s so complicated, because it’s so layered, and 
because it’s so . . . there’s wildlife zones and there’s all these 
issues all over the place, one could see how, not only do 
politicians become confused on this, but the person that’s 
actually doing the hunting or the trapping or the harvesting, 
well they can easily get confused as well because you’ve got to 
really, really research exactly what you’re allowed to do in a 
time frame before you go out there and do your hunt or do your 
fishing. So we need a lot of awareness. We need a lot of 
information. We need a public campaign to begin to teach 
people what you’re allowed to do. Because what you don’t want 
to do is have a bunch of people that are uninformed out there 
hunting and all of a sudden they get suspended for a year. And a 
lot of them will say, well I didn’t know. And rightfully so, Mr. 
Speaker. A lot of them would not know if there is not proper 
consultation done. 
 
So I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we look at ways and 
means in which we could engage those organizations, engage 
those people to make sure that their membership base, whether 
it’s the Métis Nation or the Wildlife Federation or whether it’s a 
local chapter of a wildlife committee, that they educate their 
members. And that’s why I was pleased to see the Wildlife 
Federation being a part of this process because they can really 
add to the solution; they can really add to the awareness 
campaign. And they do have generally a lot of respect from a 
lot of different quarters for their work, and certainly their 
calling. And, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage that trend to 
continue. 
 
That being said, one of the areas that I’m going to meet with the 
minister on are on the issue of First Nations hunting privileges, 
and of course the Métis hunting aspect as well. And I do so 
because there’s a bit of confusion I think overall from many of 
the people that are impacted by the hunting and fishing, and 
confusion should not be the grounds to prosecute. Because 
according to this Act, that if you are prosecuted because you’re 
not sure what’s going on with the hunting infraction, all of a 
sudden you can’t hunt for a year. Then you do it again and it 
goes to two years. Finally on the third serious offence, you 
actually have a lifetime ban. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to hold my comments on this 
particular aspect of the bill following our meeting with the 
minister because I want to get clarification as to what is being 
done to ensure that some of the hunting cases that have gone 
before the courts, whether it’s Métis hunting in the 
Morin-Daigneault case for northwestern Saskatchewan, or 
whether it’s the First Nations hunting privileges that they have 
asserted over time, and, Mr. Speaker, with the most recent 
Federal Court case that identifies the Métis as being similar in 
many legal aspects as First Nations, that also has a lot of 
moving parts to it in terms of legal ramifications for 
Saskatchewan. So we need to have a solid framework 
established, a framework of understanding between First 
Nations and Métis people and the people of Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management. Get 
these organizations together to have a common table of 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6009 

understanding as to what is allowed and who this impacts. 
 
Now the minister in the Act really clarifies poaching. And 
we’re not arguing with poaching, but poaching should not be a 
disguise for those that want to attack Métis hunting privileges 
or First Nation hunting privileges, because these have been 
dealt with through the court system. And no reason for us to 
fight the system through court because that doesn’t do anybody 
any good. It doesn’t do anybody in the province, doesn’t do 
anybody in terms of the legal profession, nor does it do 
anybody in the governing profession any favours if we have to 
have all these fights through the court system again, because 
once again the courts will determine who is right. And after 
months and months of cost and hard feelings, Mr. Speaker, 
what I think the government will find out is that when you go to 
court with First Nations or Métis people on hunting privileges, 
generally the government loses. 
 
So maybe you should have solid engagement: save a lot of 
frustrations, save a lot of money, save a lot of fight that will 
occur between these groups, instead trying to find a common 
ground so we’re able to respect each other and harvest 
accordingly without fear of the ban from hunting for a lifetime 
if you don’t have an understanding of what’s going on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have those discussions with the 
minister at the appropriate time. I think that this ban for the 
purposes of people that are poaching, that if they get caught the 
third time then they should be banned for life if they’re 
poaching animals and using animals for only certain body parts 
and profiting from those body parts . . . So it’s a long, it’s a long 
and very complicated issue. And it talks about . . . Again I’ll 
read from the notes here. Under the current Act the person who 
breaks the law has their licence suspended for a period of time 
and has to pay a fine. Once the suspension period is over, the 
offender can purchase a licence even if the fine is unpaid. Under 
the new Act, the offender must wait until the suspension is over 
and pay the fine before that person can buy another licence. 
 
So these are some of the issues I think that are important, that 
they do have a licence. In the old days they used to be able to 
not pay a fine and still get their licence for the following year. 
But this new Act says that you cannot do that, that you’ve got to 
pay off your fine first before you get your new licence. And I 
think that provision is very similar to the vehicle driver’s 
licence that if you do have a fine, a parking fine or a speeding 
fine, that if you have it in that particular year that you can’t get 
a new driver’s licence unless that particular fine is paid for. 
Well that’s the same provision under this particular Act, that the 
offender must wait till the suspension is over. If they’re caught 
hunting illegally and they get a fine, they have to pay the fine 
too before they can get a different licence, Mr. Speaker. The old 
Act said that you can have the fine still outstanding and still get 
a licence, so this Act clarifies that and fixes that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of situations that I want 
to share. This past season in northwestern Saskatchewan, 
because there was a successful court case called the Morin and 
Daigneault case, and the Morin-Daigneault case was a couple of 
Métis people who were out hunting in northwestern 
Saskatchewan . . . And there is a general recognition — I’m not 
sure if I’m going to do justice to explaining the court case — 
because the First Nations and the Métis people have always 

traditionally hunted and gathered and fished in certain areas 
many, many years ago, the courts respected that position. And 
of course the First Nations signing treaties have a right to 
harvest animals as they did when they signed the treaty, and so 
that still applies to this day. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, where does that leave the Métis people? 
Well the Métis, as many people may know, is of mixed origin. I 
think that’s the general phrase where you have many Métis 
people that may have had Scottish background. Most of them 
have French background along with the Aboriginal community. 
So the Métis do have a lot of First Nations family and they’re of 
mixed blood, so to speak. 
 
And so what happened, Mr. Speaker, is that there was a couple 
of hunters, Mr. Morin and Mr. Daigneault, who were charged 
for hunting out of season or hunting illegally, and that court 
case was taken forward. And if memory serves me correct, the 
gentleman that represented these two people who were being 
prosecuted was Mr. Clem Chartier. I’m not sure if he handled 
the case himself entirely or he had help or he got the case 
moved forward. Well I think as a result of some of his work and 
his involvement over time, the court sided with Mr. Morin and 
Mr. Daigneault because the argument was that they had the 
legal right to hunt and fish in that area because the Métis had a 
historical presence there for years before some of the laws were 
enacted, and, Mr. Speaker, that put them in a similar basic legal 
position as many First Nations are. 
 
So as a result of that, I think one of the consensus in some of 
the discussions and in the court’s final deliberations they 
basically said, as a result of the Morin-Daigneault case, the 
Métis should be able to hunt in this specific area that have 
identified as a land base for Métis many, many years ago. 
 
So that Morin-Daigneault case, while it was a victory for the 
Métis people, it was confined to a specific area in which they 
could hunt, not province wide. And that of course was a 
different argument. So what happened with the 
Morin-Daigneault case, Mr. Speaker, is that it established the 
fact that the Métis did have hunting privileges as they did prior 
to some of the laws being introduced that were similar to the 
First Nations argument under treaty. So they were allowed to 
hunt. The Morin-Daigneault case was a successful defence. 
These individuals were from Turnor Lake, I believe, in which 
the government or the court said, people in this particular area 
have hunted and fished and trapped for years and laws that 
came into effect did not recognize that, so therefore we’re 
siding with the Morin-Daigneault case in the sense that they did 
have this historical right to harvest these animals. 
 
Now what happened, Mr. Speaker, is some of the Métis people 
in our area of course were happy with that because that’s what 
they had done all their lives. They’d fished and hunted and 
trapped and that’s how their family survived. So they were 
pretty happy with the ruling because it allowed them to live 
their life as they had lived them for years and years and years. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And so what happened this past year, Mr. Speaker, is that some 
of the . . . When you’re out hunting in the bush you can get 
disorientated. You can lose your bearings fairly fast. Well I do 



6010 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

anyway. And some of these individuals, as they’re out hunting, 
which they have traditionally done for years, they can 
sometimes pass a legal line in the sense of a legal geographical 
description of where you’re allowed to hunt, you know, without 
being charged. Well if you’re a kilometre over that line or 10 
kilometres over a line, it’s hard to say where you’re at when it 
comes to which longitude or latitude bearing does the 
Morin-Daigneault cover. Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the COs 
[conservation officer] know that, but a lot of hunters do not 
know that. They’re not familiar with the description of land as 
to where they’re allowed to hunt relatively free of prosecution if 
you’re Métis. 
 
So what happened, Mr. Speaker, is COs, conservation officers, 
they’d come along and they’d issue warning tickets. They’d 
issue warning tickets to people saying, well you’ve got to be 
careful. Yes, the Morin-Daigneault case is there, but you’re off 
the jurisdiction by 2 miles or whatever the case may be. So a lot 
of the frustration by the hunters out there were expressed to me 
saying, you know, why are we getting these warning tickets? I 
thought we dealt with all of this information, all of these 
problems. 
 
Well this went on and on and on for a while. And we have to 
get clarification, Mr. Speaker, to the Métis Nation, to the 
northern governments, to the FSIN, with the COs sitting at the 
table with us so they understand as well. So both the Métis 
hunters, the COs. And, Mr. Speaker, the province and the 
government, and the minister especially, has to give direct 
orders and direct directions, solid directions as to when you 
should issue warning tickets or an infraction. 
 
Because in this Act, if some Métis guy strays a couple hundred 
metres from where the Morin-Daigneault line crosses in terms 
of being able to hunt in a specified area, free of prosecution, 
well if they stray 200 metres from that, well is that a hunting 
fine? Is that an infraction? Well we don’t know the details of 
that. 
 
Well does the CO know that? I’m assuming COs have their 
GPS [Global Positioning System], and they’d have a pretty 
good idea where this is, but the hunters need to know. The 
leadership needs to know. Because you get all this confusion 
out there, and what happens is people get prosecuted and they 
get a fine and they fight this in court, and we’re back to square 
one. 
 
So that’s one of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going 
to make too many comments on this particular aspect of the bill 
until we meet with the minister to get clarification as to what 
their plan of action is to deal with the whole notion of First 
Nations hunting rights and Métis Nation or Métis people’s 
hunting privileges as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been going on a bit about The Wildlife 
Amendment Act. There’s a lot of issues that we want to talk 
about, and I know my colleagues have a lot more to add. And I 
am going to re-enter the debate on a different venue, Mr. 
Speaker, following our meeting with the minister, as a means to 
explain to people what is being undertook to make sure that this 
misunderstanding is not out there, that COs and northern 
leadership and especially the Métis people that are out hunting 
have a good understanding of what their rights and privileges 

and responsibilities are. It all works for everyone. 
 
And from there, we can reduce a lot of misunderstanding and 
hopefully avoid a lengthy court case that costs a lot of money 
and creates a lot of angst amongst the people. So I think we 
need to have those hard discussions, and I look forward to my 
meeting with the minister later on this week to discuss those 
matters. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I went on a bit about what the bill itself is all 
about and some of the concerns. We have a lot more we want to 
add, and I will re-enter the debate when the time is appropriate 
to do so. So on that note I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
161, The Wildlife Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Enforcement of 
Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
In May 2012, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act came 
into effect, introducing a major revision in judgment 
enforcement law in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, thus far, 
implementation of the new program has gone well. However 
minor amendments are now proposed to address some practical 
and technical issues identified by the sheriff’s office and the 
public as lessons learned through their experiences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will do a number of things. It will 
introduce amendments to provide that a notice of seizure of 
employment income will last for a 24-month period of the 
enforcement instruction without requiring it to be renewed after 
12 months. 
 
It will include a revised process for the sheriff to provide 
timely, clear title to a third party purchaser of land where the 
judgment creditors and the judgment debtor have agreed to 
payment out of the proceeds of the sale in order to address the 
judgment debt of the vendor. 
 
It will ensure that the sheriff is not considered to be an account 
debtor by reason of receiving funds from a debtor. It will 
provide additional direction on the payment of premiums to 
initiating creditors. It will revise certain seizure provisions and 
enforcement instruction provisions to facilitate operations of the 
sheriff’s office. It will provide appointment of a director of 
sheriffs. 
 
It will address technical priority issues regarding advances and 
consistency of language with The Securities Transfer Act. It 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6011 

will allow the director of sheriffs to waive the enforcement of 
small amounts such as fees that remain due after judgment 
distribution. It will remove the forms from the regulations and 
allow the director of sheriffs to provide the required forms. It 
will update the language in the Act to reflect the wording in the 
new Queen’s Bench rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our view that these amendments will further 
enhance the operation of a new, modern judgment enforcement 
system in our province. So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I’m pleased 
to move second reading of the money judgment enforcements 
Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re going to have fun on Bill 162 in a sense, Mr. Speaker, 
that we’re thinking this bill is going overboard in terms of 
granting a lot of different authority and powers to not only the 
sheriff, Mr. Speaker, but also to the minister in general. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at this bill, Bill 162, and there’s two 
glaring things that we want to point out as our first initial 
comment on this bill as the opposition. The first thing is the 
garnishee of salaries, Mr. Speaker. We think the garnishee of 
salaries is something that you’ve got to be very, very careful at. 
We know that right now when people owe taxes, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Canada revenue Act is allowing, allow the provision . . . 
They have the authority and they have the power and they have 
the duty to garnishee salaries and to have those salaries paid in 
lieu of taxes that have not been paid. Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
also seeing the seizure of property. We’re seeing this kind of 
language in this particular bill and cover the costs of operating 
costs, looking at the sheriff’s costs as well, and the minister’s 
directive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point that we’re trying to raise in this particular bill, Bill 
No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment 
Act, is that people of Saskatchewan need to pay very close 
attention to this particular bill because there are some powers 
being inferred upon the government, in particular the ministers 
as well as the sheriffs, in which we think there may be a bit of 
overkill on this particular bill. And we need to get clarification, 
very good clarification as to what those powers might be 
because, Mr. Speaker, we think some of those powers might be 
identified through rules and regulations that are not subjected to 
the scrutiny to the Assembly itself. So we need to get that 
information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we look at this particular bill, the sheriff’s office, or The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, and we need 
to know a number of things. First of all, who asked for this 
particular Act to come forward and make these amendments 
and confer these powers onto certain parties? Who asked for 
this to be done, Mr. Speaker? And who is the target audience, if 
you will, of these individuals that want this Act to come 
forward? How many people would be impacted by this Act, and 
how many particular actions have been created in the province 
of Saskatchewan to justify this Act? 
 

This Act is really, really important to pay attention to. We’ve 
noted that right from the start, that if this is something that the 
Saskatchewan Party want to do to put further stress, financial 
hardships on young, struggling families, Mr. Speaker, people of 
Saskatchewan ought to know about this. If you’re talking about 
garnishee of salaries as a new power under this Act, if you’re 
talking about seizures of property under this Act, if you’re 
talking about covering the cost of judges, or not judges but 
sheriffs and the operating costs of the sheriff’s office, Mr. 
Speaker, that is warning flags galore for people out there that 
may be having financial hardships, Mr. Speaker. Because this 
shows that the government’s coming along and they’re using a 
sledgehammer, Mr. Speaker, to try and go after people that are 
having some difficult times in their lives, Mr. Speaker. We 
often in the Assembly, as the opposition . . . The NDP have 
always taken the small guy’s fight, Mr. Speaker. That’s been 
our history and we’ll continue doing so. 
 
Now what we see happen is the Saskatchewan Party is siding 
themselves with big oil companies in Alberta and not worrying 
about our environment, as I spoke about earlier. They’re letting 
a lot of big business in the States dictate how we run our affairs 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And now we see this particular bill that talks about garnishee of 
salary, seizure of property, covering the costs of the sheriff, 
covering the costs of the sheriff’s office, a minister’s directive 
in terms of what should be going forth and what is not going 
forth. These are all red flags that the opposition is quite 
concerned about, Mr. Speaker. We have to look at these issues 
in detail as to what is being proposed. And I want to assure the 
minister that we’re going to do exactly that. 
 
We’re going to be talking to a lot of people in the different 
communities and people throughout the province, the families 
that are struggling, Mr. Speaker, to say, this is what your 
Saskatchewan Party has decided to do to the people that may be 
having some financial difficulties. They’re giving the sheriff’s 
office and themselves more power over you to garnishee your 
salaries, to seize your property, and to cover all their costs in 
doing so at your expense. These are some things that we want to 
make sure we pay a lot of attention to. And some of the 
provisions, no matter how much the minister may say it’s just 
the normal course of business, this is new stuff that people of 
Saskatchewan need to pay attention to. 
 
And what perplexes me is that, who asked for these changes? 
Why all of a sudden are these changes coming forward? Which 
interest group has asked for these changes, as hard as they are, 
to come forward to the legislative agenda that the Saskatchewan 
Party government is controlling? Which party asked for that? 
That’s the first question that we asked for, Mr. Speaker. And 
are these powers, like garnishing salaries, is this overkill, Mr. 
Speaker? And seizing people’s property: this is getting a bit too 
much. 
 
As you look at some of the issues, Mr. Speaker, we know that 
many people and many families in Saskatchewan are being left 
behind by this boom. We know that. We see a lot of examples 
of that. We know that there are many people that use credit 
wisely and some have struggles with credit. There’s no 
argument about that, Mr. Speaker. We see that happening in 
many lives. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to obviously work with 



6012 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

these families to ensure that they’re able to maintain their 
homes, that they’re able to maintain food on their plates, that 
they’re able to maintain their jobs without having the 
Saskatchewan Party come along with yet another club to knock 
some of these struggling families down to their feet so that 
they’re able to come along with Acts like this that will give 
them the power to do so. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we look at this bill. We have a lot to say on 
Bill 162. It’s one thing to be able to work closely with families 
that are having problems with debt. There’s no question we 
need to work with them. And yes, debt is a very valuable tool. 
I’m not going to argue about that, Mr. Speaker. But when you 
start using a club to protect people . . . or to get their money 
back off people that are struggling, and that club being called 
Bill 162 where you can garnishee salaries, you can seize 
property, and all the costs attached for the sheriff’s time and his 
office are part of the cost of covering . . . or the cost of you 
settling the debt with these individuals, Mr. Speaker, I think 
we’ve gone way too far on this particular bill. 
 
And we need to know how different organizations and different 
people feel about this bill. And that’s why it’s important that we 
tell people, and we yell it from the highest hills, we will, that 
Bill 162 has some certain powers and certain strengths, that 
they want to position themselves as a government over those 
families that are struggling right now under debt and working 
hard to make ends meet while these guys have got a couple 
more big hammers to help them along, the Saskatchewan Party 
does, to help them punish those families that are struggling, Mr. 
Speaker. And we don’t believe that this is right in any way, 
shape, or form. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So I look at the bill itself, Bill 162. We want to make sure that 
we ask the one fundamental question is, who asked for this bill? 
Which interest group? Give us the list of the people that asked 
for this bill and allow for the provisions of the garnishee of 
salaries, the seizure of property. Which groups and 
organizations asked the Sask Party government to put this 
through as a new Act and more powers to do so? Which group 
and organizations asked for this? We want to know which 
groups. 
 
And when we say which groups, Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to 
hear, oh we consulted with this group. Consultation does not 
constitute agreement. We’ve always argued that point: 
consultation does not constitute an agreement. So don’t list 
organizations, as the government, that said to you, well we 
don’t agree to any of these changes. Then you put them as one 
of the groups that you consulted with. That’s not the way to do 
business, and that’s why it’s important we tell people out there, 
if the government say they consulted with certain groups, it 
doesn’t mean those groups agreed with the changes in this Act. 
 
And I would suggest that on this particular Act where they’re 
talking about garnishee of salaries, where they’re talking about 
seizure of property and giving the office of the sheriff more 
powers and the ministers more powers to do so, Mr. Speaker, 
this is not an Act that we should take lightly. And this is not an 
Act that I think the people of Saskatchewan would appreciate, 
especially if it’s starting to hurt many working families and 

young couples throughout our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s why it’s important that we have this legislative 
agenda so we’re able to expose to the people of Saskatchewan 
what the Saskatchewan Party is trying to do, using their legal 
means to go after those that are struggling under huge debt that, 
in the event that they fail, that these hammers will come 
tumbling down. And guess what? They lose their house. They 
lose their salary, and they lose their hope as a family of ever 
making it in the province of Saskatchewan that has such riches, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why would you bring an Act of this sort, Mr. Speaker, during a 
time and the opportunity when Saskatchewan and the 
Saskatchewan Party government is flush with cash? Why would 
you want to bring an Act in of this sort when the economy is 
moving along really well, Mr. Speaker? Why would you want 
to bring an Act of this sort when you know many young 
families are struggling to maintain their homes and to feed their 
children, Mr. Speaker? Why would you bring an Act of this sort 
into the Assembly when we should be talking about an Act to 
strengthen young families, an Act to put more money into 
education, an Act to train our young people, to engage the 
Aboriginal community as well? These are some of the Acts that 
should be coming forward in this Assembly. 
 
But what happens in the middle of a booming business 
opportunity for Saskatchewan, an economy that’s strong — 
what happens, we have a growing population — the 
Saskatchewan Party brings in an Act, Bill 162, an Act called 
The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act that 
talks about garnishing salaries and seizing of property, Mr. 
Speaker. What kind of silly notion . . . Why would a 
government do something this silly in the middle of a good 
economic opportunity for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Lord 
knows where they got this advice from. 
 
We want to know who gave you that advice? Who warrants 
some of the enforcements of this particular bill? Which 
particular group or organization asked for this? That’s the first 
thing we want to know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think from our perspective as an opposition, we’re going 
to tell the people of Saskatchewan that the Saskatchewan Party 
is giving themselves more authority, more control, more power, 
more hammers to come after you in the event that you’re 
struggling under debt, to seize your home, to garnishee your 
salary. And guess what? They’re going to cover their costs at 
your expense as well. I think this is an absolute silly first step, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re going to find out all the details of this particular bill, and 
we’re going to advise as many organizations as we can that this 
is what the Saskatchewan Party is trying to do. We need to find 
out who asked for these provisions in this bill. Who asked for 
those changes? And once you know who asked for those 
changes, Mr. Speaker, once you know who’s going to benefit 
from these changes, then the NDP opposition is going to come 
along and tell people exactly which organizations asked for this 
bill so they can deal with them from the perspective of 
customers. And then from the perspective of politicians you can 
tell people, these are the organizations that’s pushing the Sask 
Party button to come after you under garnishee of salaries and 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6013 

seizure of property, including your home. And the people of 
Saskatchewan, the struggling young families will know who’s 
exactly on their side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We don’t think, we don’t think that empowering the sheriff’s 
office to seize your property or to seize your bank account is the 
right way to working families, Mr. Speaker. We need to help 
working families find easier ways to maintain their home. We 
need to have the opportunity for working families, for home 
ownership, Mr. Speaker. We need to do as much as we can for 
child daycare, Mr. Speaker, for supporting the education of our 
young people, the health of our families. These are what we 
need to do to support the working men and women in 
Saskatchewan, the struggling men and women that are working 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
This bill is not a good step. Why would they put a bill of this 
sort in the middle of good economic times? It’s confusing to us 
as an opposition. It’s worrisome to many people who know 
many people that struggle under debt, Mr. Speaker. And once 
again we’re seeing the Saskatchewan Party come along and 
they’re saying, guess what? We’re going to start garnisheeing 
your salaries. We’re going to start seizing your property. We’re 
going to give the sheriff more authority, more control over you. 
And guess what? We’re going to also bring in policies and 
procedures and rules and regulations at a later time that 
positions the minister to determine whether your house is taken 
or not. And, Mr. Speaker, that is going over the line, from my 
perspective. 
 
There’s always, always an important part that you have to 
incorporate when you’re talking about issues of this sort, is you 
want to educate the families. Absolutely that’s important. We 
also know that . . . [inaudible] . . . debt is a valuable tool if it’s 
properly used. We understand that as well, Mr. Speaker. But 
when you’re struggling and you have a difficult time, you don’t 
need more government intervention and more government 
hammers coming at you. You need some good understanding, 
some good support to strengthen your family and keep your 
perspective and keep your job and keep working and keep 
focused and keep that spirit alive without having the 
government come after you — and the sheriff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This smacks of an old tale of Robin Hood, you know, where the 
Sheriff of Nottingham comes along and collects all these taxes 
or collects your salary or collects your home if you’re not 
paying that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bottom line here is we want to know who’s pushing the 
Saskatchewan Party government. And the Minister of the 
Economy chirps from his seat, Mr. Speaker. We want to know 
who pushed his button to put a bill of this sort in the middle of 
good economic times, Mr. Speaker. Which party asked to give 
them more powers to garnishee salaries, seize your property, 
and give the sheriff more powers at the directive of the minister 
in these good economic times? Which person, which party, 
which organization asked for that, Mr. Speaker? That’s our first 
question on this particular bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen already how the Saskatchewan 
Party operates. Look at some of the struggling families. Young 
working mom and dads, you know, have a difficult time getting 
a mortgage. The idea of home ownership for many young 

couples is totally unachievable now, given the high price of 
homes and no help from the government. 
 
You look at the housing programs that were in place. I believe 
that one program they were bragging about, about six, seven 
months ago, in terms of affordable homes for families. Well I 
understand from my colleague from Saskatoon Centre that the 
developer that got the money to develop these homes for 
low- and moderate-income families basically said, I changed 
my mind. I’m not going to do this anymore. And the 
government said, okay fine. See you later. They walk away with 
our grant, and you can do what you want with your homes. And 
that left many, many young and also low-income families out in 
the street, Mr. Speaker. And that’s another example of the 
callousness of this government and the bitterness of this 
government towards working men and women of this province. 
 
So I think it’s really important that people pay attention to these 
bills because they do have some major ramifications to their 
lives. And, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of my colleagues in 
some of the constituencies that, you know, they represent rural 
areas. They represent the inner city, represent northern 
Saskatchewan. And we know that many families struggle from 
time to time, and many of them use debt in a most responsible 
way. Like I said at the outset, it’s a valuable tool, but many of 
them are just treading water, barely keeping their head above 
water between the mortgage payment, the food, the medical 
costs, going to school, clothing. The list goes on as to what it 
costs to raise a family today. 
 
And instead of this government understanding that and putting 
the appropriate measurements or measures in place to help these 
struggling families, they come along with this bill, Bill 162, that 
talks about garnishee of salary, that talks about seizure of 
property, that talks about the sheriff getting new powers, and 
talks about the minister conferring more power upon himself or 
herself. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this during a time when Saskatchewan has 
unprecedented revenue, Mr. Speaker, when the government is 
flush with cash. They refuse to recognize that there are families 
out there that are having a difficult time making ends meet. And 
once they begin the depressing slide of not being able to pay 
their bills, not being able to meet all their obligations on a 
regular basis, along comes the Saskatchewan Party government 
with some clubs and makes sure that these families are beaten 
to the ground with no chance of ever making it. That’s the 
Saskatchewan Party way, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why many 
people in Saskatchewan still have a strong dislike — and that 
number’s growing — a strong dislike for the Saskatchewan 
Party government because they simply haven’t got the basics 
figured out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, look at the notion of covering the sheriff’s costs, 
covering the costs of the office as well. Like who determined 
the value of those costs? How would you rate the cost of a 
sheriff’s salary? Who sets the salary of the sheriff, Mr. Speaker? 
I’m assuming it’s the provincial government. 
 
But what happens here, Mr. Speaker, is they’re going to start 
implicating some of the debt plans of this bill to ensure that the 
sheriff’s office costs are part of this bill and that the sheriff’s 
cost himself, his salary, are also part of the bill that some of 



6014 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

these families have to pay in the event that they’re in default of 
their loans or default of their debt. 
 
Now again I go back to my point, Mr. Speaker. Who asked for 
this bill? Which organizations came to the Saskatchewan Party 
and said, can you put this bill in place? We want to know who 
the government consulted on this bill. What was the intent 
behind this bill? Who asked the government to put this bill 
forward, Mr. Speaker? These are the questions that we have to 
ask and we’ll continually ask. Until we get the answers as to 
who asked for this bill, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue 
pressing this government to find out why this bill was 
introduced at this time to the Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again I point out that there are things that 
the Saskatchewan Party could have done. We argued today that 
when the NDP left government, we had an $8 billion budget. 
Today now, the Saskatchewan Party’s got a $14 billion budget, 
almost twice the amount of money, almost twice the amount of 
money that we had when we last had our budget in 2007. They 
have twice the amount of money and, Mr. Speaker, they come 
along with a bill that now talks about seizing people’s homes 
and seizing people’s salaries from the bank. Now what’s that 
about, Mr. Speaker? That’s just plain silly. 
 
You have twice the amount of money to work with than the 
previous NDP government did, and you have all this money. 
You have a growing population and an economy that’s red-hot, 
and now you’re talking about garnisheeing people’s salary and 
taking away their homes. Like what is wrong with this 
government? There’s so many things that they’re doing wrong. 
And it’s exactly what we say on this side of the House. We 
know that their shelf life for that front bench is two or three 
years at the most. Half those guys on the other side, Mr. 
Speaker, are also going to be stepping down next election, Mr. 
Speaker, and the other half we’re going to get rid of just 
through a process called election. 
 
So it’s important to the people of Saskatchewan to know this: 
the Saskatchewan Party government are a tired, old government 
that’s flush, that’s flush, that’s flush with NDP cash, but they 
can’t figure out what their role is, and they can’t figure out what 
they’ve got to do as government, Mr. Speaker. I see total 
confusion, a lack of leadership from that side that goes right 
from the Premier to the Minister of the Economy to the Deputy 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ll see more of how their inaction and their inability and 
their underperformance is not deserving of Saskatchewan 
people’s vision for the future, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to see 
evidence of that as we go down this path. From my perspective, 
Mr. Speaker, from my perspective we know, we know that the 
next couple of years, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see a lot of 
change over there. And the biggest change we’ll see is less 
numbers, less . . . [inaudible] . . . less vision, Mr. Speaker, and 
to me the people of Saskatchewan know this. I think they know 
this as well, Mr. Speaker. The good times have since passed 
them by. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the next two or three years, you’re going to 
see a significant change in direction, Mr. Speaker. From the 
NDP perspective, when we see bills of this sort, Bill 162, Mr. 
Speaker, when we see them going after working men and 

woman that are having struggles, to go after their salaries, to go 
after their homes, Mr. Speaker, to give more powers to the 
sheriff, what is that all about in this time of prosperity? Why are 
they bringing this bill forward now, Mr. Speaker? It is because 
they are who they are, Mr. Speaker. That’s why. They’re intent 
on working against the working men and woman who are 
struggling in this province. They have no care, no concern for 
those people. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I think it’s important that next 
election we send these guys a message that you had billions 
more to work with, and you couldn’t get the job done. That’s 
the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. You couldn’t get the job done. 
And that’s why you’re bringing bills of this sort along: to give 
yourselves more hammers to begin to hurt young working men 
and woman in this province who aspire for home ownership and 
who use debt on a regular basis. And if they have struggles, 
there’s no understanding from the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker, no understanding whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the people in front are giggling away. They’re obviously, 
Mr. Speaker, they haven’t had any financial crises, you know, 
in their lives. So the problem we have here, Mr. Speaker, is that 
you look at some of the families that are being impacted, the 
families being impacted by their legislation, Mr. Speaker, when 
you’re conferring more power to the sheriff to seize property 
and garnishee salaries, Mr. Speaker. There’s three ministers that 
are giggling away in the front row of the Saskatchewan Party. 
That’s not funny when families are going through that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It is a trying time for many families to try and own their own 
home. It’s a trying time for families who are trying to afford to 
keep food on their table. It’s a trying time for families to keep 
working at some of the salaries that are really low in this 
province of Saskatchewan. And yes, they use credit because 
they have no choice. But you come along as a government 
that’s uncaring, that has no vision whatsoever to be inclusive of 
all the people of Saskatchewan, and they come along with bills 
of this sort that gives them more power to take your cheque, to 
take your home and, Mr. Speaker, otherwise they don’t care 
what happens to you in the future. 
 
And that is really a shame for a party that inherited so much, for 
a party that inherited so much and enjoyed a free ride, Mr. 
Speaker. They have enjoyed a free ride. And no matter what the 
right wing Saskatchewan Party may say to the public or to the 
media, we know on this side of the House they’re getting a free 
ride from the previous administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We tell them, enjoy your free ride. It’s coming to an end soon. 
Enjoy your free ride. You’ve underperformed. You lack vision. 
You have no governing skills, Mr. Speaker, and you’re 
absolutely silly to bring bills of this sort into the Assembly. 
When the times are supposed to be good for everyone, you’re 
talking about garnisheeing salaries. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that people aren’t realizing it, but 
they soon will, that this government has mismanaged their 
finances once again. They have mismanaged the finances once 
again. And what’s the evidence of that, Mr. Speaker? Because 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6015 

one of the things that’s important here is they’re looking at 
garnisheeing salaries here. Now are they in that bad of shape 
where they’ve got to start garnisheeing working men and 
women’s salaries and seizing their property, that you have to be 
able to use those revenues to subsidize your sheriff’s office 
because you can’t give them the proper resources from the 
Ministry of Finance office? Is that what it comes down to, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And they’re laughing in the front row there. They find that 
funny, Mr. Speaker. There are many people out there that I 
would suggest, highly suggest that they pay very close attention 
to this bill. They’ve got to pay close attention to this bill 
because it gives extra powers to the minister, extra powers to 
the sheriff’s office, and those powers mean garnisheeing 
salaries, Mr. Speaker, seizing of property. And in the process of 
seizing your home, they’re also going to bill you for their time. 
To add insult to injury, you’re going to pay the cost of the 
sheriff and his office in seizing your home so their friends can 
get your house and your salary through the garnisheed property, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll tell you one thing, a lot of people in Saskatchewan 
don’t like a government that does that to people that are having 
difficulty and struggling to make ends meet. Because there’s a 
lot of families that have that problem, and it’s a problem that of 
course they don’t understand nor appreciate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues are going to have a lot of 
opportunity to talk to a lot of groups. We want to talk to the 
people that talk about reducing poverty in our province. They 
want to attach their bandwagon to that. Well guess what, Mr. 
Speaker? They come along with a bill like this, and yet they 
say, oh, we want to reduce poverty. And I say, well why do you 
have to introduce a bill like that? There’s no reason for you to 
confer extra powers on the sheriff to take your salary away, to 
take your home away. Why would you want to put a bill like 
that to a time of economic prosperity? It’s totally confusing as 
to what the Sask Party wants. 
 
So to me, from my perspective, we think that one of the special 
interest groups are pushing them and pulling their . . . They’re 
like puppets being told, put this bill through so we can get more 
of our debt back from some of the families that can’t afford to 
keep their home. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what happens 
here in Saskatchewan, why the NDP will continue to fight for 
those people that don’t have a voice in this Assembly and 
continue to tell the Sask Party, despite the largesse that you got, 
you should leave working men and women who are struggling 
to make ends meet, leave them alone. Don’t put extra powers 
here to try and garnishee their salary or take away their home. 
Like where did that come from? Who asked for that? 
 
That’s the fundamental argument that we have today in the 
Assembly on this bill, Mr. Speaker. We want to know why 
these changes are here now and who asked for them. Because 
once you get the information who asked for them, Mr. Speaker, 
then we’ll know the interest of those groups and we’ll know the 
interest of the Saskatchewan Party. And from our vantage point, 
the interest that the Saskatchewan Party has is not for working 
men and women who are struggling to make ends meet because 
their policies do not help those that are struggling to find 
decent, affordable homes, those that are struggling to find food 

on the table, Mr. Speaker, and those that are able to put their 
kids in some good, decent daycare. Those are issues that the 
Saskatchewan Party doesn’t care about, they don’t come 
forward with, Mr. Speaker. Instead they come forward with a 
bill like Bill 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act. 
 
We have a lot to say on that, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to pay 
very, very close attention to this bill, almost every bill that they 
bring forward, Mr. Speaker. This really smacks of the right 
wing rhetoric that we’ve been hearing from these guys for 
years. They’re back, Mr. Speaker. They’re back, and the 
Saskatchewan people are going to, they’re going to see that, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re going to see that, and they’re going to 
certainly adjust their actions in the future more favourable to 
the NDP. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as much as the right wingers want to chirp 
from their chairs over there, my point is that the booming 
economy that Saskatchewan’s enjoying today had nothing to do 
with the right wingers, had nothing to . . . And that’s what really 
gets them upset, Mr. Speaker. They inherited that booming 
economy and a growing population, and that’s what really 
sticks in the craw of many of the right wingers, Mr. Speaker. 
They knew they didn’t create the booming economy, yet every 
parade, there they are, waving at the crowd, pretending that they 
had it figured out, Mr. Speaker, when in fact they just simply, 
they just simply inherited. They came in at the right time, Mr. 
Speaker, and they couldn’t figure out how to use it properly. 
Almost twice the amount of money each year they get, this 
unprecedented revenue, and they can’t figure it out. Their 
choices have been poor, Mr. Speaker. They lack vision. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, from my perspective, after seven years, 
seven years in unprecedented revenue, why are they so 
confused, and why do they look old and tired, Mr. Speaker? 
Because, Mr. Speaker, they never had the vision for 
Saskatchewan that’s positive for many working men and 
women and families in the province. And that’s why bills like 
162 come along to garnishee people’s salaries and to seize their 
property. Like, what’s that about? What’s that about? 
 
They should be putting bills forward to double the amount of 
support that these families need to keep their homes, to keep 
their kids in good daycare, to keep food on the table, to help and 
to applaud some of them that are working low-paying jobs to 
try and show their kids that working for a living is something 
that’s good and should be built on for the future. And it’s a 
good example for many kids to see their mom and dad are 
working. And what happens, Mr. Speaker, when they get 
themselves into a situation where they just simply can’t make 
ends meet? The Saskatchewan Party comes along and finishes 
them off with Acts of this sort that allows them to garnishee 
their salaries and to seize their home. 
 
And I say, in this day and age in 2014, it’s a crying shame to 
see a government with unprecedented revenues, with $14 
billion a year to operate with, where they have to start going 
after working men and women that have trouble with making 
ends meet, Mr. Speaker. There should be good supporting 
mechanisms in place to protect those families, to help those 
families, but the Saskatchewan Party has nothing to do with 
that. And we’re going to tell absolutely any organization that 



6016 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

they pretend to side with, what exactly their deal is. Because 
Bill 162, Bill 162 is the bill that tells us that the Saskatchewan 
Party is back. They’re back at hurting working families. 
They’re back at not caring for those that have struggles, Mr. 
Speaker. And they’re going to give those that have power over 
us more power to seize our home and to take away our bank 
accounts. And this is 2014. 
 
So the people of Saskatchewan need to pay very close attention 
to this bill. It’s got a lot of moving components to it. I don’t like 
it from where we sit in terms of them trying to downplay it. 
And one of the ways that they downplay it is laughing and 
giggling in the Assembly when we talk about these issues. They 
find it funny that families struggle. Well that’s fine, Mr. 
Speaker. They will pay a price for that. And I think people of 
Saskatchewan will certainly know in the future what the 
Saskatchewan Party is all about. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more that we want to say on this 
particular bill as I said. My colleagues will have the opportunity 
to speak on this bill at a later date. I want to re-enter the debate, 
and I want to ask the member from Melfort that’s chirping from 
his chair, who asked you to put this bill forward? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I can almost guarantee you he won’t have a clue. He 
won’t have a clue because he’s just told to read the notes, sit in 
the back, and don’t say a word. We’ll take care of that in the 
front bench. 
 
Well I don’t know if you heard the story of Peter the Pied Piper, 
in terms of following the Saskatchewan Party leadership right 
off a cliff, because the bottom line is there are families that 
struggle. And the member from Melfort may not notice, there 
are families that struggle. There are many families that struggle. 
Day in and day out they struggle. And your government came 
along and they decided through Bill 162 . . . It’s right here. I’ll 
send the member a copy if he wants to see it, Bill 162, in which 
this bill confers greater power to the sheriff, to the sheriff’s 
office to seize your house and to garnishee your salary if you’re 
not making a payment to certain companies. 
 
Now what companies are these? That’s my argument I’m 
making today. Who asked for this bill? And I will challenge the 
member from Melfort to find out for me, find out who asked for 
this bill. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? Guaranteed he 
won’t know and guaranteed he won’t provide that information 
because of that old phrase don’t ask, don’t tell. You know that 
old phrase, Mr. Speaker, is something that I think the member 
from Melfort is quite good at upholding. So I think it’s 
important, Mr. Speaker, that we find out. And again I challenge 
the member from Melfort: you bring forward to me which 
individuals asked for this bill. And will he do that? 
 
He’s chirping from his chair. He asked to be engaged in the 
debate so he’s chirping from his chair. Will he get me the 
information as to what parties asked for this bill, Mr. Speaker? 
Will the member from Melfort give me that information? And 
now he sits quietly, Mr. Speaker, because he doesn’t want to 
find out. But we’ll find out eventually. And when he doesn’t 
come forward, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to ask him other 
questions if he doesn’t come forward. So either way the 
member from Melfort wants to chirp from his chair but can’t 
provide any advice or leadership on this issue, which is 
prevalent with the Saskatchewan Party. Then at the very least, 

he should learn to be able to understand the plight and the 
struggles of many young families, working men and women 
that work minimum jobs. And they have a tough time trying to 
buy a house, never mind a tough time trying to make ends meet. 
 
And now they come along with The Enforcement of Money 
Judgments Amendment Act that’s designed to garnishee salaries 
and seize your property, Mr. Speaker. It’s very clear here. It’s 
very clear. And guess what? In the process of the sheriff seizing 
your property and garnisheeing your salary, you’re going to pay 
the sheriff’s costs too, and you’re going to pay his office costs. 
Now what happens if it’s an American-based company? Does 
that apply here as well? What happens if it’s a 
misunderstanding?  
 
Suppose you buy a vehicle that’s not very good and you sign 
this contract for the vehicle, and then all of a sudden the vehicle 
breaks down a month later. And basically you were, quite 
frankly, robbed of a decent vehicle. And what happens to that 
debt? So the guy says, you know, the dealership says, well he 
owes me money because he signed this debt. Well who’s going 
to come to the defence of that young working man or woman 
saying, well I got ripped off by this deal. So my vehicle doesn’t 
work. It had a really bad motor. And then I bought this vehicle. 
Who’s going to support that particular person? 
 
Or you sign an agreement for a product and you never get that 
product, and all of a sudden this goes through and guess what? 
You get your salary garnisheed because somebody didn’t give 
you a proper vehicle or didn’t give you a proper product? Well 
what, where are their rights? And what happens if the court case 
finds that the family that was involved was not in the wrong? 
Will the sheriff’s office costs and the sheriff’s cost himself be 
attached to the defender’s bill? Well these are some of the 
questions that we need to know. And, Mr. Speaker, none of this 
information, none of this information is in here at all, none 
whatsoever. 
 
So we got a lot of work to do on this bill. We got a lot of 
questions on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, and we’re far 
from pleased from the vagueness on this bill and we’re far from 
pleased with knowing who asked for the changes in this bill. 
We want to know which of the Sask Party friends asked for this 
bill and the changes attached to this bill, Mr. Speaker. We want 
to know. And we want to know why the Sask Party 
accommodated them, when you know very well, in a time of 
opportunity and a time of a booming economy, Mr. Speaker, 
they bring in a bill of this sort, it doesn’t make any sense 
whatsoever. And this is the reason why, Mr. Speaker, this 
Legislative Assembly needs to work and needs to hold the 
government to account, and that’s why this particular 
opposition will continue doing so. And once again, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to ask . . . The member from Moose Jaw 
starts to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5985 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5985 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5985 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5985 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5985 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5985 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6005 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5986 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5986 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5986 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5986 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5986 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5987 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5987 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Transgender Day of Remembrance 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5987 
 Canadian Western Agribition 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5987 
 Promoting Dignity for All People 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5987 
 Advancing Housing Solutions in Saskatchewan 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5988 
 Moose Jaw Health Foundation Festival of Trees 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5988 
 Moose Jaw Team Wins Provincial Football Championship 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5988 
 Fundraiser Supports Scholarships 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5989 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provision of Care for Seniors and Investigation of Long-Term Care Facility 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5989 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5989 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5991 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 International Education Strategy 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5994 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5994 
 Centre of Responsibility Opens in Saskatoon 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5994 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5995 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5995 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5995 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5996 
 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6010 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6011 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


