
























































Hansard: March 04, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 27A  TUESDAY, MARCH 4, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4509 
 March 4, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to introduce eight individuals seated 
in the front row opposite. Mr. Speaker, the Ukrainian 
community in Saskatchewan and here in Regina is very strong, 
and we have a number of individuals that are here to follow the 
proceedings of this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce the president of the 
Regina chapter of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, Orest 
Gawdyda. If you would just give us a quick wave. Thank you, 
Orest. I’m going to also introduce Mariya Sporysh, Petro 
Nakutnyy, Olena Andrusyak, Diana Dumanski, Vera 
Feduschak, Ken Mazur, and Volodymyr Makhov. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people, as I mentioned earlier, are here to 
watch the proceedings but they’re also leaders. They’re also 
leaders of the Saskatchewan Ukraine community, and I’m 
pleased that they are here. We also have students that are here 
from Ukraine that are studying here in Saskatchewan, and I 
want to thank them for being part of this afternoon’s activities. 
And I ask all members to welcome them to this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Deputy Premier in welcoming this important delegation to 
the Assembly here today from the Ukrainian community across 
Saskatchewan, but especially from here in Regina as well. 
 
These are difficult days, Mr. Speaker, for Ukrainians in Ukraine 
as well as Canadians who have Ukrainian ancestry, as thoughts 
are with family members and loved ones and a country many 
miles away but very close to hearts here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. So I join with the Deputy Premier in welcoming this 
group and extend my appreciation to the group for the 
leadership provided within the context of Saskatchewan, and 
ask all members to join me in welcoming this important 
delegation to the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I’m 
pleased to introduce six guests seated in the west gallery; and 
I’ll ask them to wave when I mention their names. First of all, 
Mr. Speaker, from the College of Pharmacy and Nutrition at the 
University of Saskatchewan, we have Dr. Susan Whiting and 
Poppy Lowe. From the Saskatchewan Dieticians Association, 
Lana Moore and Bronwyn Smetaniuk; and Tammy Ives and 
Allison Cammer representing Dieticians of Canada. 
 

Mr. Speaker, they’re here today in recognition of National 
Nutrition Month, which the government is proclaiming for the 
month of March. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome 
them to their Legislative Assembly. And so I would ask all 
members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I see in the west 
gallery a constituent of mine, Cody Rood who is from 
Bengough, Saskatchewan, ranches in the Bengough area. Mr. 
Speaker, Cody is an accomplished rodeo cowboy and I’ve had 
the opportunity to visit him at his ranch in the Bengough area a 
couple of years ago. I haven’t had the chance to talk to him. Just 
seeing that he’s here now today, hoping to have an opportunity 
to reconnect with him. So I’d ask all members to welcome 
Cody to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
opposition, it’s my pleasure to join with the minister in 
welcoming the six guests here to recognize National Nutrition 
Month, the health care professionals and educators who work 
very hard to ensure that people here in Saskatchewan have good 
information and good skills to be healthy on the front end of the 
whole health continuum, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we are 
preventing illnesses in the long term. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to welcome this 
delegation to your Legislative Assembly and thank you for all 
the work that you do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 
members of this Legislative Assembly, I too want to welcome 
these fine dietitians to their Legislative Assembly. I have been 
taught by some of them. I have worked shoulder to shoulder 
with some of them. All of them have pushed and pulled me into 
and through the field of dietetics. So these brilliant women are 
leading the profession of dietitians through into the future. 
 
And Tammy Ives, Susan Whiting, Poppy Lowe, Roseann 
Nasser, Allison Cammer, Lana Moore, welcome to your 
Legislative Assembly. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 
Heart Community School here in the fine city of Regina. The 
petitioners point out that the gym at Sacred Heart Community 
School in north central Regina is now quite literally falling 
apart, has been closed indefinitely, and is no longer safe for 
students or staff. 
 
They point out that the school and the community have raised 
the issue with the Sask Party provincial government since 2007 



4510 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

without resolution. They point out that any school needs a gym 
as a place for the school and the community to gather together, 
to engage in cultural and educational activities, and to promote 
physical activity which we know is good for the mind, body, 
and spirit of a child, Mr. Speaker. And they point out that 
Sacred Heart Community School is the largest school in north 
central Regina with 450 students, 75 per cent of whom are First 
Nations and Métis. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the Sask 
Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 
replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 
Community School. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
Saskatoon and Kindersley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased today to stand up and present a petition on highways. 
And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to recognize that upgrades, repairs, and 
maintenance on Highway 123 is important to northern 
residents and must be undertaken immediately. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from Moose Jaw and all throughout southern Saskatchewan and 
northern Saskatchewan as well. And, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Celebrating Canadian Athletes at Sochi Olympics 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to stand and recognize individuals who really embody the true 
Canadian spirit and pride. I call on members to join me in 
congratulating our Canadian Olympic athletes who represented 
our country in Sochi. We always must be reminded that 
Canadian athletes can compete with the very best from across 
the world as they undoubtedly succeeded, having earned five 
bronze medals, 10 silver medals, and 10 gold medals, Mr. 
Speaker. In particular I want to recognize our very own 
Saskatchewan athletes for their impressive performances. 
Participating in these moments of leadership will motivate 
young people from across this province to pursue their goals 
and remain involved in Canadian sport. 
 
The Sochi 2014 Olympics revived the spirit of inclusion, 
reminding us that it is crucial that all athletes are able to 
participate fully in the Sochi games. Mr. Speaker, we are very 
proud that we were among the local, national, and international 
voices who worked together to call for inclusion at the Sochi 
games, one that is welcoming to the LGBT [lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender] athletes and spectators. It is also 

important to recognize the Olympic coaches and support staff as 
well as families that have played such an important role in 
guiding these athletes to success. 
 
Finally the event wouldn’t have taken place without numerous 
associations, clubs, and volunteers here at home who are part of 
the Canadian network that supports our inspiring athletes. I call 
on all members to join me in congratulating the Canadian 
Olympians and Paralympians from across this country, 
especially from Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

St. Gregor Family at Brier Competition 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For a curler, there 
are few things that top representing your province at a national 
level. However, sharing this honour and unforgettable 
experience with two of your family members might just be one 
of those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I rise in the Assembly today to recognize and congratulate 
brothers Dallan and Kirk Muyres along with their father and 
coach, Lyle Muyres, who join the Steven Laycock rink as they 
represent Saskatchewan at the Brier in Kamloops, BC [British 
Columbia]. 
 
All three Muyres hail from St. Gregor, Saskatchewan, just east 
of Humboldt in the Melfort constituency. The family has made 
a tradition of Brier appearances, Mr. Speaker. Dad Lyle played 
in the national showcase, skipping his three brothers, in 1986 as 
did lead Dallan who played there in 2011. Younger brother 
Kirk, a previous Canadian junior curling champion, is making 
his first appearance at the men’s premier event as the team’s 
third. The team currently curls out of the Nutana Curling Club 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating Kirk, Dallan, and Lyle Muyres along with 
second Colton Flasch and skip Steven Laycock on their 
provincial title, and wish them the best of luck this week to 
achieve their goal of bringing the Brier trophy home to 
Saskatchewan for the first time since 1980. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Saskatchewan Musician Wins Prestigious Award 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to celebrate the most recent success of singer, 
songwriter, and pianist Jeffery Straker, winner of the 
international category at the prestigious Viña del Mar song 
competition last Thursday night in Viña del Mar, Chile. Held at 
the 20,000-seat Quinta Vergara Amphitheatre and televised 
throughout South America, the competition is held in 
conjunction with the Viña del Mar festival, a week-long event 
featuring the best and brightest of artists throughout Latin 
America along with international superstars, this year including 
Ricky Martin and Rod Stewart. 
 
Hailing from Punnichy and now splitting his time between 
Regina and Toronto, Jeffery was one of the six contestants in 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4511 

the international category. Jeffery Straker is the second 
Canadian to win at the event which began in 1960, now joining 
Sierra Noble who claimed the top prize in 2011. 
 
Jeffery Straker’s music has been compared to the likes of Ben 
Folds and Harry Chapin. He has produced a variety of albums, 
beginning in 2003, and is constantly touring, performing up to 
100 shows a year including a recent star turn hosting the 
Saskatchewan Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards. For winning 
the event he received the Gaviota de Plata trophy and $50,000 
US [United States] which I understand will help to produce a 
new album this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the entire Legislative Assembly to please 
join me in extending congratulations to Jeffery Straker on 
winning the prestigious Viña del Mar song competition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week 
 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, March 2nd to the 8th is Impaired 
Driving Awareness Week in our province. Students Against 
Drinking and Driving, better known as SADD, with the help of 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] plays a lead role in 
promoting this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SADD is a youth-based organization devoted to 
eliminating impaired driving. Every year they deliver 
presentations and raise awareness about the often devastating 
impact of impaired driving on families and communities across 
this province. This is a very important contribution, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In 2012 in Saskatchewan, 67 people were killed in impaired 
driving collisions and 720 people were injured in collisions 
involving an impaired driver. Almost half of those injuries and 
fatalities were caused by impaired drivers under 30 years of 
age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, groups like SADD are essential to educating 
people, youth in particular, about the dangers of impaired 
driving. Education and awareness helps people young and old 
to think about the choices they make before they get behind the 
wheel. SGI also continues with its efforts to highlight the 
dangers of impaired driving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the all-party Committee on Traffic Safety last fall 
put forward several recommendations to make Saskatchewan 
roads safer, including tougher penalties for impaired driving. 
We introduced legislative amendments in November which we 
anticipate will be passed this sitting. With the new laws being 
put into place, Saskatchewan will have one of the toughest 
packages of impaired driving legislation in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank SADD, SGI, and the all-party special 
committee for their efforts to help ensure our residents learn to 
always plan a safe ride home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 
 

Regina Hosts Women’s University 
Volleyball Championship 

 
Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend was a very busy 
one for University of Regina student athletes. Members have 
already heard of the great women’s hockey series that took 
place in Saskatoon. And here in Regina the women’s volleyball 
team hosted the CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport] 
championship. 
 
The championship was made up of eight participating 
university teams from across Canada, which included our 
University of Regina Cougars. Regina was happy to welcome 
the athletes, coaches, and team supporters from across Canada. 
The host committee did an amazing job of welcoming teams. 
They even had elementary school students meet the university 
teams arriving at the airport, waving banners and cheering as 
the athletes came down the stairs. 
 
This year’s winners were the Manitoba Bisons, defeating the 
UBC [University of British Columbia] Thunderbirds and ending 
the Thunderbirds’ six-year winning streak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Cougars did well in the tournament. After a 
slow start this season, they finished very strong. They were 
seeded eighth, however, in the tournament and faced the 
powerhouse UBC Thunderbirds in the first game. They put up a 
valiant fight but lost in four sets, Mr. Speaker. The U of R 
[University of Regina] Cougars performed well and were 
competitive in each and every match. Though the tournament 
results weren’t exactly what we hoped for, the U of R did an 
excellent job of hosting the national event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in expressing our 
thanks to the coaches, tournament organizers, and volunteers 
who worked hard to host the CIS women’s volleyball 
championship here in Regina. Once again, Regina showed that 
it is the place to hold national sports competitions. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Premier’s Award of Excellence to Lakeland Resident 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize the outstanding work of Ernie Locke, who is 
responsible for the maintenance and upgrades of infrastructure 
within the district of Lakeland. On February 14th, I had the 
pleasure of presenting Mr. Locke with the Premier’s Award of 
Excellence in recognition of his efforts to save the homes and 
properties of his neighbours and residents of Anglin Lake due 
to flooding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s Award for Excellence is presented 
to members of Saskatchewan’s public service who have made 
an outstanding contribution to the government and citizens of 
the province. Mr. Locke exemplified those characteristics in the 
spring of 2013 when record rainfall resulted in severe flooding 
at Anglin Lake. During this time Mr. Locke went above and 
beyond his job to help residents protect their homes and calm 



4512 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

their fears. Mr. Locke was able to divert the water away from 
the Anglin Lake properties by working non-stop to build a 
berm. He showed compassion and empathy for his community 
members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 
me in congratulating Ernie Locke on this prestigious award, and 
thank him for his outstanding contributions by caring for the 
residents of Anglin Lake. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

National Nutrition Month 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today and recognize March as Nutrition Month, National 
Nutrition Month. Mr. Speaker, we are extremely fortunate in 
Saskatchewan to have highly skilled dietitians who are 
dedicated to the people of this province. The practice of 
dietitians is regulated through The Dietitians Act. Dietitians are 
important members of the health care team. They have 
specialized knowledge in food and nutrition and how it impacts 
our bodies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize the vital role dietitians play in 
helping people make informed choices about nutrition in order 
to maintain a healthy lifestyle and to help manage chronic 
conditions. You will find dietitians working in a variety of 
settings. This includes hospitals, long-term care homes, 
long-term care settings, universities, research, public health, and 
that’s just a few of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, dietitians have always been involved in quality 
patient-centred care. They are important partners in bringing 
about the transformation we are seeing in our health care 
system. Their Nutrition Month campaign, Simply Cook And 
Enjoy! is dedicated to serving up practical advice on cooking 
and food skills. Mr. Speaker, we have great dietitians in this 
province, and we are honoured to have a few of them in their 
legislature today. I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking all 
dietitians for their ongoing commitment to high-quality, 
patient-first, centred care. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Financial Support for Care Facilities 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The inquest into the 
deaths of three seniors at St. Mary’s Villa in 2010 heard 
concerning testimony yesterday. The boiler that caused the 
deadly carbon monoxide poisoning was on the health region’s 
needed capital repairs, but there simply were not enough funds, 
Mr. Speaker, provided to get the job done. There’s a crucial 
lesson here for this government. When you force health regions 
to make difficult decisions about urgent projects to focus on, the 
consequences can be tragic. 
 
My question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker: in light of what we 
heard yesterday about the government forcing health regions to 
scale back their urgent requests, how can he guarantee that there 

are no urgently needed repairs that are being ignored like the 
boiler at St. Mary’s Villa? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, each year we work with our regional health authorities 
within their operating capital budgets to look to see how we can 
improve and help the regions improve the maintenance, the 
facilities, the capital facilities that they do have, Mr. Speaker, 
whether that be through the renewal, building brand new 
facilities to replace aging facilities. We know that roughly 
two-thirds of our health care facilities in this province were 
built before 1970, Mr. Speaker, so there is a backlog of aging 
facilities that we’re trying to work our way through, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as through the maintenance budgets of our 
health authorities. 
 
We look to provide funding for those that are a high priority for 
the health regions, knowing that it’s within the confines of what 
is available through the provincial budget each year, Mr. 
Speaker. We have provided, as I’ve said before in this House, 
nearly $1 billion in just six years on both renovating existing 
facilities and building replacements, Mr. Speaker, but there is 
more to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the inquest, we are following it quite 
closely. Certainly our hearts go out to the employees, the 
residents, and the families that were affected by this tragedy in 
2010. And, Mr. Speaker, we strive to always put patient and 
staff safety first. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Health regions asked 
for about eighteen and a half million dollars to meet urgent 
needs in seniors’ care facilities. Those urgent requests, Mr. 
Speaker, included things like needed staff, equipment, and 
repairs. But the government, Mr. Speaker, said the health 
regions were asking for far too much. They forced the health 
regions to slash their requests for urgent repairs, and they only 
delivered about $10 million, Mr. Speaker, to meet the urgent 
needs that were identified in care facilities. 
 
Cypress Health Region for example, Mr. Speaker, identified 
$900,000 that is needed in needed infrastructure improvements, 
but the government forced the region to cut that request to just 
$300,000. We saw what happened, Mr. Speaker, in the situation 
of St. Mary’s Villa when needs, urgent needs, are neglected. 
The government knew that there was a problem with the boiler, 
Mr. Speaker, but it chose . . . It did not bother to actually 
address it, and there were tragic consequences that came from 
that decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again my question is for the Premier: how can he guarantee 
that there are no urgently needed repairs that are currently being 
ignored like the boiler at St. Mary’s Villa was ignored? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
With respect to the infrastructure needs that are all around our 
province, Mr. Speaker, when this government took office in 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4513 

2007, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we were left with was 
a VFA study of every single health facility in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, which indicated that there was a backlog of in the 
billions of dollars in maintenance that was needed across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. That’s why under the former Health 
minister in 2008-2009 an unprecedented $100 million went into 
the maintenance of health facilities, Mr. Speaker, knowing that 
we needed more to do. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been doing 
that in the subsequent years to bring our spending in 
maintenance and in capital work in health care, Mr. Speaker, to 
nearly $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to the Urgent Issues Action Fund, what we did 
know and what I publicly had said, Mr. Speaker, even as far 
back as November, was that we were asking for regions to bring 
forward their proposals within the $10 million that was 
provided and that we would work with regions to prioritize 
which ones needed to take place within the money that was 
available, Mr. Speaker, knowing that it wasn’t an unlimited pot 
of money, Mr. Speaker. We think that the $10 million will go 
far, but more work needs to be done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, health regions identified about 
eighteen and a half million dollars of urgent need, Mr. Speaker, 
that is required: things for staffing in a big way, Mr. Speaker, 
equipment, and for repairs. But we know, Mr. Speaker, there 
are many repairs and many needs that aren’t even showing up in 
this urgent request. 
 
It’s important, Mr. Speaker. This is what the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region had to say about the process of the 
business case submissions. They said this: “Infrastructure needs 
require targeted funding that can’t be addressed in this 
proposal.” And that’s from page 37. I’m going to say it again, 
Mr. Speaker, because the government needs to hear this from 
the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. They said, 
“Infrastructure needs require targeted funding that can’t be 
addressed in this proposal.” 
 
My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how many urgent 
infrastructure needs currently exist in care facilities throughout 
the province and are being ignored by this government like the 
boiler at St. Mary’s Villa was ignored? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I will be the first and this government will be the first 
to say that despite spending nearly $1 billion in six years — I 
think the number is about $935 million in capital maintenance 
and new construction in just six years, Mr. Speaker — we know 
that there is still more that needs to be done in terms of 
renewing the infrastructure that we have available in capital. 
Mr. Speaker, I would suspect that that job wouldn’t be so large 
had previous governments spent more than just $300 million, as 
a comparison, in six years, the last six years of their 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what we’re doing about it, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
replacing 13 long-term care facilities in rural Saskatchewan that 
were long overdue, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are providing 

$10 million in urgent dollars for the regional health authorities 
that will result in 700 pieces of equipment, including lifts, 
slings, mattresses, and tubs that weren’t available even six 
months ago, Mr. Speaker. There’s more work to be done, Mr. 
Speaker, but I think that this is a right start to correct the 
mistakes of the past. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the answers that are coming from 
this government are as though they didn’t just tell the health 
regions to slash their requests, Mr. Speaker, for urgent needs for 
staffing, for equipment, for repairs — the lines that we’re 
hearing from the government, Mr. Speaker, suggesting that 
everything is going well. 
 
When we have, Mr. Speaker, health regions being forced to 
scale back in a huge way their urgent requests, not even the 
requests that aren’t showing up in the urgent issues fund, Mr. 
Speaker, when we see those kinds of steps we have to call into 
question, Mr. Speaker, this government’s willingness to 
recognize the urgency and the severity of the situation. 
 
It’s about the decisions that this government is also making, Mr. 
Speaker. At a time when there are huge needs for seniors, we 
see this government deciding to spend $130,000, Mr. Speaker, 
for wireless Internet for a few level 4 care facilities, Mr. 
Speaker. And while the Internet of course is important, Mr. 
Speaker, the reality is for many of the level 4 residents sitting in 
a care facility, Mr. Speaker, they’re not sitting in their bed on 
Facebook. They’re sitting in their bed in diapers, Mr. Speaker, 
and many of these seniors aren’t even getting one bath a week. 
 
We see, Mr. Speaker, this government has $207,000 for yet 
another lean consultant. My question for the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker: why are they failing to fix the basics in seniors’ care 
and putting their attention at things, Mr. Speaker, that are not 
about fixing the basics for seniors who are struggling here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, what I think the people of Saskatchewan have seen in 
terms of a difference between the approach of this government 
and the former government, the former NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government, Mr. Speaker, when in mid-year injection, in 
terms of dollars that weren’t available previous, Mr. Speaker, 
$10 million was made available, as well as $3.8 million in 
ongoing funding to address some of the urgent concerns, Mr. 
Speaker, urgent concerns that all tie back to what we heard 
during the CEO [chief executive officer] tour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those were dollars that were made available by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, knowing that more needs to be 
done, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the members opposite. The 
only thing that they proposed to fix long-term care, Mr. 
Speaker, the only thing that they proposed was to dramatically 
increase the fees that long-term care residents would pay, to the 
point where some would have to go on welfare, Mr. Speaker. 
That is the record of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. We choose to take 
a different approach. 
 



4514 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this grain transportation crisis is 
hurting our economy and costing producers billions of dollars. 
We’ve been listening to producers and experts about how to fix 
the system and move this bumper crop to market, but instead of 
listening to ideas, the Minister Responsible for Agriculture has 
been dismissive. 
 
Yesterday in the emergency debate about the crisis, the minister 
said our suggestions for open running rights were “dumb 
ideas.” Well, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t pull this idea out of thin 
air or from a box in the basement. We got it from producers and 
ag experts. 
 
To the minister: why does this government reject even 
exploring the idea of joint running rights as one of the solutions 
that could help fix the broken grain transportation system? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — In a perfect system, joint running rights 
are something that might be able to fine-tune a system that’s 
working pretty good. We don’t have that. Joint running rights 
are available to railways to negotiate between themselves, and 
that’s been done in many areas and the right is there for them to 
do that anywhere they want. Nothing has to change to make that 
happen. 
 
The problem is not joint running rights or the lack of, the 
problem is not enough rolling stock on the rails to move the 
grain that needs to be moved. Hundreds of locomotives have 
been idled, thousands of grain cars. This is a choice by the 
railways and that is the problem, not joint running rights. 
There’s no shortage of track. There’s no lack of capacity there. 
There’s no problem with having capacity to run more 
equipment. There’s just no willingness to do so. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s well known that 
joint running rights have been in the Canadian transportation 
legislation for over 130 years. It hasn’t been working the way 
it’s currently legislated because of the monopoly that exists 
with the railways. Many agriculture groups that represent 
producers believe that open, competitive access to the rail 
system is one of the ways we could get this crop moving to port 
and fix this mess. 
 
Here’s a list of who supports the idea: the Keystone 
Agricultural Producers in Manitoba, the Federation of 
Agriculture in Alberta, the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, 
and the Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan. 
All of these groups have been calling for open running rights as 
part of the fix because it would increase the level of competition 
and break the monopoly that CN [Canadian National] and CP 
[Canadian Pacific] have enjoyed for decades. 

To the minister: why is this government siding with the big rail 
companies and stubbornly opposing the concept of open 
running rights that could help fix the broken system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — That’s ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a very serious problem, not one that I think is 
appropriate for the NDP to join the fray all within the last 
month and take potshots from the bulrushes at the people that 
are actually trying to fix it. 
 
We’ve made, just to outline what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve made submissions to the level of service review back as 
far as 2010, and we’ve asked for improved accountability, 
including penalties. We’ve wrote to the federal standing 
committee last May supporting amendments proposed by the 
Coalition of Rail Shippers. We’ve sent letters last November to 
all stakeholders. Previously I’ve met with all of the major 
stakeholders and recently a delegation has been appointed by 
the Premier including myself as Chair, the Minister of the 
Economy, the Minister of Highways, and the MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] for Rosthern-Shellbrook. And that 
work continues through the delegation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, producers are facing 
overwhelming stress today. Their bins are full of grain and their 
mailboxes are full of bills. And they aren’t sure if they can 
afford to put a crop in the ground this spring. Producers need to 
know that this government is willing to explore all of the 
options, and open running rights should be on the table. Even 
the federal Agriculture minister, who hasn’t done much of 
anything to address the crisis, has agreed that open running 
rights should be considered. 
 
So it makes no sense why Saskatchewan’s Agriculture minister 
is saying it’s a dumb idea. New Democrats are standing with 
producers and calling for joint running rights. To the minister: 
why is this government siding with CN and CP against the 
interests of farmers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Joint running rights are not the answer to 
this problem. CP Rail alone has idled 400 locomotives, 13,000 
rail cars, laid off 4,550 people from train crews, and you think, 
that member thinks, Mr. Speaker, that joint running rights is 
going to solve this problem. CN did the same thing three years 
ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the problem, not joint running rights. Joint 
running rights could be a good tool when, after we get the 
problem fixed and get the grain moving, it could fine-tune the 
system. Joint running rights in certain locations could be a fine 
thing. I agree with that. Nobody disagrees but it’s not the 
solution to this problem. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4515 

Provision of Surgeries in Regina 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As of Monday, 80 
surgeries and 22 procedures were postponed at the Pasqua. 
We’ve been told this is because of discoloration on the cotton 
packaging of surgical tools. But we’ve heard a lot over the last 
year about significant staffing shortages in Regina’s operating 
rooms. To the minister: can he guarantee that these cancelled 
surgeries and procedures have nothing to do with short staffing? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, there had been a period in the past, about a year and a 
half ago, when we knew that Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 
was not on track in terms of hitting their surgical target of 
nobody waiting longer than three months by March of 2014. 
Mr. Speaker, at that time there were some issues around some 
operating room nurse positions. We have added some dollars 
and some funding to increase those seats. Mr. Speaker, the 
region believes that they’re in a good position in that respect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the postponements, obviously Regina 
Qu’Appelle is working hard to resolve this situation as quickly 
as possible. Urgent surgeries are now being diverted to the 
General Hospital, Mr. Speaker, as well as additional capacity in 
the General, as well as two third parties — suppliers, surgical 
units — are providing some surgeries, Mr. Speaker. And we 
certainly hope that this issue is resolved shortly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we know this is not the first 
time that staff noticed this discoloration. The health region has 
admitted that such discoloration has been noticed at least twice 
before in February. To the minister: if package discoloration is 
significant enough to cancel surgeries for 10 days right now, 
why was nothing done when it was noticed previously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding from the 
health region was that at that time it was noticed, Mr. Speaker, 
as it has been, Mr. Speaker, in other facilities in North America, 
from my understanding at that time they believed that they had 
rectified the situation. Mr. Speaker, it’s not a situation that 
they’re experiencing at the General Hospital and so they’re 
looking to see whether or not it has to do with the filter in the 
machine, whether or not it’s the machine itself, Mr. Speaker, 
perhaps the water supply into the Pasqua Hospital. 
 
The Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region has a team that is 
working on this, Mr. Speaker, trying to find a resolution to the 
situation. They’re meeting twice daily, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
providing the public, through the media I think, fairly timely 
notices in terms of what they have and have not been able to 
determine. But obviously we’re all hoping that this situation is 
resolved shortly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What’s the 
difference between February and now? Why the surgery 
cancellations now and not when the package discoloration was 
noticed in February? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, again, from the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, it 
wasn’t actually on the equipment, Mr. Speaker. It was on the 
packaging that wraps around the equipment when it is 
sterilized. They believe that the equipment is safe to use for 
patients, Mr. Speaker. But because it has been a recurring issue 
over the last couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker, they wanted to do 
their due diligence to try to rectify the situation so that the 
discolouring doesn’t happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the meantime they are moving as many 
surgeries as they can to the General Hospital as well as to two 
surgical third-party providers of surgeries within Regina, here 
in the city, Mr. Speaker, and looking at seeing if there are other 
options if this is a longer term issue, whether or not equipment 
can be sterilized in other locations and transported back to the 
Pasqua Hospital. But, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the 
government and the region wants to come to a solution on this 
as quickly as possible. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, at the start of this, last 
Wednesday, we were told it would take less than a day to 
correct the problem. So just 16 people would have had their 
surgeries postponed. But then that was changed to a 10-day 
shutdown. And now over 100 patients have already been 
affected. Those patients and many Saskatchewan people simply 
cannot understand why there is no contingency plan in place. 
The region says they have considered the option of transporting 
sterilized equipment from the General Hospital to the Pasqua 
Hospital but they chose not to do so. 
 
To the minister: why is there no contingency plan in place? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, just to . . . It seems I spend 
probably a good portion of my time on the floor of the 
Assembly correcting statements by the members opposite. I just 
want to correct them. There has been a contingency put in place 
to lower the number of surgeries that have been cancelled or 
delayed because of this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of surgeries that have 
been moved. As of yesterday, Mr. Speaker — I don’t have the 
updated information as of today; I’ll get that later today — but 
as of yesterday, 20 procedures were moved to the General 
Hospital, Mr. Speaker. There were several surgeries that were 
moved to Aspen, Mr. Speaker, a third-party deliverer of 
surgeries within the city, as well as SCI [Surgical Centres Inc.] 
was able to take on some additional ortho, dental, and cataract 
surgery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So while they work through this issue, Mr. Speaker, there has 



4516 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

been a contingency put in place. Mr. Speaker, they’ll develop 
that plan if it looks like this delay is going to be even longer 
than 10 days. But we certainly hope that there is a solution 
before too long. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture Project 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government doesn’t seem to 
have its facts together regarding either the budget or the timing 
of its carbon capture project. In 2011 the government said this 
project cost $1.24 billion. But by October 2013, the project was 
already running months behind and saw its costs balloon $115 
million over budget. And by December, the Minister of the 
Economy admitted the project was already a full $120 million 
over budget. Yet for some reason, the Premier is still trying to 
claim the project is on time and on budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a simple question to the minister: what exactly 
does on time and on budget mean for carbon capture? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, when this project is 
complete, it will be the first of its kind in the world. Mr. 
Speaker, as the member very sarcastically pointed out, there has 
been some time issues and a bit of a cost overrun. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we fully expect, as I said, this is going to be the first of 
its kind in the world for a project like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find this unusual that the members opposite are 
consistently criticizing the government, saying that we’re not 
concerned enough about the environment. Mr. Speaker, we are 
on the verge of, as I said, a world-class project. Mr. Speaker, all 
they do is criticize it. I find that surprising, Mr. Speaker. As we 
speak, the Premier is in Washington promoting this technology, 
Mr. Speaker. We have every reason to believe that this project 
will be incredibly successful. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s really not surprising 
that this government considers a project that’s $120 million 
over budget to be on budget. After all it’s the same government 
that failed an audit for trying to pretend that a $600 million 
deficit it was running was actually a $60 million surplus. 
 
SaskPower has admitted this project is over budget. The 
Minister of the Economy has admitted this project is over 
budget. So Saskatchewan people cannot understand why it is 
that the Premier keeps saying that the $120 million of cost 
overruns are somehow on budget. 
 
To the minister: what kind of accounting practices is the 
government using to claim a project that’s $120 million over 
budget is actually on budget? 
 
[14:15] 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, to clarify for the member 
opposite, the power facility part of the project is slightly over 
budget. Mr. Speaker, the carbon capture portion of this project 
is on budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as again I mentioned, we have a world-class 
facility about to come on stream here. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
quote from Kirsty Anderson who’s the public engagement 
manager for Global Carbon Capture Institute. And this is what 
she said, Mr. Speaker: 
 

You guys are world leaders in this field here in 
Saskatchewan, so the fact this is happening right here on 
your doorstep and the students can learn about it is really 
very cool.  

 
Mr. Speaker, people from around the world are looking at this 
project. The Premier’s in Washington promoting the 
technology. And, Mr. Speaker, I realize it’s the critic’s job to be 
critical but, Mr. Speaker, every once in a while when it’s very 
clear that a project’s doing a good thing, I think those members 
should be supporting it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

Crisis in Ukraine 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, the recent violence unleashed in Ukraine has 
caused great concern to many around the world and right here 
in Saskatchewan. Over the weekend, we have been alarmed by 
statements and actions that have the effect of violating 
Ukrainian sovereignty. 
 
As we have affirmed all along, Mr. Speaker, the government 
and the people of this province support a free and democratic 
Ukraine where freedom of expression and the rule of law are 
guaranteed. We also stress that Ukraine’s full territorial 
integrity must be respected. From the outset of the recent crisis, 
we have offered assistance and have been working with the 
Ukrainian Canadian community, the Ukrainian Canadian 
Congress, and the federal government in coordinating a 
response to the situation. 
 
Last week, the Premier and I requested a special meeting of the 
Saskatchewan-Ukraine relations advisory committee to provide 
recommendations to government on a meaningful response to 
the situation in Ukraine. This committee met last Thursday and 
yesterday I received their recommendations. 
 
In addition, the Ukrainian Canadian Congress Saskatchewan 
Provincial Council has written to the Premier requesting 
humanitarian aid. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that 
the Government of Saskatchewan will provide $60,000 in 
immediate humanitarian assistance. These funds will be 
advanced to the UCC [Ukrainian Canadian Congress] 
Saskatchewan Provincial Council for use by Ukrainian social 
services in Ukraine to assist those who require ongoing medical 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4517 

attention. 
 
I encourage the people of Saskatchewan to also support the 
people of Ukraine. Donations to Ukraine are being accepted by 
the New Community Credit Union in Saskatoon. 
 
In addition, today I have also written a second letter to Minister 
Baird indicating that the province of Saskatchewan is ready to 
assist in a broad effort through medical or technical assistance. 
It is important that we coordinate the federal approach, the 
provincial approach, and all who are involved to ensure that we 
direct the aid to where it is needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, based upon the recommendations of the advisory 
committee, we will continue to work with those organizations 
within and outside government who have partnerships 
established in Ukraine. We want to assure our friends and 
partners that we have not abandoned them, but will continue to 
work with them in the areas of trade and economic 
development, education, and the furtherance of civil society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve also requested that the advisory committee 
continue to meet on a regular basis to continue to provide their 
counsel and advice on this important issue. The situation in 
Ukraine, Mr. Speaker, remains dear to the hearts of many in our 
province. It is my firm belief that we must all work together to 
assist Ukraine’s emergence to a future of prosperity and 
freedom. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, we stand together with the people of 
Ukraine. 
 
[The member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a few 
remarks following the statement that the Deputy Premier has 
made. All of us are closely watching the volatile situation in 
Ukraine. And for some it comes through emails or messages 
from loved ones. For others it’s through the ongoing news 
reports we see, and the story unfolding on a hourly and daily 
basis. In the midst of a very concerning and troubling situation, 
this is a bit of good news and I certainly thank the Deputy 
Premier for making this announcement and providing this type 
of support. 
 
As I said in the House yesterday, Mr. Speaker, Ukraine needs 
and deserves our support. And as I said back on February 24th 
when I called on the government to pledge humanitarian aid for 
victims of violence in Ukraine, our solidarity runs deep with the 
people of Ukraine and so do our ties, and sending help to 
Ukrainians who are desperate and in a troubling situation, Mr. 
Speaker, is simply the right thing for us to do. 
 
We’ve all been, Mr. Speaker, troubled and appalled by the 
violent and brutal acts that we have seen on our TV screens in 
Ukraine over the last weeks. Mr. Speaker, we also remain 
deeply concerned about the aggressive actions of the Russian 
Federation in just the last few days. 
 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I rose in the Assembly to clearly say 
that we stand in support of a free and a democratic Ukraine, 
where freedom of expression and rule of law are guaranteed for 
all citizens, Mr. Speaker. I said that we condemn in the 
strongest possible terms any actions that could lead to an 
escalation in tensions or lead to more violence. I said we’d call 
on all sides to respect international law and to respect Ukraine’s 
territorial sovereignty. And I said, Mr. Speaker, that we urge the 
Canadian government to play a leadership role in working for a 
peaceful resolution to this troubling situation. 
 
I’m pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, as I said, pleased to see 
Saskatchewan making this contribution of humanitarian aid for 
the people of Ukraine. Time and time again the people of 
Ukraine have demonstrated just how resilient and just how 
courageous they are — always, Mr. Speaker, refusing to give 
up, never letting their spirits be broken, and always pushing for 
a better and brighter future. I’m pleased today, Mr. Speaker, 
that all of us here in the Legislative Assembly are able to stand 
with them in a small way. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before orders of the day I would ask for leave of the Assembly 
to move a motion regarding the situation in Ukraine. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has requested leave to 
move a motion under rule 61, an emergency motion on Ukraine. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Crisis in Ukraine 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll make a few additional remarks beyond what I just have 
introduced to this Assembly through my ministerial statement. 
 
I think it’s important for non-Ukrainians to understand exactly 
what is going on within Ukraine and why there are so many 
people here in Saskatchewan that are very concerned about 
what is going on. So I’m going to give a little bit of a history 
lesson, as my colleagues would have expected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our ties, Saskatchewan to Ukraine, have been for 
almost 125 years, Mr. Speaker, and in fact in just I guess a 
couple of short years we’ll be celebrating the 125th anniversary 
of the first Ukrainian settlers here to Saskatchewan. 1891, Mr. 
Speaker, is when that first wave started, and we have seen 
numerous waves of Ukrainian settlers coming to Saskatchewan 
to make their homes here. And that is why today we have over 
130,000 individuals who can trace their heritage back to 
Ukraine. 
 
So it is very important that the connection between 
Saskatchewan and Ukraine continues, Mr. Speaker. It continues 
to this very day, in fact, through the Saskatchewan immigrant 
nominee program, Mr. Speaker. Since 2008 we’ve had over 



4518 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

1,700 individuals call Saskatchewan home and that continues 
into 2013 and 2014. We’re again seeing hundreds of people 
from Ukraine look to Saskatchewan, look to the opportunities 
that are here in Saskatchewan, and are moving here with their 
families. 
 
As I indicated earlier on today, we have exchanges that occur 
between Ukraine and Saskatchewan, whether they be 
educational excursions as we have students that are studying 
here in Saskatchewan or whether it’s the reverse where we do 
have individuals that are involved in Ukraine. 
 
We have a very strong program right now with SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. I 
was fortunate to be in Ukraine in June of 2013 and toured three 
different areas where the colleges in Ukraine in Lviv, 
Ivano-Frankivsk, and Kiev are indeed benefiting from the fact 
that SIAST is rewriting their curriculum and is helping the 
instructors to deal with the modern teachings of today. That is 
going to continue, Mr. Speaker, and that is why it is so 
important as the Leader of the Opposition has already indicated. 
 
We’re concerned about the fact that Russia continues to show 
its mightiness by, in fact, being the big bully on the block and is 
really challenging what is going on in the province, or as I say, 
Mr. Speaker, it is the oblast, the Oblast of Crimea, where indeed 
the Russians are exerting their force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we have a lot to benefit. We 
have a lot to benefit from trade agreements with Ukraine. And 
I’m just very, very quickly, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to indicate 
that since 1990 Saskatchewan has signed 14 agreements with 
Ukraine with the various . . . directly with the national 
government or with the oblast. Mr. Speaker, three, I’m just 
going to mention three that are very important. 
 
We’ve had a discussion today about agriculture. There’s an 
MOU [memorandum of understanding] between the Zhytomyr 
Oblast and the Government of Saskatchewan to identify 
opportunities for collaboration in the area of agriculture 
development. There is a memorandum of intent between 
Chernivtsi Oblast and the Government of Saskatchewan to 
promote and facilitate international links in education, which 
has been renewed for a second term until 2016. And I have 
already mentioned SIAST, Mr. Speaker, but we also have 
agreements between the universities of Regina and 
Saskatchewan with counterparts in Ukraine that continue to 
promote educational and cultural exchanges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the distinction of being the first 
Canadian province to sign agreements with the Government of 
Ukraine in the area of education. And many are familiar, Mr. 
Speaker, with the fact that in addition, artists, artisans, and 
dance troupes have been well received as cultural ambassadors 
in both countries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was very pleased to stand in this Assembly and recognize 
Lastiwka and the Pavlechenko Ensemble who toured Ukraine 
last year and the tremendous response that they had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that takes us to today and the events of . . . since 
November when we start to look at the rapid changes that have 
occurred in Ukraine, the fact that in November there was hope, 

there was a belief that indeed Ukraine would join with the 
European Union in an economic partnership and move forward 
with the kind of prosperity and freedom and rule of law that 
they see as being very important. But that decision was 
reversed. And, Mr. Speaker, that violence that was unleashed by 
the Yanukovych regime on the European Maidan in Kiev I 
think has caused everyone tremendous concern. We saw the 
clashes that occurred. And then on February 18th unfortunately 
we saw the first violence that resulted in death, many deaths, 
Mr. Speaker, of people who believed that there is a better future 
for Ukraine. 
 
Subsequent to that, Mr. Speaker, of course with President 
Yanukovych leaving, and we understand . . . And it’s very 
important that people who are listening today pay attention to 
the various newscasts because media is reporting on a 
minute-by-minute basis, Mr. Speaker, and it changes. It changes 
minute by minute, as we know. I saw at noon hour the exchange 
between the Ukrainian troops and . . . the army, unarmed by the 
way, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that the actual . . . There were 
rifles fired in the air. In the air, thank goodness. And I think it 
has the possibility to escalate to something that the world does 
not ever want to see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been very adamant in supporting the 
efforts of not only the Canadian government, but all of the 
governments involved. We listened to the reports of leaders, 
world leaders, whether they be President Obama or Prime 
Minister Harper or Angela Merkel from Germany. We see the 
fact that these individuals, these individuals who lead powerful 
nations, are very concerned about the direction that President 
Putin has taken. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, the approach of Putin, we were in awe 
of the Olympic Games. And I think all it did was allow 
President Putin the opportunity to show off the games. And as 
we know many times he refers to those games as the Putin 
games and not the Olympic Games. And now he has the power, 
he has the money to turn his attention to what he may really 
want. Now there are positives, Mr. Speaker. Don’t get me 
wrong. There are positives that I’ve heard in the last six hours 
where indeed Putin himself, President Putin himself has 
indicated that he does not see the need for force, but again, the 
second qualifier — at this time. And I think that’s the part that, 
you know, is of great concern to Ukrainians living in Ukraine of 
course but also here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of groups that are very actively 
involved here in Saskatchewan, and I want to make . . . I want 
to give recognition — couldn’t spit that one out, Mr. Speaker — 
I want to give recognition to many individuals who have 
worked tirelessly over the last number of weeks and months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a letter that was sent by the 
Ukrainian Canadian Congress, the Saskatchewan Provincial 
Council. It’s a two-page letter and I’m not going to read it all, 
Mr. Speaker, but I do want to enter into the record of this 
Chamber a paragraph or actually two paragraphs that are from a 
letter written by Vice-president MaryAnn Trischuk on February 
the 26th to the Premier of this province. 
 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4519 

The first paragraph reads this way: 
 

The events of the past three months have shocked, 
troubled, and deeply affected the people of our community 
and province alike. With the removal of the autocratic 
Viktor Yanukovych and current attempts to assemble a 
new government in Ukraine, these remain unstable and 
uncertain times. It is our hope that this is the start of the 
fundamental change for which 88 heroes gave their lives 
and for which hundreds of thousands of Maidan protestors 
so bravely demonstrated. The work of building a new 
Ukraine is only just beginning and will require ongoing 
support from both inside and outside the country. 
 

Mr. Speaker, her closing paragraph reads this way: 
 
In closing, for as much as there is relief that hope defeated 
despair in Ukraine, ultimately it is the determination of the 
Ukrainian people together with governments and 
institutions around the world that will ensure Ukraine’s 
future is bright, prosperous, and democratic. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, to MaryAnn, as vice-president, and Slawko 
Kindrachuk and all of the different branches across the province 
of Saskatchewan, Orest Gawdyda from the Regina branch 
who’s in our gallery this afternoon, thank you. 
 
The second letter, and I made reference to that in my ministerial 
statement, Mr. Speaker, I am very fortunate and the government 
is very fortunate. We all are very fortunate; we have something 
called the Saskatchewan-Ukraine Relations Advisory 
Committee — S-U-R-A-C — or sometimes I’ll use the acronym 
SURAC. 
 
SURAC is a committee of a number of people. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I have never actually entered the names of all of the 
individuals that are currently on the advisory committee, but I 
want to do that today because these people have worked 
tirelessly to advise our government, to advise me, on the affairs 
of Ukraine and the relationship with Ukraine and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people on the committee are Gerald Luciuk, 
Alicia Klopoushak, Dave Dutchak, Dr. Natalia Friesen, Laurent 
Mougeot, Holly Paluck, Nadia Prokopchuk, Danylo Puderak, 
Jim Shevchuk, and MaryAnn Trischuk. Mr. Speaker, as I 
indicated last week, I asked for an emergency meeting of this 
committee to advise on what they believed the Government of 
Saskatchewan along with the Government of Canada should do 
and, Mr. Speaker, they attended to that promptly. Their meeting 
last week occurred on Thursday and, Mr. Speaker, as of 
yesterday morning I received a letter that contains a number of 
recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these recommendations are very important. 
We will ensure that we move forward on them, and that’s why 
today we’ve made the announcement of humanitarian aid. 
There’s further recommendation about how we might work 
together with oblasts in Ukraine through the federal government 
or through other partners like the provinces of Manitoba and 
Alberta who have also announced financial assistance. We need 
to work together to ensure that there is a long-term relationship, 
there’s a long-term solution for Ukraine that will exist forever. 

Mr. Speaker, the concluding paragraph in this letter dated 
March 3rd says this: 
 

We also resolved and requested that Mr. Rick Mantey, 
SURAC’s secretary, speak with you requesting that the 
Saskatchewan legislature pass an all-party resolution in 
support of its solidarity with the Ukrainian people as they 
take action to build a free and democratic Ukraine that 
respects the rule of law and supports Canada’s recognition 
of the interim government of the Ukraine. 
 
In addition, we request that the Saskatchewan legislature 
pass a resolution expressing its sadness for the Ukrainians 
who tragically lost their lives at the hands of a corrupt 
regime while peacefully demonstrating for their right to 
self-determination and a free and democratic homeland. 
 
Respectfully, Alicia Klopoushak, Vice-Chair of SURAC. 

 
Mr. Speaker, with those comments and the comments already 
made by the Leader of the Opposition, I’m pleased to put 
forward the following motion for consideration by this 
Assembly. By leave: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan expresses 
its condolences to the families of the individuals who, in 
the defence of freedom, justice, and a democratic Ukraine, 
held fast in pursuit of these fundamental rights on the 
Maidan and, as a result, paid the ultimate price for these 
rights and today stand among the Heroes of Ukraine; and 
further, 
 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recommit 
its support for a democratic and free Ukraine wherein the 
geographic borders of this sovereign nation are respected; 
and further, 
 
That the Assembly commends the efforts of the Ukrainian 
Canadian Congress, the Ukrainian community of 
Saskatchewan, and the Government of Canada in their 
strong and ongoing support of the Ukrainian nation, 
especially to those on the Maidan, in the pursuit of 
fundamental rights and freedoms. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved the following 
motion: 

 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan express 
its condolences to the families of the individuals who, in 
the defence of freedom, justice, and a democratic Ukraine, 
held fast in pursuit of these fundamental rights on the 
Maidan and, as a result, paid the ultimate price for these 
rights and today stand among the Heroes of Ukraine; and 
further, 
 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recommit 
its support for a democratic and free Ukraine wherein the 
geographic borders of this sovereign nation are respected; 
and further, 
 
That the Assembly commends the efforts of the Ukrainian 



4520 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

Canadian Congress, the Ukrainian community of 
Saskatchewan, and the Government of Canada in their 
strong and ongoing support of the Ukrainian nation, 
especially to those on the Maidan, in the pursuit of 
fundamental rights and freedoms. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the chance to say 
a few remarks on the motion. I will not go on too long, Mr. 
Speaker, since we have had the chance to address the entire 
situation through the ministerial statement and the remarks that 
I made following that. 
 
But I do want to add a few things, Mr. Speaker, in follow-up to 
a few of the remarks made by the Deputy Premier as the 
Assembly considers this motion and considers the response that 
we are taking or that we are making as the Saskatchewan 
legislature on behalf of our constituents and every region of the 
province that we do represent. 
 
The Deputy Premier did give a good survey of some of the 
history involved and some of the current reality that Ukrainians 
are facing and really what the global community is facing as 
many nations wrestle with how best to address what we see 
unfolding before our eyes. 
 
But I want to make a few remarks, Mr. Speaker, about the 
reality that we have in Saskatchewan and a bit how we are, I 
think, uniquely positioned to make a gesture like we are today 
in stating that we do support the people of Ukraine and seek a 
peaceful resolution to what we see occurring. A good number of 
us in the Assembly — I don’t happen to be one of them, Mr. 
Speaker — but a good number in the Assembly can trace our 
roots and our family ties to Ukraine. And whether we have 
lineage or whether we are as focused on some of the economic 
ties that we’ve developed over the years, Mr. Speaker, with 
Ukraine, it’s important that Saskatchewan clearly states where 
we stand on this issue and the type of support that we’re 
prepared to make because of the strong ties that we have. 
 
We think, Mr. Speaker, of the different waves of immigration 
that have occurred in Saskatchewan. And my thoughts go, Mr. 
Speaker, to really a sense of gratitude and appreciation that I 
have for being a Canadian, for living in Saskatchewan, and 
recognizing the blessings and the good quality of life that we 
experience here. And absolutely we have a lot to do to extend 
that good quality of life to more and more people. But we are 
very fortunate to be in Canada, and we’re fortunate to live in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And with that type of reality, with those good benefits that we 
have, there’s also a responsibility that we have, Mr. Speaker, to 
do our part. And it can be through gestures and statements of 
humanitarian aid which we’ve talked about here in the 
Assembly, and it can be through the words and the positions 
that we take and that we make. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we will be supporting the motion that has 
been brought forward. As I said in my earlier remarks, it simply 
is the right thing to do. And I know, I’m sure I speak for many 
members, Mr. Speaker, in stating that we want to see a peaceful 

resolution. We want to see a de-escalation of the tension and the 
threat and the danger of violence that could be imminent. And 
we want Canada to play a constructive role in that process. And 
that means, well it could mean a number of things. But what’s 
required is wisdom and determination and co-operation with 
our allies and with our partners in ensuring that the best steps 
are taken, that clear pressure can be applied when appropriate, 
and other acts of diplomacy can occur in order to ensure that a 
peaceful resolution is in fact the outcome. 
 
And I know that’s what the people of Ukraine want, and that’s 
what the people of Saskatchewan want, and a more peaceful 
world is ultimately what all people on the globe want. So with 
that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be supporting the motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the question as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
request that that motion be passed nemine contradicente, 
without dissent. 
 
The Speaker: — Nemine contradicente. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 127 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 127 — The 
Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, again it’s good to rise in my 
place in this Assembly, particularly having such a clear 
reminder of these rights and privileges that we enjoy here in 
Saskatchewan, in Canada; that better life that many people 
came from around the globe to Canada, to Saskatchewan to 
build; and that reminder that to whom much is given, much is 
expected and with great benefit comes great responsibility. 
 
And as those people came from around the world to 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4521 

Saskatchewan, made a better life, so we have a responsibility to 
look back to the places like Ukraine, to do what we can to build 
upon that benefit, to build upon that good fortune, to build upon 
that legacy of hard work. And I think about that through the 
lens of my own Scottish heritage, Mr. Speaker, and the way that 
my people came here to make a better life, and that 
responsibility that we all have. 
 
But in terms of responsibility, Mr. Speaker, it’s again good to 
rise and join debate on Bill No. 127, The Mental Health 
Services Amendment Act. And I guess off the top, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of mental health services, there are a number of lenses 
that I have opportunity to view the whole question of mental 
health as it plays out here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I view it through the lens of family and friends that have had 
occasion to interact with the services that are there, Mr. 
Speaker. I view it through the lens of constituents who have had 
similar interactions or who are on the health care provider side 
of the equation. I view it through the lens of individuals who 
work in advocacy and work in terms of community-based 
organizations and the work that is done there around provision 
of mental health services. And I also view it through, quite 
frankly, the lens of education that we need to do in the broader 
community, educating, informing, de-stigmatizing, but the work 
that we all need to do, be it on a family level, on a 
neighbourhood level, or as a city or a province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And I guess today it’s interesting in some ways the manner in 
which Saskatchewan is keeping up to the question, to the 
challenge of proper provision of mental health services in 
Saskatchewan, in the province, the way that different national 
efforts have been undergone. We’ve just come through the 
Olympics and you have the example of someone like Klassen 
from Manitoba and the work that she has done coming out. 
Other Olympians have come out and said that mental health has 
been a struggle for them. 
 
You look at the federal level where there have been different 
task forces launched, Mr. Speaker, and different sort of work 
being done bringing together the better resources to hopefully 
have a better national response. And you also look at the work 
of consultation that is ongoing on the part of this government 
right now in the province of Saskatchewan. And you look at all 
those efforts, Mr. Speaker, and still it’s unfortunate that we hear 
too much about how mental health need is going unserved and 
how we need to do a better job as a province to respond in 
terms of the way that we as a community can support 
individuals with mental health challenges, the way that we as a 
community can marshal resources to do that work of education 
and healing and support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I guess those are some things I wanted to say off the top in 
terms of how I approach a question like the bill in front of us 
today. This bill of course doesn’t answer all of those questions 
but it’s part of a broader front of activities that need to be 
engaged. It’s part of a broader mission. And in that regard, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re interested to see how some of the initiatives here 
work on the ground, whether it alleviates some of the stresses 
that again I think in terms of people that have interaction with 
folks in different sort of places in that mental health continuum 

like, you know, MLAs would be, I would imagine, have a bit 
more contact than most, a bit more perspective than most in 
terms of the folks that we meet with on a daily to weekly basis. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the legislation that’s 
brought here again, I always pay quite close attention to the 
second reading speeches that provide a good sort of overview of 
where the legislation is going and in this case the speech back 
. . . I’ll just move through here, Mr. Speaker. I beg your pardon. 
The Mental Health Services Act was just a very, you know, very 
recently introduced, in matter of fact yesterday, Mr. Speaker. In 
the second reading speech, the minister talks about the intent of 
the amendments being to improve timely access to mental 
health services for vulnerable people, support integration of 
mental health and addiction services and information sharing, 
and resolve governance and administration issues affecting the 
ministry and health regions. 
 
Now off the top, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the first draft of 
content for the legislation, the minister referenced the repealing 
of those sections of the Act dealing with confidentiality and 
release of information and substituting The Health Information 
Protection Act or HIPA, allowing for better collaboration 
among areas of health services and other ministries while still 
protecting personal information; reducing the criteria for 
community treatment orders, which allow for involuntary 
treatment in the community, and increasing the period of time, 
the time period of CTOs, the community treatment orders, to 
reduce barriers to treatment for very vulnerable clients; 
transferring the responsibility for licensing mental health 
approved homes from the ministry to the regional health 
authorities to align closer to day-to-day practice using facility 
designation regulations under The Regional Health Services Act 
instead of The Mental Health Services Act to designate 
facilities; transferring the power to appoint regional directors of 
mental health and chief psychiatrists from the ministry to 
regional health authorities, to align with day-to-day practice. 
 
So just to dwell on those for a moment, Mr. Speaker. Again 
there’s someone who’s very important in my life who’s very 
recently had fairly rigorous involvement, fairly extensive 
involvement with the mental health system. And one of the 
challenges there, Mr. Speaker, is of course the availability of 
qualified health care professionals. 
 
And I guess in terms of the changes anticipated in this 
legislation, I think of the designation of regional directors in 
mental health and the chief psychiatrist in terms of the ministry. 
And again if that improves process and makes it more 
responsive to the situation as it presents on the ground, situates 
that authority with the most appropriate level of decision 
making in the health regions versus the ministry, then that’s a 
good bit of work. But I can’t help but think that there’s a 
broader discussion that begs to be had as regards the availability 
and the supply of mental health professionals. 
 
Now in a different context, I know that the government has 
moved forward on the degree for psychiatric nursing, and that’s 
a good thing, Mr. Speaker. And it’s certainly one part of the 
solution though in terms of what is that broader front of efforts 
that we’re bringing to bear in terms of incenting people taking 
the courses. What are the tools that we can use in terms of 
perhaps return for service or bursaries? And what is the supply 



4522 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

of mental health professionals stacked up alongside the 
demand? And again, Mr. Speaker, I’d be interested to know that 
in a particular way, but I know from again just the people that I 
interact with that the supply is far outstripped by the demand. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, if you think about how mental health 
issues are like any other health issue in terms of lost 
productivity, the stress on individuals and families, and the 
individuals not being able to live up to their full potential and to 
make that again that broader social and economic contribution, 
mental health isn’t any different than any other sort of injury or 
health problem, Mr. Speaker, except in one regard. And again 
that goes to the broader work of de-stigmatizing and to bring 
some of these issues that have been held so close out into the 
light of broader public and to have that respectful and 
thoughtful discussion on real terms as opposed to, you know, 
tamping these things deep, dark, and down. 
 
So again there’s that broader front of effort that needs to take 
place, but as regards the first sort of suite of efforts in this piece 
of legislation, I don’t know that it’s going to do that much to 
alleviate stresses on supply and demand, questions around 
mental health professionals and the delivery of services, and the 
way that those services are in too short supply. 
 
But again, better work around refining the criteria for 
community treatment orders, allowing for involuntary treatment 
in the community, and increasing the period of time, that would 
seem to be a reasonable step. The transferring of the 
responsibility for licensing mental health approved homes from 
the ministry again to the regional authority, fair enough, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of better situating the authority to where the 
information is more readily available. 
 
But again, all seemingly positive steps, but certainly not all of 
the steps that we need to be taking on what is a very significant 
journey in front of us if we’re going to meet the challenges that 
are out there in terms of provision of mental health services, 
demand of mental health services, and marshalling the 
resources and the education and the efforts to do just that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again referring to the minister’s second reading speech, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister stated: 
 

The Ministry of Health is responsible for providing 
services to promote, preserve, and restore the mental 
health of Saskatchewan people. As this Assembly is 
aware, we are developing an inter-ministerial mental 
health and addictions action plan to better meet the mental 
health and addiction needs of the people we serve. 

 
Again, great. Glad to hear it, Mr. Speaker. But again the hope is 
that, you know, alongside the very good and necessary things 
around making sure that you have the multi-ministry approach 
and that you don’t have silos and that you’re bolstering 
co-operation and all of those very important things, Mr. 
Speaker, that the resources are brought to bear to take a very 
clear look at what the shortcomings are in the system in terms 
of what the need is there for services and professionals and that 
the development of an action plan leads to just that, to action, 
and not to a communications exercise. 
 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the need is there in the community, and it’s 
fairly . . . It’s readily quantified in a number of different ways. 
So with the action plan and the very important work of reaching 
out to the community, we want to see it arrive at just that. We 
want to see action. We want to see action on mental health and 
then certainly on addictions as well, and the way that some of 
these things present is dual diagnosis and the way that 
sometimes these problems come together. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, any time we hear government talking 
about an action plan, we’re always very interested to see what 
the action is in that action plan, and we’ll be looking for that. 
But we know that the need is significant in the community right 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister referenced the fact the age of the Act 
being 27 years old and the need to do some housekeeping, 
keeping it up with modern practice in terms of the shift from a 
more centrally provided era in mental health services to more 
community based in terms of allowing the ministry to improve 
access for vulnerable persons in need, to aid in the timely 
delivery of mental health services, but different things in that 
regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again there’s some fine administrative questions being 
considered in this legislation and some reallocating of different 
authorities under the Act, refining of the approach under the 
community treatment orders. But honestly, Mr. Speaker, if the 
action plan doesn’t result in action — and again one of those 
key actions is going to be around where we’re at with the health 
professionals that provide the mental health services — then 
this will be so much administrative dancing on the head of a pin 
unless those real questions are addressed. 
 
So there are some useful things in this legislation to be sure, 
Mr. Speaker, but it’s not the whole of the moon. It doesn’t 
claim to be. But again the good steps here will be significantly 
bolstered and won’t be in vain if that broader front of effort is 
undertaken. 
 
I know other of my colleagues are very interested in joining the 
debate on this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, so I will take 
my place and at this time adjourn debate on Bill No. 127, The 
Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 127, The Mental Health Services Amendment 
Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 128 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 128 — The 
Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 be now 
read a second time.] 
 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4523 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on debate 
on Bill 128, The Saskatchewan Employment Act, 2013. And I 
guess I just want to make a few opening comments in regards to 
the legislation that’s being introduced and discussed. 
 
And it’s unfortunate that the way the government’s handling of 
labour legislation was handled in the province. And truly when 
they should have consulted with the working men and women 
of our province, the unions, there could have been an 
opportunity to communicate. But unfortunately the government 
decided in its bully tactics and its heavy-handedness to bring in 
legislation that unfortunately is being challenged and is going to 
the Supreme Court of Canada for a ruling. And many are 
waiting for the ruling within the province. And whether it be the 
official opposition . . . I know our colleague, the critic for 
Labour, has made it very clear on this side of the House, the 
member has made it very clear he’s waiting and he, you know, 
to see what exactly the ruling will be. 
 
And we’re hoping that at the end of the day the courts will 
support the appeal, and government will have to deal with their 
essential legislation that they introduced. It was the wrong way 
they’ve done it. And I think it’s no surprise, and they shouldn’t 
have been surprised that it was going to be challenged. And not 
only in, you know, the appeals court but to go further to the 
Supreme Court of Canada for a ruling that clearly said you’re 
violating the workers. And I think at the end of the day the 
essential services legislation that they introduced truly wasn’t 
done with consulting, wasn’t done with an open dialogue with 
so many people that would be impacted by legislation that this 
government’s introduced. 
 
But again, I want to show some of the examples this 
government has shown. You know, when we asked them to 
listen and consult with Saskatchewan people, the government 
just goes ahead and does what it wants to do. Doesn’t matter. 
They just want to do what they want. Their agenda. And they, 
you know, they have no qualms with saying, look, we’re a 
strong government. We’ve got a majority of 49 seats and we’ll 
do whatever we want. And that’s how they’ve played it. 
 
I’ve seen groups send in letters saying we are not supporting 
what legislation you’re bringing in and on many cases we’ve, in 
this House, have shown those letters. I’ve talked about groups 
that have raised their concerns when legislation . . . when you 
look at even a park and I think about the La Ronge Indian Band. 
Clearly chief and council did not support the new provincial 
park that this government introduced. Pretty sad when you have 
a First Nations and a large First Nations, probably one of the 
largest First Nations in Saskatchewan, who just want to have an 
opportunity to talk and be heard and have some concerns about 
the traditional territory that this government has taken on and 
saying, well we’re going to make a provincial park. It just goes 
to show you how this government’s willing to bully, to 
heavy-handed tactics to do what they want to get their agenda 
because it’s a campaign promise, you know, a campaign 
promise. So it goes to show you the correspondence were there. 
 
But I just want to show, Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly some of 
the examples of this government, the way they handled some of 
the files and some of the concerns that Saskatchewan residents, 

Saskatchewan leaders have brought forward to this government 
and how the government handled it. It goes to show. So it’s no 
surprise and there shouldn’t be a surprise that this has gone to 
the Supreme Court of Canada for a ruling. 
 
Now I know they’re introducing, you know, Bill 128 and 
they’re saying, well we’re making some changes. And some 
might say it’s a good start, you know, and I know some will 
say, well okay, let’s see. Is it going far enough to make sure 
workers’ rights are protected? Is it going far enough to make 
sure that they’re taking the comments and the advice from the 
unions, from the labour movement, from the working men and 
women of this province that have good advice, good 
recommendations and are saying, yes there needs to be a 
balance, but at the end of the day it’s the way this government 
chose to do it and it wasn’t the right way. It was the wrong way 
for them to introduce, you know, essential service legislation 
when they did that. 
 
You know when you look at the Bill 107, and I just want to 
show some comparisons. The heavy-handedness they used. We 
had how many years of this legislation, you know, that this 
government took and just rewrote it within a very short period 
of time as they’re coming into the government to be . . . and you 
just look how they took that legislation and changed our 
Saskatchewan labour laws that were there providing protection 
for men and women and many residents of this province. This 
government chose to just go ahead and do it the way they want. 
 
And I mean, as you said it, I think it was the comments that 
were used and then my colleagues talked about it, you know, 
this government went to war with the working men and women 
of this province with the unions. And that’s pretty sad that 
that’s what a government chose to do when it had such 
opportunity to work with those individuals, to work with the 
unions, the working men and women of this province. 
 
It’s pretty sad when you see a government using the bully 
tactics. And they bring in legislation and it’s important 
everybody sees what’s going on. But sometimes maybe they 
should look at the way they handle some of the situations and 
the heavy-handedness. Some might say maybe that’s a way of 
bullying people to get what you want. And that is not the way 
Saskatchewan people want to be treated. They wanted to be 
treated with respect, dignity, and that’s what they ask. 
 
So when we look at the legislation and this bill that they’re 
bringing forward, yes, I know some have said there are some 
changes. And you know, I know there may be some changes 
that lighten their previous challenge. But the point is until the 
Supreme Court makes its ruling, this will sit there, and 
government’s saying they won’t proclaim it until they hear the 
Supreme Court ruling. We’ll let’s just hope clearly that happens 
soon so that we can move forward. 
 
But it just goes to show again, I’m talking about the way this 
government handles . . . And it is the government, the members 
opposite, that have the responsibility, the obligation to the 
people of this province to do the right thing. And the way this 
government has handled some of the business, whether we look 
at the labour legislation that they’ve reviewed, changed, the 
essential service legislation they’ve introduced without 
consulting, goes to show you something. 



4524 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

People will not sit back. And they will for a while because they 
gave trust to a government and they say, here you go. They’ve 
got a strong mandate. We realize that. But a lot of people are 
getting tired of the way they’re being treated, that that 
government is treating Saskatchewan people when it comes to 
affordability, when it comes to the cost of living, when it comes 
to the way the cost of living is affecting them, when it comes to 
government ministries and ministers that are supposed to be 
doing the right thing for Saskatchewan, whether it’s foster care, 
whether it’s long-term care, whether it’s in our health system. 
 
This government has the mandate. They’ve had years and years 
to fix things. They’ve had a record revenue. I just want to show 
the comparisons when you don’t consult and you don’t take 
care of the business that needs to be taken care of. You will 
have people challenging, and they will send a message. They 
will send a message, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to this government, 
to this government. They’ll send them a message. Take 
advantage of them. Ignore those people. And at the end of the 
day, they’ll get the message. They’ll get the message, and 
there’ll be their time for your evaluation. And did you do what 
you were asked to do here? The people will judge you on that. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like I’ve said clearly, people are not 
happy with the way some of this legislation was dealt with. 
We’ll wait for the Supreme Court’s ruling and that will 
determine which way we go and which way the labour 
movement and the unions. 
 
And I want to remind people out there, there’s many brothers 
and sisters within the unions that are very proud, work hard. 
Many people out there that are working for minimum wage. 
They’re trying their best — part-time jobs. They’re doing all 
they can. But there was years and years of hard work done by 
unions to negotiate fairness to make sure that wages, whether 
we look at our plumbers, our electricians. There’s many 
professionals, many apprentices that are out there who are 
getting the wages, whether it’s in the private sector, because of 
the good work, fair negotiations. That’s what it is. And they 
have established certain rates. And that is good and many 
people benefit from that. 
 
So some say oh no, no, you can’t have this. It has to be a 
balance. And a balanced approach is the right way to go. And it 
can’t be the heavy hand of this government the way it wants to 
introduce its essential legislation. It wants to change the labour 
laws of this land. There’s years and years of hard work, 
dedication by many people that were in this Legislative 
Assembly that were working the front lines, were doing the 
tough job to make sure that their rights were protected, that the 
rights of my grandchildren, my children are protected. That’s 
what we want. 
 
But this government has truly chosen, chosen to do it their way 
again. And like I’ve said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of 
this province, they gave you the trust. They gave you the trust. 
Make sure you do right with it, because when they decide that 
that’s enough, you’ll get the message and you’ll get your 
evaluation. Take advantage. Mock the opposition and say what 
you want. I’ve heard it from them many times, you know, the 
nine. That’s okay. I’m proud of what I’ve been asked to do here 
and my colleagues are very proud as the opposition to raise the 
issues and concerns of Saskatchewan people. 
 

When we’re supposed to be an economy that’s doing so great, 
there are so many — our seniors, people living in poverty. 
There is many people out there that are suffering and not doing 
so good in this so-called boom economy. And we’re happy for 
those that are doing well, but there are so many left behind. 
There are so many not feeling the boom. So many not feeling 
this economy the way they hear everyone talking about. So 
there’s a lot of challenges out there for many Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And we see the crisis going on with our farmers now, the 
challenges that they’re getting their . . . the producers getting 
their market. So it just goes to show government not doing what 
it should have done. It is government. It is in charge. It is their 
role to fix things, so it’s time. You know, news flash. The job is 
yours. You earned it by the people, now represent them right. 
But at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn 
debate on Bill 128. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 128, The Saskatchewan Employment Act, 
2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 129 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 129 — The 
Executive Government Administration Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Glad to join debate on Bill No. 129, The Executive Government 
Administration Act. 
 
This one’s, you know, I can’t decide, Mr. Speaker. There’s part 
of me that really loves public administration and the whole 
machinery of government-type questions and, of course, part of 
me loathes them. It’s a bit of a split jury over here, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s been interesting to watch this government approach 
certain of the government, the machinery of government type 
questions since they came in in 2007, nearly seven years ago, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the things that they’ve done right off the bat that I 
thought was a good innovation was the issuance of mandate 
letters for the ministers. I thought that was a good practice, a 
good sort of, you know, get everybody on the same page, aids 
in accountability, aids in the public clearly understanding what 
the ministers should or shouldn’t be up to. And of course it was 
very handy for the opposition as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
terms of evaluating where is this particular minister at in terms 
of meeting or not meeting information set out in the mandate 
letter. That one was, I thought, a good innovation and I think 
they’ve done best when they were a bit more close to that mark, 
a bit more serious about what was in the mandate letter. 
 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4525 

Where, you know, the other changes being the changing of the 
nomenclature from departments to ministries, that was a very 
interesting adaption, Mr. Speaker, in terms of machinery of 
government. And we’re still changing the different pieces of 
legislation to bring about the transfer of departments into 
ministries. 
 
And you know, for me, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t so useful. I 
don’t think it really helped the department really elevate itself 
into a ministry. I think, you know, at the end of the day it was 
still a line department providing services for the people, and I 
don’t think that there was any great value that accrued to the 
public from that change. But you know, here we are, still to this 
day changing different pieces of legislation to bring it in line to 
that change in machinery of government brought about by this 
current regime. 
 
[15:15] 
 
You know, so there’s been a bit of a spectrum here, a bit of 
they’ve run the gamut, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of some of 
the things they’ve done around how they have organized 
government. And this piece of legislation is interesting because 
it would seem to run the gamut itself in terms of some things 
that are interesting, some things that would seem to be kind of 
preposterous, some things that would seem to be carrying 
preposterous things even further down the line. It’s interesting 
to see how this legislation goes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I guess, again referring to the minister’s second reading 
speech from yesterday so it is hot off the Queen’s press, and it’s 
interesting to figure out the first thing that comes up for 
significant mention is: 
 

The new legislation will remove any confusion about the 
organization of ministries and the assignment of 
ministerial responsibilities. The following changes are 
being made to these Acts from the current legislation. 

 
Well thank goodness for that, Mr. Speaker. You know, finally, 
finally we can cut through the confusion and find out who’s 
really responsible for what in each ministry. And I only say that 
partly in jest. You know, one of the things that’s very important 
in politics is you know who’s responsible for what. And if this 
Act aids in that, then fair enough. 
 
But then it gets into the particulars about how this is to be 
accomplished, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and first up “. . . legislative 
secretaries will not need to be reappointed every year. That was 
a requirement that simply added unnecessary paperwork.” 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve lost count, and one of the things 
that was nice of the yearly reappointment of who’s a legislative 
secretary or not was it really helped you out if say you were 
playing legislative secretary bingo. You know, you would be 
able to keep your card updated in terms of who’s all legislative 
secretary over there. 
 
And maybe it’s one of these things where there is so much 
paperwork because there are so many legislative secretaries. 
You know, it would be interesting to get a show of hands, like 
who’s all a legislative secretary over there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Because is it a dozen? Are there a dozen legislative 

secretaries?  
 
Maybe something that would have been better was, you know, 
reinforcing the accountability of those individuals in terms of 
what value they’re going to be adding to the Legislative 
Assembly, to the people’s welfare. Maybe there could’ve been 
some kind of reporting function attached to the Legislative 
Secretary duties. But you know, some of them, we can figure 
out what they’re doing. It’s good. Some of them, you know, it’s 
like a ship goes off in the night and you never see it again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, until — at least now, Mr. Speaker — until 
they’d be reappointed as Legislative Secretary the year later. 
And then you knew, wow, they’re still a Legislative Secretary, 
and you can keep your tally up to date. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker, that’s too much paperwork because 
apparently there are so many legislative secretaries that it’s an 
onerous task that the government had to change so, you know, 
away goes the yearly reappointment requirement for legislative 
secretaries. And to date, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting. I 
don’t have anything against the practice of Legislative Secretary 
appointments. I’ve known some legislative secretaries over the 
years that have done some good work. I think it provides for a 
better engagement of backbenchers or people that are not in 
cabinet. And those are all fine things. 
 
But the practice can descend into some pretty ridiculous depths. 
And I think at the end of the Devine government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if they weren’t in cabinet, they were a Legislative 
Secretary and they got pay in perquisite that came along with 
that. And one of the things that’s been interesting to see that, 
you know, the government to date hasn’t engaged in the 
additional pay for legislative secretaries, although there are 
some that are sort of hybrid, so we still have questions about 
that. But what it seemed to be at the end of the Devine era, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was a way to get everybody even more firmly 
on the payroll and dipping into the public purse. And you know, 
also, who doesn’t want an extra title, I guess. So it gave them a 
bit of title and a bit of extra pay and made them feel better about 
their lot in life. 
 
And as you look across to the members opposite, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in terms of the . . . You know, they haven’t gotten into 
the pay yet. We’ll see where that winds up. But again the great 
number of legislative secretaries that have been appointed and 
the vastly different sort of output that is demonstrable from 
those individuals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s one of these things 
where it’s . . . is it about providing better, more effective 
government for the people of Saskatchewan or is it about 
keeping people happy in the backbench or keeping peace in the 
caucus? And these are some of the questions that we look at 
when we see the measures being brought forward here. 
 
And like I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the start of that, that bit 
of thinking, at least when they had to reappoint them on a 
yearly basis, you could keep a tally of who was a Legislative 
Secretary. Now I guess we’ll take it on sufferance, and we’ll see 
who sort of fades and who actually produces reports and who, 
you know, sort of skips away without any sort of broader 
responsibility. And then if you ask questions, perhaps in 
question period or in estimates, the minister will say, well you 
know, that’s not really my responsibility, that’s a Legislative 
Secretary. 



4526 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

And you know, it does damage to the notion of ministerial 
responsibility. It does damage to the notion of responsible 
government when you don’t have clear accountability chains in 
terms of what those individuals are responsible for. So instead 
of, instead of seeking to strengthen those bonds to better 
accountability — better, more effective government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — what we see in here and what would, you 
know, what is I think a diminishing action on the way that that 
accountability should be on offer. So again the Legislative 
Secretary bingo is going to get harder to perform, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but we shall endeavour. 
 
Second up for the actual measures in the bill are the regulations 
establishing ministries will not be subject to review by the 
legislature. This exemption is not often granted. But because 
it’s the prerogative of the Premier to determine the organization 
of government, it is appropriate in this case. And again, it’s 
appropriate in this case . . . It’s sort of the, you know, proof by 
declaration, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Why is it appropriate? Well it’s appropriate because we say it’s 
appropriate. This doesn’t do much for scrutiny, Mr. Speaker. 
This doesn’t do much for making your decisions in the full light 
of public disclosure and debate that we are afforded, however 
good or bad, by this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, moving it into regs 
and moving it out of the broader light of scrutiny. 
 
Again, does that improve the case or worsen the case for a 
government that said it was going to be the most accountable 
government, the most transparent government in the history of 
Saskatchewan? Again, every now and then, Mr. Speaker, we 
see some things that fly directly in the face of those claims that 
were made seven long years ago. And this would seem to be 
one where, again, there is greater accountability, greater 
transparency, and they’re rolling it into the shadows of the 
Premier’s office. So does this improve government or does it 
make it worse? And does it improve what government does for 
people? Does it improve the accountability that people expect 
from their government? Does it live up to the claims made by 
this government in 2007 in terms of accountability and 
transparency? I would submit that it does not, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Next up:  
 

. . . the appointment of advisory committees to ministers 
will require cabinet approval in all cases. Presently this 
approval is required if the advisory committees’ 
appointment is for more than one year. This will provide 
more accountability and oversight. 

 
While again, Mr. Speaker, as I’d said at the outset, there’s a fair 
range of initiatives in this legislation, and I think that one is 
actually not bad. You know, I think it’s got some hope for it in 
terms of living up to what it actually proclaims it’s setting out 
to do. So we’re glad to see that: 
 

Federal-provincial agreements will not require cabinet 
approval unless they require an expenditure by the 
government of more than $50,000. This is consistent with 
agreements under section 18 of the new Act. 

 
On the face of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of people 

being able to keep track of what their government is up to, 
making sure that the government is accountable and transparent, 
that would seem to be a fair enough endeavour. 
 
Moving right along, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

. . . all department Acts, such as The Department of Justice 
Act, are being amended to remove the word department 
from their title, change all references from department to 
ministry or minister, and remove references to things like 
annual reports, seals and staff. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, you know, as I’d said about my thoughts 
on the changing from department to ministry at the outset, like 
big deal. On a list of 100 sort of urgent legislative problems that 
the government’s got to tend to, I’m sure, you know, in most 
other circumstances the great department versus ministry debate 
would have ranked about 157, but you know, it was early on in 
the days of this government and we see its legacy living on. So 
we’ll see how that shakes out as well. 
 
Returning to the minister’s second reading speech: 
 

. . . redundant grant-making and agreement-making 
powers are removed as they will appear in The Executive 
Government Administration Act. Exceptional 
grant-making and agreement-making powers will remain 
in their respective Acts. 
 

Again it would seem to be fair enough. I guess we’ll give it a bit 
more thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m sure various of my 
colleagues will have something to say. But again on the face of 
it that would seem to be fair enough. 
 
Then moving on through the amendments, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Financial Administration Act is being amended to 
eliminate the Investment Board and provide the treasury 
board can have non-ministerial members. This is 
consistent with all other cabinet committees. 

 
I’ll be very interested to see how this goes, Mr. Speaker, 
because unless I’ve missed something in the talk around the 
water cooler, there are currently backbench MLAs that serve on 
treasury board, do I understand that correctly? And if that is the 
case, is this some kind of retroactive legislating of the situation, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Again it’s not . . . I’ve got a lot of love in my heart for the 
hard-working backbencher, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and finding 
different ways that you can engage them in the machinery of 
government. But I’ll be interested to get a more definite 
explanation in terms of the whole appointing of non-cabinet 
members to treasury board and how that authority was arrived 
at, and whether or not this is in fact, you know, closing the barn 
door after the horse is already down the course. 
 
So that sort of brings the review of the minster’s second reading 
speech to a close, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again turns ridiculous, 
turns fair enough in terms of the legislation here, but we’ll be 
interested to see how this actually improves governance on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan or whether or not it . . .  
 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4527 

Again you know, if it’s in the case of the legislative secretaries 
and the apparently, you know, onerous paperwork attached to 
the yearly reappointment, well maybe it’s because you’ve got 
so many legislative secretaries, Mr. Speaker. Maybe that’s the 
problem, and maybe you should solve it by paying a bit closer 
attention to who’s made it in the legislative secretary 
sweepstakes. 
 
You know, there are a number of these things. Ministry to 
departments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again it’s like, you know, in 
case of emergency, break glass because we’re going to change 
it from department to ministry. It’s like, big deal. 
 
Anyway with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 129, The Executive Government 
Administration Act. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 129, The Executive Government 
Administration Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 130 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 130 — The 
Executive Government Administration Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government 
Administration Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and thanks of course to my colleagues for the great support. 
Always great to have that solid support here in the Assembly. 
And I’m not sure if I . . . No, no. Moose Jaw North’s not in the 
House so I guess I didn’t hear that properly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Oh wait, wait. He’s moved, he’s moved. We’re going 
to have to put a bell on him, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Then we’ll be 
able to keep track of him. But on the other hand, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you can always hear him bellowing from someplace 
sooner or later. You know it’s sort of like the clock hits 12 at 
least once a day and you know the member from Moose Jaw 
North’s got to wonder what the heck’s going on at some point. 
So almost like clockwork over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So again in terms of legislation that I’ve always sort of had . . . 
I’ve always found the concept of consequential amendments to 
be kind of interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Consequence of 
course implies that they’re substantial or that they’re, you 
know, ushering forth from a decision that’s been made and 
changes to the legislation so the changes ripple through the 
other legislation. And in terms of, you know, the great 
consequence involved in terms of removing the requirement for 
annually reappointing legislative secretaries, I don’t know that 

it does justice to the word consequential, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
But here we are; here we are. 
 
So in terms of, you know, what is the consequential amendment 
and just playing through the changes that are made in 129, 
again some of them are fair enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Some 
of them, there’s a concept in law I understand from my 
television viewing, that there’s such a thing as the fruit of the 
poison tree and, you know, if you’ve got something that’s 
poison to begin with then anything that flows from it is 
poisoned itself. And I’m sure there is also something, you 
know, fruit of the ridiculous tree in terms of ridiculous changes 
that are now flowing through and provided to us in 
consequential amendment format. 
 
So in terms of this bill ushering forth from 129, again there’s 
some things that are fine, there’s some things that are fair 
enough, but there are some other things in it that are fairly 
ridiculous. And you know, in terms of, I don’t know if it’s a 
commentary on the legislative agenda or what, but you know, 
aside from obviously, you know, the shameless interventions on 
the part of my colleague from Athabasca, I don’t know that this 
debate needs much more said about it at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll see, I’ll be interested to see if any of my colleagues are 
interested to get into the debate. But I think I’ve said in the 
main what I had to say under Bill No. 129. And as for this one, 
we’ll just leave it on the desk where it lays. Anyway with that, 
I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 130, An Act to make 
consequential amendments to certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Executive Government Administration Act. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 130. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 126 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 126 — The 
Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 
on Bill 126, The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 
2013 (No. 2). Just looking at it clearly, and I know at the end of 
the day as we go through, and there’ll be more discussions 
about this. And previously I know there was legislation that 
gave government the power to seize, and we had this talk about 
property from I guess illegal profits, so that someone in the act 
of crime doesn’t benefit for their own. And it gives an 
opportunity for government or law enforcement officers to seize 
certain property, I guess dollars, whatever. And having said 
that, it’s a tool. And what they’re asking here for amendment is 
to amend the tool. 
 



4528 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

And they look at the cost, and some of the explanations is the 
cost of administration and the process that they have to go 
through to seize, to go to the court, for the court to have that. So 
there are some provisions in legislation here to provide tools to 
I guess the agency that would be seizing or going before the 
courts to seize property that I guess under crime or whatever it 
may be classified as, it gives them tools. But there is process. 
And they make it very clear in here that it’s quite the process to 
make sure the documents, everything’s in order to go ahead 
before the courts. And it’s a costly thing, and I think this is 
giving amendment. But at the end of the day, I think it needs to 
be clear, these amendments. 
 
And I’m hoping due diligence was done by the ministry and the 
Minister of Justice to make sure, you know, that the rights — 
and there are rights — to make sure they’ve talked to . . . 
whether the individuals out there that are within the legal 
profession are understanding. And there will be a process. And 
I know when Justice deals with these items, I want to make sure 
that Saskatchewan residents are protected and of course it’s 
going through the court system. So the courts are going to make 
sure that, you know, we dot the i’s and cross the t’s, and they’re 
going to make sure the courts will protect. 
 
And whether this legislation goes into effect . . . And I’m not 
going to get into the details of it. Like I’ve seen some of the 
other stuff where we’ve seen government introduce legislation, 
and then that essential legislation that this government 
introduced and the change it made, it’s going through the 
Supreme Court of Canada for a ruling. 
 
Now all I’m going to say on this point, clearly government has 
to do the good work. We require that they consult, and 
hopefully they have done that. And maybe there’s something 
that’s needed, whether it’s the individuals that are working to 
prepare the documents, those agencies that are working, when 
they’re going to seize. And maybe this makes good sense and 
maybe it’s required, and that’s fine. 
 
I know there’ll be provisions. And fortunately on our side, I 
know sometimes we’re lucky we have a couple of our members 
that can get into the details and really work in committee and 
can ask the tough questions. I’m not about to say that I truly 
understand, as I am no lawyer. There are individuals that can 
ask the tough questions and get clarification in committee and 
do the good work to make sure the rights of individuals are 
protected and the amendments and changes that we are making 
are clearly tools that are needed. 
 
And according to the minister, it is something that he’s heard, 
and obviously he’s introducing this. Hopefully we have no 
reason to believe that it isn’t. Like some legislation they’ve 
passed before, we question it. But in this case I think the 
minister is asking to make some amendments that I hope will 
make the work of agencies that seize property from, I guess, 
crime, it makes it easier for them and it doesn’t cost 
Saskatchewan taxpayers a pile of money to seize small amounts 
of property. 
 
So I think, you know, not saying again, going that I am a lawyer 
but, you know, clearly we have that and those details need to be 
worked out. And in committee, there’s a lot of time to flush out 
those questions. 

We have an opportunity before it goes to committee to talk to 
some of the, I guess the law firms that are out there, the legal 
professionals that are out there and have some of their questions 
and concerns raised so we can deal with those and deal with 
them in the committee. 
 
So at this point, you know, I’m not going to ramble on on these 
items. But I could use other examples, you know, if that need be 
to happen. But at this point, I think I’ve showed some examples 
when government doesn’t respond. Well here you go. Well 
we’ll go, when government doesn’t respond to the needs of 
Saskatchewan people clearly. 
 
You know, I just want to make sure that they understand 
because maybe, you know, they couldn’t hear what I was 
saying. So I want to go over it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now unfortunately we have situations, and I’ll give you an 
example of some of our seniors, when we see what’s happening 
to seniors. And I think about the many seniors I met with in 
Creighton. Their rents have gone up to 30 per cent. And 
honestly, to see some of them share their frustration, their 
frustration, their concern for their friends who are saying 
they’re not sure if they can meet the rent increase. They’re very 
concerned with covering their medical, transportation, their 
medications, the food. There are so many challenges facing 
them, the cost of living in these communities. And they say, 
here’s a government again that doesn’t listen. 
 
And they feel like they have done their job. They’ve worked 
hard for this province. And here we have ministers and a 
government that’s supposed to be taking care of our seniors 
who have paid the ultimate price, have done . . . They’re 
veterans. You should be ashamed of yourselves. They are 
veterans. And there they are, asking them to pay $1,200 a 
month in a senior’s unit. Asking seniors, raising, raising . . . I 
want to show, I want to show . . . Mr. Speaker, I want to show 
an example of where government doesn’t listen so that when 
the law profession brings clearly recommendations and 
suggestions, the government will listen. 
 
So in like this bill, you know, when you look at the bill itself, 
the bill that’s coming forward, that’s being asked to be 
amended, the amendments that we were referring to and that the 
government has asked for clearly is coming forward. Now 
having said that, I was showing examples of when government 
doesn’t listen. When government does not listen to the people, 
whether it’s seniors, whether it’s . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Yes, that’s exactly it. Whether it’s seniors . . . an amendment. 
And this bill’s going to amend some of the tools that the 
agencies will use, the agencies will use when they go to seize 
property, as I said before. 
 
But I was showing, Mr. Speaker . . . But they want to hear more 
about it, about when government doesn’t listen, when 
government has a responsibility to hear what the Saskatchewan 
people have to say. They may not like it, but this government 
has the responsibility to serve the people of this province. And 
when they raise concerns, government should listen, whether 
it’s petitions, long-term care, whether it’s the needs of health 
professionals. There are so many needs out there. 
 
But I just want to show examples, just examples, Mr. Speaker, 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4529 

when government doesn’t listen when they amend bills, when 
they amend bills. Again back when they amend a bill . . . Bill 
126, if that’s what they want. They want to hear the number. 
They amend Bill 126. So a criminal . . . Clearly, clearly, one 
they amended. I just wanted to show some examples. They 
don’t like it, but that’s okay. That’s okay. They don’t have to 
like it. Because the people of this province, the people of this 
province, clearly of this province want to make sure their 
concerns, their issues are brought forward. 
 
So in this case, they’re amending this. This provides . . . And 
Bill 126, Bill 126 will give some tools to the agencies to do the 
good work that they’re doing, to do the good work that they are 
doing. It’s a tool. It’s about cost, saving costs. And that’s what 
people are trying to tell the government, save money. So at the 
end of this, Bill 126, I’m prepared to adjourn on Bill 126. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment . . . No. 
Okay, the minister has moved second reading of Bill No. 126, 
The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 
(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill 126, The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 
2013 (No. 2) be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
[15:45] 
 

Bill No. 109 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 109 — The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
once again pleased to stand today to give a very few comments 
on this particular bill. I think what’s really important for the 
people of Saskatchewan to know that The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act really talks about 
the impact that 40,000 Saskatchewan people may feel as a result 
of the changes in this Act. We see that The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act really is a 
valuable tool to develop our economy. And as we’ve mentioned 
from time to time, and our leader has indicated and dictated to 
his team that it’s important to note that when the government is 
doing certain things correctly, that we ought to support that 
notion. 
 
And when I look at this particular bill, Bill 109, when we see 
some of the objectives and the targets of having The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 
Act increase its activity by 25 per cent by 2016, that it’s 
something that we want to encourage because we think that as 
you have more investing in Saskatchewan businesses, that is a 
good thing. It certainly fits well with the Saskatchewan NDP 
smart growth strategy. And, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
investment that is needed to look at innovative approaches and 
certainly for new products, that it’s something that I think that 
the people of Saskatchewan support. And we want to see the 
economy of Saskatchewan continue to build and continue being 
very strong. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture 
Capital Corporations Amendment Act, we think that 40,000 
people are not doing anything wrong. We think that the 
investment that they have made is a good investment. It’s going 
to help the economy. It’s going to help bring innovative 
products. It’s going to provide for new products. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s going to be a bigger tool and a more valuable tool 
as we continue to build the Saskatchewan economy for years to 
come. So on that note I’m pleased to offer those final comments 
on Bill 109. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill 109, The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 be now 
read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 102 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 102 — The 
Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, a 
few comments on this particular bill, The Builders’ Lien 
Amendment Act. What we’re doing here, Mr. Speaker, on this 
particular Act is that we’re just trying to make sure that we 
include land surveyors and professional surveyors when we talk 
about the whole process of the relationship of construction 
between the landowner, the builder, and all the subtrades that 
are involved. I understand that land surveyors and professional 
surveyors were not included under the builders’ lien process, 



4530 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

and this is something that we also want to support and we also 
want to incorporate. 
 
We also notice that there is some wording changes on defining 
the completion of contracts, Mr. Speaker. We also see that 
there’s a limitation period that’s being increased from one year 
to two years in terms of resolving some of the disputes around 
the builders’ lien processes, Mr. Speaker. And we think that in 
terms of meeting the balance between the rights and obligations 
of landowners, the challenge and investment attached to the 
builders, and of course all the professionals that provide and 
assist the investors in building these units, that all of this 
construction, this team of construction people and landowners 
and builders and so on and so forth, that we have to make every 
concerted effort to make sure that we professionalize that 
service and we have good understanding of who does what, 
when, where, and how, and what the obligations are and what 
the legal obligations are between all these parties. 
 
We think that that’s something that ought to always have the 
attention of government. And as I indicated at the outset, our 
leader is not going to be wasting a lot of time. If there’s certain 
things that are going along well, certain bills that are intended 
to enhance Saskatchewan’s economy overall, that we as an 
opposition would want to support that and continue moving that 
agenda forward because this economy of Saskatchewan is 
fragile. We have to continue building it and building it for years 
to come. So those are my final comments on this particular bill, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien 
Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 103 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 103 — The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 
2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 
ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, 
just to recapture what the intent of the bill is, Bill 103, the 

maintenance enforcement Act, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s 
really impressive, that as I look at the bill itself and you see that 
the maintenance enforcement office, the individuals and the 
staff and the team that go after payments from different parents 
that are either separated or have been divorced or involved with 
children, that many times there are the difficult tasks of tracking 
down the parents and ensuring that they provide the adequate 
supports to the children. And that’s something that we certainly 
want to stress is really important. To strengthen the 
Saskatchewan family overall, they’ve got to have the proper 
care and you’ve got to have the support mechanisms in place 
for many — the single mothers and single fathers out there — 
that may be struggling to make ends meet. 
 
So as I look at the bill itself under the maintenance enforcement 
orders, so to speak, you see a very impressive number that the 
collection rate for some of the arrears in the child enforcement 
payment orders is at 91 per cent. And that shows that the staff 
and this team are doing a remarkable job of tracking down 
parents that are trying to shy away from the responsibility of 
caring, not so much caring, but paying for some of the costs of 
raising children. And I think the rate of 91 per cent is certainly a 
very impressive number, Mr. Speaker. We certainly wish it was 
100 per cent, but in this day and age, 91 per cent is certainly a 
very impressive number. 
 
The other thing that I think is important, how do you translate 
that into dollars? According to the information that we received, 
it is a net effect of $39 million that is being collected through 
this office that is going to support children in this province that 
certainly need that support. And the single moms or the single 
dads that are out there trying to help make ends meet, I’m sure 
that they appreciate the maintenance order enforcement office 
and seeing that the collections of $39 million in one single year 
is something that’s very, very impressive. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, people should know that there are a lot of 
provisions out there and there are a lot of laws. And there’s the 
long arm of the law when it talks about meeting your obligation 
as a parent in the event that you do have a separation or divorce 
or it was just something that was not meant to be in terms of 
staying together, that nowadays if you have children and then 
you try and not meet your responsibilities, there’s a number of 
steps that are being allowed nowadays, and that includes 
garnishing salary. That also includes suspending your driver’s 
licence. That also excludes, from the federal scene, denying 
your passport and also intercepting any GST [goods and 
services tax] refunds you might have as a parent that is not 
meeting their obligation, or income tax refunds. 
 
That kind of pressure, that kind of law, that kind of incentive 
for people to pay, there’s a series of not only provincial and 
territorial steps, but there’s also the federal collaboration 
ensuring that folks that have obligations for child support are 
not finding ways in which they’re able to shy away from that 
responsibility. And now what this particular bill does, Mr. 
Speaker, it not only defines the success of the maintenance 
enforcement office, it also defines what the rules are in terms of 
what the current laws are.  
 
And now there’s one more being added to this bill, Bill 103, 
and that is also denying hunting and fishing licences. So if you 
are a parent that is not meeting their obligations, then rest 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4531 

assured that the maintenance enforcement office will be on your 
case. They’ll be looking for you. Rest assured that they can 
garnishee your salary if they find out where you’re at. Rest 
assured that they can suspend your driver’s licence if you’re not 
meeting your obligation. Rest assured that they can deny you 
passports, and rest assured that any kind of dollars that you may 
have coming in from the federal or provincial government — 
whether it’s GST refunds, income tax refunds — that they can 
take that money as well. And now you’d be denied hunting and 
fishing licences as another step in trying to stem the challenges 
of making parents that are not meeting their obligations to make 
them pay and keep up with their maintenance enforcement 
order. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is something that I think is really 
important overall for the many single parents that are out there, 
the single moms. And I know there are many single moms out 
there and there are many single dads out there as well. And it 
just shows that it is important that we recognize their particular 
challenge. And it is something that we, within the caucus, the 
opposition caucus are always vigilant in ensuring that the 
proper supports are there for young parents, young, single 
parents that have the challenge of child care, proper housing, 
health care, and the list goes on as to the many challenges that 
many of these young, single and older, single parents face as 
they raise children in this day and age. 
 
So we can basically tell them that we certainly hear your 
challenge. We hear your plight. And that the maintenance 
enforcement process to ensure that you have your child support 
in a timely fashion, there’s always ways to improve that 
process. And when we see evidence of this sort, it is something 
that we want to continue seeing the government focus on. And 
this is one step in the right direction by adding a component of 
denying hunting and fishing licences to those parents that are 
not meeting their family obligations. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of 
Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2013 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

Bill No. 104 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 104 — The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
Bill 104 is really a companion piece to the previous bill that I 
spoke about. It really relates to the child enforcement office in 
the sense that they’ve added a new provision that not only do 
you lose your driver’s licence or you can’t apply for a passport 
or they can garnishee your salary; now as I indicated earlier, 
that they can also deny you a hunting licence or a fishing 
licence. 
 
And what this Bill 104 is, a consequential amendment Act 
which in the sense you can’t have one Act enforced on the 
Justice front and not have a collaborative Act on the many other 
departments of government. So what this consequential 
amendment Act does, it’s really a supportive Act. It’s a 
supportive process of the Bill 103 to make sure that all the rules 
around issuing hunting licences and fishing licences are 
addressed right across the board when it comes to government 
services. 
 
So the consequential amendment Act really is about being a 
supportive piece of legislation that is required to put in place the 
measures to ensure that the child enforcement office is able to 
successfully seek out the parents that are not meeting their 
obligations. And I think that’s really a straightforward 
adjustment to what every department has to do when it comes to 
the ideals behind the previous Bill 103. And this Bill 104 is 
primarily going to be done to support that process. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of 
Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
[16:00] 



4532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

Bill No. 105 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 105 — The 
Informal Public Appeals Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
I’m very pleased to stand here and give our final few comments 
in the Assembly about Bill 105, The Informal Public Appeals 
Act. And, Mr. Speaker, what this informal public appeals Act is 
primarily trying to do here is it’s trying to address the 
spontaneous appeals made to the public after families or 
communities or individuals go through an emergency traumatic 
experience, as an example fire or flood or a particular challenge 
to their community or their home. 
 
And as you know, the Saskatchewan people are fantastic people 
for helping each other out. We’ve seen that evidenced time and 
time again. Telemiracle again is another great example. And we 
really want to commend the Saskatchewan people for their 
kindness and their show of compassion and support, especially 
towards families that have had emergencies. I think that’s really 
important. 
 
We’ve seen a lot of evidence of that over time. And recently 
Saskatchewan, with their flooding, with some of the issues 
around fires, and some of the trauma caused to our family, it’s 
important that we encourage as a government, and certainly as 
an opposition, that we encourage and foster the proper support 
so that when families are going to get helped by a particular 
group or a group of individuals or three or four trustees that’s 
saying, look, they want to do their part in helping families 
through a trauma . . . And there’s a lot of goodwill. There’s a lot 
of goodwill. 
 
And this bill, the 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act, really 
is trying to clarify the process when you do want to do the 
public appeal to help a certain family or help a certain 
individual or help a certain group out of a very traumatic 
experience. And what they’re trying to do is put some process 
into how they report the funding and how much they make and 
what they do with the proper accounting of that fund. So a lot of 
trustees that embark on an effort to try and help a family, you 
know, they can raise X amount of dollars, and all they want to 
do in order for them to feel good about their activity and their 
donation of time is to make sure that the money is well spent. 
 
And obviously some of the questions we have on this particular 
bill we’ve asked earlier in the schedule in terms of, you know, 
does this require more process that the government is going to 
inflict upon some of the groups and organizations that might be 
doing this out of the goodness of their heart? So is there going 
to be more documents for us to fill out for government? The 
questions like, how many complaints have the government 
actually received from the different organizations that are out 
there doing this good work? Where are the concerns coming 
from? Like is it coming from the rural areas, the urban areas, 
coming from certain groups in a certain geography, from a 
certain area? And, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the questions 
we have on this particular bill. 
 

And we certainly, through the committee process, we’re going 
to ask those questions because it’s really important for us as an 
opposition to basically say, if there are processes that are going 
to help the people of Saskatchewan show their compassion and 
they’re able to do that without fear of misspent money and 
without fear of the government coming there and saying this 
was done illegally, then we’re all in support of making sure the 
process is fair, accountable, and transparent. That’s what we’re 
about. But if it’s all about the government themselves trying to 
discourage that activity, to try and harness some of the goodwill 
that the people of Saskatchewan have towards helping each 
other out, then of course we have some of the concerns and 
questions that we will ask during the committee phase. 
 
So I think it’s important that people out there know that there is 
a lot of good-willed people in our province that do the right 
thing at the right time. And many times you can’t plan these 
things out because of the emergency basis of a certain incident. 
So a lot of the Saskatchewan families and people rise to the 
occasion. They do a bunch of fundraising to help each other out. 
And this bill is really talking about how we legitimately 
understand what was fundraised, how the money’s going to be 
used, and that there be a proper procedure in place to make sure 
that all the goodwill is not spent on things that are not proper. 
And that’s something that I think overall that we would look at 
and that we would certainly want to clarify a few questions we 
have during the committee process. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s all the comments I have on this 
particular bill. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals 
Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act be referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 106 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 106 — The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4533 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
pleasure to wade into debate about bills before us here today, 
and today I have the opportunity to talk about Bill 106, The 
Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013. 
 
I think one of the things that’s important to talk about when 
we’re talking about bills before us, before I get into what the 
bill is about, is consultation. With whom has the government 
spoken? Have they . . . When a bill comes forward, you want to 
know why a bill is before us. Who asked for the bill? Are the 
things that impact stakeholders found in the bill? Are there any 
unintended consequences? Those are all things that you need to 
look at when a bill is before you, and consider. 
 
I know in the minister’s second reading speech, he does 
mention that this bill was proposed at the request of the Law 
Society of Saskatchewan, which is the body that it impacts. So 
that consultation piece seems to be done there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I know sometimes when this government has said that 
they’ve consulted, it’s kind of like the game, telephone. 
Someone says something on one end of the telephone, and by 
the time you get to the end of the telephone conversation it’s 
something very different. In our experience here in this House, 
Mr. Speaker, someone may have said something in 
consultations, and it becomes something very different in 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have my own experience actually. I had the 
opportunity last summer to sit on the Traffic Safety Committee, 
and we had many, many people come before us recommending 
a number of different proposals — and people who have far 
more experience than any of us in this House — on the issue of 
traffic safety.  
 
We had people . . . So in two particular areas on impaired 
driving, we had experts, someone who has more than 30 years 
of experience in traffic safety in Canada, Mr. Speaker. We had 
Mothers Against Drunk Driving. We had someone who works 
directly with individuals who’ve been caught drinking and 
driving or driving while impaired. And they put forward 
suggestions at the committee level and this government . . . 
those suggestions looked very different when they got to this 
legislature in the proposed legislative changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Around booster seats, we had the Canadian Paediatric Society 
make very specific recommendations, and we had the 
committee both . . . all members of this all-party committee 
heard what the people or heard what the Canadian Paediatric 
Society said. I was in the meeting. Everybody, both sides were 
incredibly enthusiastic. But when that bill was introduced or 
those changes were introduced here, which we will be passing 
in a few months, Mr. Speaker, it was very different than what 
the Canadian Paediatric Society had actually recommended and 
what other jurisdictions do. So sometimes in the consultation 
process, things start out well with this government and don’t 
always finish as they should. So I am glad that the minister has 
consulted or that these recommendations have come forward 
from the Law Society of Saskatchewan, but some of the 
questions that will be asked down the road here is, are these the 
changes then in fact that the Law Society in fact asked for? 
 
So what does this bill do? The minister outlines that first there 

will be a provision clarifying that in regulating the lawyers, the 
law profession, the public interest is paramount over the interest 
of members being disciplined. That is a reasonable change, Mr. 
Speaker. Obviously public interest should be paramount at all 
times and I think most if not all endeavours upon which people 
embark, public interest is absolutely imperative. 
 
Secondly, the society is given more control over the number of 
elected members on its council to accommodate demographic 
changes and improve governance. So in fact I think this change, 
if I’m looking at the existing provision and the explanatory 
notes, one of the pieces . . . So obviously we’ve had, in terms of 
demographic changes we’ve had people move throughout the 
province. There’s heavier concentration in population perhaps 
in some of our urban centres. An increase in population. So one 
of the particular changes is that the numbers of public 
representative benchers has changed from four to not less than 
four, recognizing that I think this is probably acknowledging 
the increase in population and this permits additional public 
representatives to be appointed if appropriate. So when it comes 
to good governance too, obviously a body needs to be able to 
have in place the members that it needs to do that work. 
 
As well, a third change, there are a number of amendments that 
the minister points out that provide the Law Society with the 
ability to recruit persons who are not members of council or 
lawyers to assist with investigations and hearings. The minister 
goes on to say that this is designed to increase flexibility and 
avoid delays in proceedings. 
 
So obviously everybody in any legal process, whether it’s in our 
courts or in this case here, the disciplinary hearing of someone 
who has been charged or is said to have done something 
inappropriate, a quick and speedy hearing is always important. 
Justice served is best done if it’s done in a timely manner, Mr. 
Speaker. So speeding up that process or being able to speed up 
that process by perhaps adding other learned people is a good 
idea, Mr. Speaker. Timelier decision making is important in 
order for people to get on with their lives, both perhaps the 
lawyer who is before the Law Society and the individual or 
individuals who brought the case forward or the issue forward 
that needs to be dealt with. 
 
And the final piece, Mr. Speaker, the minister outlines that: 
 

. . . the statutory exemption from liability for good faith 
decisions is being extended to the Law Foundation and 
members of the Law Foundation to help encourage 
volunteers to undertake this . . . activity . . . There are also 
several changes in the rule-making power of the society 
[as well.] 

 
So again these seem like very reasonable changes. But 
ultimately when it gets to committee, we’ll have the opportunity 
to ask the minister questions about the consultation process and 
further questions about some of his changes, making sure that 
they are in fact doing what the minister said they are going to 
do. 
 
But I do know I’ve got colleagues who would like to weigh in 
on this debate at a later time. So with that, I would like to move 
to adjourn debate on Bill 106, The Legal Profession Amendment 
Act, 2013. 



4534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 
2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 113 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 113 — The Powers 
of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la 
Loi de 2002 sur les procurations be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s again my 
pleasure to be up speaking to a bill, and on this occasion it’s 
Bill 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013. I’d like 
to talk a little bit about what this bill will do. But again going 
back to the consultation piece, the minister outlines in his 
second reading speech that these changes are being introduced 
as a result to a recent consultation respecting vulnerable adults. 
And I think the question and some of the questions that we’ll be 
following up with in committee is, with whom did this 
government consult? In what ways? Did they reach out to 
everybody who is impacted by this legislation to ensure that all 
the necessary voices and perspectives were heard? 
 
So consultation, real and meaningful consultation when you’re 
making changes to legislation, implementing any kind of public 
policy is so important so you make sure that there are not 
unintended consequences to make sure that those who are 
impacted by the bill are considered in the development and 
implementation of the bill. 
 
[16:15] 
 
So what does Bill 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act 
do? The minister outlines that as a result of the consultations — 
he doesn’t say with whom but — it was determined that there 
were some aspects of the law around powers of attorney that 
were unclear. And he points to an example that the law was not 
clear about an enduring power of attorney’s authority to make 
gifts from an adult’s property. 
 
So one of the goals of this bill, the minister says, is to clarify 
this. So a power of attorney can make gifts in, with this new 
legislation, in the following circumstances: 
 

. . . if the document creating the power of attorney 
specifically authorizes the making of gifts. Secondly, if an 
amount not to exceed the value prescribed in the 
regulations, and if there are sufficient funds to make the 
gift, and there are reasonable grounds to believe that the 
adult would have made the gift if she or he had capacity 
[themselves]. And finally, if the court authorizes the gift. 

 
So clarifying that. Any time in legislation if something is 
unclear, there can be room for perhaps not the best outcome. 
 

I think clarification is undoubtedly a good idea here, Mr. 
Speaker. The bill also allows regulations to set a fee schedule 
for someone acting under a power of attorney. And it’s 
interesting, Mr. Speaker. In this job, we all come to this place 
with certain experiences and expertise, I suppose, or focuses in 
certain areas. But there’s lots that we have to learn when we 
come to this place, Mr. Speaker. And I knew very little about 
power of attorney actually until very recently. When something 
comes before you, you have to learn a little bit more quickly 
about it. But I didn’t realize at one point that powers of attorney 
were actually paid, Mr. Speaker. So that’s an interesting piece. 
But so this bill allows: 
 

. . . regulations to set a fee schedule for someone acting 
under a power of attorney. The fee schedule will come into 
effect if the document creating the power of attorney does 
not specify the fees to be received and if there is no court 
order establishing the fee to which the attorney is entitled. 

 
And the minister also points out that: 
 

There are several amendments dealing with the 
requirement for an attorney to account for his or her 
handling of the property of the donor. They are divided 
between accountings that occur during the exercise of the 
power of attorney and accountings that occur after the 
power ends. 

 
In this bill as well, The Public Guardian and Trustee is given 
new powers to carry out an investigation to ensure the accuracy 
of an accounting. 
 
And the minister points out that “. . . regulations will prescribe 
the form of an accounting.” 
 
So I think it’s always interesting in legislation. Obviously not 
everything is laid out in legislation. Often it can be in 
regulation. But so there’ll be some questions, I think, for the 
minister around what that accounting will look like or how 
those new powers to carry out an investigation to ensure the 
accuracy of an accounting will look like, what the form of the 
accounting will look like. 
 
The minister points out that: 
 

For mid-term accounting, the court is given the power to 
remove an attorney if the accounting is not satisfactory. 
[And he also points out that] A final accounting occurs at 
the conclusion of the attorney’s power such as when the 
donor dies, a property guardian is appointed, or the court 
removes that attorney. 

 
Again I think about coming to this place and maybe we don’t 
all have knowledge in every single area. I’ve just recently, in 
my own office, have learned a little bit more about the role of a 
property guardian, Mr. Speaker, and how important that is. 
 
So around this accounting piece: 
 

The final accounting must be provided within six months. 
The bill directs to whom the accounting is provided and 
gives the court the power to order an accounting if it is not 
voluntarily provided. With these improvements . . . 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4535 

The minister goes on to point out that the goal of this bill is to 
protect vulnerable adults who have given a power of attorney, 
and so this power of attorney is further enhanced. 
 
I know again we will have questions when this bill moves to 
committee. And I know that I will have colleagues who stand 
on their feet here and participate in adjourned debates and will 
have much to say about Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney 
Amendment Act. But with that, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment 
Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 114 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 114 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in the 
debate on Bill 114, The Health Care Directives and Substitute 
Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. It talks 
about three areas in here. And it’s an amendment to an Act, and 
I think it clarifies, and it does that. It provides some clarification 
for day-to-day treatment for someone who is in long-term care 
or in a health facility, about the day-to-day care. And I guess 
the regulations will determine the day-to-day care that a patient 
or a resident requires. 
 
So there’ll be regulations designed that’s saying what is the 
day-to-day care. And then it provides in there, if no family 
member is available, next of kin family member, whether there 
is no directive from the patient on the day-to-day care, then this 
gives provision for a health care caregiver to provide the 
day-to-day treatment saying yes, this is what needs to happen. 
So this gives some clarification I think as probably something 
that’s been long waited for by the health care, individuals who 
provide health care out there for patients. And this will clarify 
it. 
 
So that does one area where it clarifies the role and when it’s 
needed and the regulations. When we talk we’ll make it very 
clear as to who has . . . [inaudible]. And I want to get into that 
because the other side of that, when you’re looking at the 
second part of this, it talks about clear legislation and rules. 
This is what this is going to do. It’s going to once and for all 
clarify who has the responsibility when it comes to the 
day-to-day treatment of a patient when that patient is not able to 
give their consent, there isn’t a family member close to provide, 
I guess, advice to the facility that’s providing the day-to-day 
care of that patient or their loved one. 
 
The legislation would then clarify clearly who has the 

jurisdiction to provide that. Now it doesn’t state in here other 
than day-to-day, and it says clearly that will be determined in 
the regulations. They will consult. They will go out and talk to 
many of the providers that provide. And it sounds like in this 
part of the amendment they have done that. They refer to that 
about the groups and many individuals that they went out and 
consulted. And I’m glad that they done that. And in this case it 
makes sense and it’s good. Yes, it’s all right to criticize but 
sometimes when the consultation and the good work is done, 
that’s great and we want to see that. 
 
And it looks like it’s been asked once and for all, something 
that needs to be clarified from the health care profession and 
those that provide care for our loved ones that we need to make 
it very clear. If there isn’t a family member, if there isn’t a 
directive by the patient, when can the health caregiver say as a 
caregiver, the day-to-day treatment, we say this is what’s 
needed and they can do that for the person that they’re supposed 
to care? Just to take care of the best interests of the patient at the 
end of the day. I think this is clarifying it. 
 
It also goes into a section of power of attorney where someone 
has decided to have a power of attorney over them. It’s going to 
clarify I think in the health profession that the power of 
attorney, those individuals do not have . . . And I think, and this 
is what I’m trying to, being not a lawyer again, but I think it’s 
trying to clarify that individuals, whether it’s one, two, 
somebody has power of attorney for themselves. If they don’t 
have the directive to the doctor or to be clear on whether they 
come into a situation where the power of attorney, the 
individuals that have been appointed, the person has, that they 
don’t have the power to do certain things when it comes to 
health. 
 
It talks about the finances, to make sure that is being dealt with. 
And I think what this is trying to clarify, if I’m correct, is 
clearly that they don’t have, as power of attorney, when it 
comes to a directive, if a family member decides that should 
their health condition get to the point where they need to pull 
the plug . . . And some will leave those directives and some will 
not. But if those situations come up where the power of attorney 
does not — and I clearly, whether it’s one, two, however is 
appointed — have the power to tell doctors, to my 
understanding if this is clear, to pull the plug if that was the 
case. 
 
Because their loved one, they want to keep them or not. If 
there’s no directive by that person, then I guess it’s up to the 
doctor, the family doctor or the doctor that is providing the care 
will determine. And maybe they’ll talk to the family. Maybe 
they’ll talk to the power of attorney individuals and they’ll say, 
well, we hear you. And it might be family members that are . . . 
We hear your concerns, but unfortunately the doctor may, you 
know . . . And we’ll get clarification. And I think at the end of 
the day, the caregiver, whether it be the doctor in a hospital or a 
long-term care, will determine what decision will be made. But 
clearly I think the power of attorney does not have that power, 
but caregivers do have a day-to-day treatment. 
 
So there’s some amendments that’s being proposed I think and 
giving some clarification, which is good. And it allows people 
to do the treatment, the day-to-day treatment to take care of our 
loved ones. And those are the most vulnerable, adults and 



4536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

caregivers, to provide that if there isn’t family members, loved 
ones close that can make day-to-day . . . So there are some 
things that are being clearly dealt with and clarified in this 
amendment. 
 
So at this point I know there’ll be more discussions in 
committee and as the regulations come out and are developed to 
make it very clear and clear it up and with the consultation in 
the health profession, the caregivers, families. I encourage and I 
hope the government will go out and make sure they are 
consulting and getting the information they need to provide 
good legislation and clarification that’s probably been asked 
and needed for some time. And I think that’s why the 
amendment’s here. So at this point I’m prepared to adjourn 
debate on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 114, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 115 — The Public 
Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise on Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 
Amendment Act, 2013 which, as the minister pointed out, 
there’s several pieces, or a few pieces of legislation before us 
dealing with protecting vulnerable adults. I just had the 
opportunity to speak to The Powers of Attorney Amendment 
Act, 2013, which I think goes in some measure with this 
particular bill, Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 
Amendment Act. 
 
So one of these things that this bill does, it removes the 
provisions respecting certificates of incapacity from The 
Mentally Disordered Persons Act, allowing that legislation to 
be repealed. The minister points out in his comments that in the 
former Act the terminology, the word incompetence, many 
people in the consultations found that objectionable, and I 
understand why. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is language matters. I know just a few 
years before this, Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Saskatoon 
Centre brought forward a private member’s bill around 
removing the R-word from all legislation here in Saskatchewan. 
Language does matter. I think it sends a signal about how we 
view people. 
 
And I never used to think that, Mr. Speaker. I was a reporter for 
12 years and I always, when we used to talk about 
gender-neutral language . . . and for a very long time I scoffed 

at that and never really saw the importance of language until 
actually I became a mother. And I was an at-home mother, Mr. 
Speaker, and it started to dawn on me as people . . . as I was an 
at-home mother and people would say to me, oh, so you don’t 
work. Or they referred to working mothers. And I was a mother 
who was at home with my oldest daughter at the time. And I 
was in fact a working mother. I think all mothers are working 
mothers. So I think my point here, Mr. Speaker, is language 
matters. 
 
So being able to repeal that particular . . . The Mentally 
Disordered Persons Act, and changing terminology from 
incompetence to the concept of capacity or incapacity is a 
positive step. And in fact I know the minister had said in 
consultation that is one of the things that came up. 
 
[16:30] 
 
I want to just go back to something I’ve said earlier in a bill 
today around the consultation piece. The minister didn’t point 
out with whom he’s had consultations, and those are things that 
we will talk about once this bill gets to committee. With whom 
did the minister consult? Are all those parties who are impacted, 
are all those people who are impacted by this particular piece of 
legislation in on the consultation process? Was it thorough and 
meaningful? 
 
Another thing that this bill does, it creates a new ability for 
physicians to examine a person for capacity without a request 
from a chief psychiatrist and a reduction in the time period that 
can be imposed between re-examination for capacity from one 
year to six months. 
 
I should talk a little bit about what in fact the public guardian 
and trustee does. You know, Mr. Speaker, I actually had no 
knowledge of this before becoming an MLA. And I actually 
have had several cases come into my office, either with 
concerns about public guardianship and trusteeship or 
wondering how this happens. So I just want to say that the 
mandate of the Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee — I 
think it’s important for us to understand that while we’re talking 
about the bill — is to protect the property rights of children 
under the age of 18, to manage the financial or personal affairs 
of adults who are incapable of managing those affairs, monitor 
other guardians, and investigate allegations of financial abuse, 
administer the estates of deceased persons and missing persons, 
and hold and administer unclaimed property. So that’s what 
we’re talking about here when we’re talking about the public 
guardian and trustee. 
 
So the minister again had talked about, this is about addressing 
concerns for vulnerable adults and I just . . . a previous bill that 
we had spoken to earlier today on power of attorney, and then 
this all ties in with the public trustee. There’s some changes that 
I haven’t seen. I may be missing them in this suite of 
legislation, but I know from anecdotal and personal experience 
people can be very frustrated, particularly with trying to gain 
power of attorney over a vulnerable adult. 
 
In my own family, last year my nephew who passed away very 
tragically this summer, his parents actually tried very hard last 
spring to gain power of attorney. And my nephew was 23 and 
was bipolar, and at times did not have the capacity to make 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4537 

good decisions for himself, and his parents tried very hard. It’s 
a very costly process and very time-consuming and they were 
not able to . . . it wasn’t the tool that . . . The tools weren’t there 
for them to be able to undertake that process. 
 
And I have another . . . I had the opportunity after my nephew 
passed away to talk to a few other people about powers of 
attorney. I know one example of a physician in Saskatoon 
whose grown son has an acquired brain injury and was 
hospitalized. And I believe he needed to be intubated and 
wasn’t eating. And the doctor said, well he doesn’t want to eat. 
He’s a grown man. He doesn’t need to eat. But the mother, who 
also happened to be a doctor, was very insistent that her grown 
son would die if he did not have some nutrition. And she also 
tried going through the process, or had initially looked into it 
and discovered it was not only incredibly costly but very 
difficult and time-consuming. 
 
So I don’t know in the minister’s consultations if that piece 
came up at all, but I’d be interested in hearing further, perhaps 
when these bills come before him in committee, if those kinds 
of scenarios had come up and if there were . . . They don’t seem 
to be addressed in these particular bills before us, but I’d be 
interested in knowing if that was something that was flagged for 
him. 
 
Some of the other amendments: 
 

. . . update the powers of the Public Guardian and Trustee 
by adding the power to revoke an acknowledgment to act 
that was signed in error, and adding the power to 
administer the estate of a deceased dependent adult client 
of the public trustee and guardian pending administration 
by someone who’s not a court-ordered personal 
representative. 

 
The minister also says this bill “. . . updates references to 
legislation in a number of places that adopt the word incapacity 
and other legislation that references the Act.” 
 
Again, I know the minister — I’m going to say this again — but 
the minister had said this came from consultation process. And 
our experience with this government on consultation, it hasn’t 
been incredibly strong. The stance is that they engage in 
consultation and often will listen, but don’t often hear what 
people are saying, or they choose to ignore what people are 
saying. So I’d be curious to again press the minister a little bit 
on this consultation piece and find out if what is in the bill is in 
fact what he heard from stakeholders, people who will be 
impacted by this legislation. 
 
But I know that I have other colleagues who are interested in 
discussing Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 
Amendment Act, 2013. And I look forward to at some point 
down the road hearing what the minister has to say further in 
committee. But with that I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate of Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 
Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 116 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 116 — The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well good afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
very pleased to be able to get up today and enter into the debate 
once again on Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 
2013. We have the benefit of really good, extensive comments 
by the minister on this particular bill. And I have to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s something that’s appreciated because too often 
we are left guessing what the intent of the government is. 
 
And I think the second reading speeches by the ministers aren’t 
something that we in the opposition look to very carefully. But I 
think it’s also something that the members of the public do look 
for. And certainly when bills are being interpreted by the legal 
profession, I know that those kinds of comments add a lot of 
context and background information for interpretation of bills. 
So I do want to congratulate the minister for his extensive 
comments and his guidance in terms of what the government’s 
attempting to do in this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Simply put, The Municipalities Amendment Act, the main thrust 
of the bill is to add a new kind of character to the municipal 
framework, and that’s a beast that’s being referred to as a 
municipal district. And I’ll get into that in a little bit, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But we see the government reflecting, I think, a reality that is 
out there in rural areas certainly, and some smaller urban areas 
as well. And I think if you look back at the history of this 
province, you know, when you look at the numbered 
municipalities, I think it was . . . there’s up to 560, maybe, 
numbered municipalities. But I believe in Saskatchewan now 
there is only around 250, somewhere in that area, 
municipalities. So of all the municipalities that were created 
rurally, you know, about half of them have actually changed, 
disappeared, been amalgamated into other municipalities, or 
simply aren’t functioning anymore as municipalities. So we see 
this in rural Saskatchewan in any number of areas of course, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you would know, coming from a rural area, some towns 
have disappeared completely. Many towns which were once 
thriving are now hamlets or villages, and a much smaller sort of 
population base. And certainly the depopulation in the 
countryside, where we see farms getting larger but the 
population, farm population, certainly getting smaller. So when 
it comes to municipal government, which isn’t an easy task, I 
think even municipalities finding enough people to volunteer to 
be councillors is often a struggle for a lot of rural 
municipalities. And finding the people with the energy and the 
time and the commitment that they can put into being 
contributing members to the council of the municipality isn’t an 
easy task. 



4538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

And I think I understand, in reading the minister’s comments 
here, that the thrust for the amendments has come basically 
from consultations and representations by the municipality 
associations, the various . . . well both SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] and SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association]. And apparently, according 
to his comments, there was an actual request coming from the 
SUMA to provide this kind of flexibility in terms of creating a 
new beast called the municipal district. 
 
One of the areas . . . There’s five areas of change I guess, and I 
could maybe address those right now in terms of my initial 
comments here. The first area of change is to determine whether 
unincorporated areas and communities have capacity to have 
local governance, municipal status. So apparently there’s a 
concern that the criteria simply isn’t there right now. And the 
desire and the intent of the bill is to create the legislative 
capacity to determine whether or not an unincorporated area 
would have the capacity to provide their own governance. 
 
Secondly and conversely, this would be where there’s the 
second part of the Act where changes is to give some criteria for 
action when municipalities are no longer able to function and 
meet their statutory requirements as local governments. And I 
think this is really important for legislation to reflect these kinds 
of realities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can speak with some experience on that in relation to 
conservation and development area authorities. And back in the 
’60s when water management was becoming an important 
issue, there was a piece of legislation, The Conservation and 
Development Act. And what it did is allowed for the creation of 
a whole number of conservation development and area 
authorities. And they were created all over the place, 
willy-nilly. Often they were represented by the local rural 
municipal council. Sometimes it was a completely separate 
board that was created. 
 
And what happened I think is the same thing happened there as 
it has in other areas of rural Saskatchewan. With depopulation 
and perhaps no need for active water management, the area 
authority simply stopped functioning. So on the books you 
would have an area authority that was duly incorporated 
pursuant to the legislation, but in reality it didn’t exist. And in 
fact the original members of the board were often gone or 
passed away or not even locatable. 
 
So back in the day when I was working with the federal 
government on treaty land entitlement, we often came upon . . . 
because those authorities had the ability to tax and issue levies 
on rural ratepayers in order to create works for water 
management, for example, channelization or dikes or any kind 
of water control structures. They had the authority to issue 
levies. So when it came time for treaty land entitlement and 
clearing off all the interest that existed provincially on the 
lands, quite often we would come across a conservation 
development area authority that simply was not locatable. These 
people no longer functioned as an area authority, but it was 
considered to be a burden on the title of the land, and it was 
very difficult to pursue reserve creation with these lands. 
 
So I know that the problem was in the Act. And I’m not sure 
which minister’s actually responsible for The Conservation and 

Development Act, but there is no provision in that Act to do 
what the minister is proposing in this Act, and that’s the ability 
to de-create I guess the municipality or the ability to de-create a 
conservation and development area authority. So I think this is a 
prudent move on this part. And the recommendations from 
SUMA and SARM make a lot of sense in terms of dealing . . . 
having a way to move forward when municipalities are no 
longer able to function and meet the requirements as a local 
government. 
 
And I guess that leads into the third and the most important part 
of this legislation and that is, well, if a local municipality’s 
struggling, perhaps its neighbour municipality is struggling as 
well, and there might be some opportunity for them to work 
together voluntarily. And so the minister has made some 
significant changes to the Act and has created a — proposing to 
create a beast — a legislative entity called a municipal district. 
So this is a new creation, and it’s a new addition to our fabric of 
municipal governance here in Saskatchewan. So I’m going to 
talk about that a little bit more later. 
 
Fourth there is a new opportunity here for citizens. And I think 
this is something that as well has come to the minister because 
of letters and concerns that have been raised by individuals 
about the inability to have a good look at audits and financial 
management of their local operations. So I know you don’t 
want to give the opportunity for an individual, a disgruntled 
citizen to be able to, you know, constantly demand 
accountability from rural municipalities. I mean certainly that 
could be used as tool against efficient functioning of the rural 
municipality, but certainly I think the local individuals should 
be able. If there is a problem and if there is a valid concern, 
there has to be a mechanism to do that. And I’ll talk about that a 
little bit more in a minute. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Finally the fifth aspect of the bill as indicated by the minister is 
to enhance both property owners’ and the minister’s ability to 
ensure municipal compliance with legislation and regulations 
and to constrain the potential misuse of local property tax tools 
and tax abatements. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think I want to focus most of my 
comments at this point on the creation of a municipal district. 
This is found in section 51 I believe of the . . . or it’s an 
amendment to section 51 of the existing Act, municipalities 
Act. And it is found . . . I just have to find the place here if you 
just hang on one second. There we are, 51.1. 
 
So what this talks . . . It walks us through the process. The new 
section 51.1 is added after section 51, and it walks us through 
the process that’s going to be required to create a municipal 
district. Again the minister was quite clear in his comments 
about what the goals are here, and he was very specifically clear 
about that this is not forced amalgamation. You know, I don’t 
think it is, Mr. Speaker. I think that this is something that’s 
clear in its intent to be voluntary. 
 
I think that the issue here is that a lot of RMs [rural 
municipality] may have no option because they can see their 
ratepayers are becoming less and less. They are having more 
and more difficulty being able to service, provide the kind of 



March 4, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4539 

services that they know that their ratepayers want without 
hiking up the local taxes. So although it’s definitely a voluntary 
proposal, I think it’s going to help this government deal with 
that exact issue where there are struggling municipalities. 
 
I think it is very difficult politically to force amalgamation. It’s 
not ever been welcome by rural communities despite the fact 
that it may look like it makes sense on paper. It’s an emotional 
and definitely a personal and political issue for many, many 
local citizens when they feel like they are being told what to do. 
 
People are very fiercely proud of their rural governments and, 
you know, I think it’s one of the sources of community 
interaction. I know my dad was reeve, for a few years anyways, 
and certainly was a councillor on the rural municipal board. 
And I remember stories around the kitchen table, and it was 
always around, you know, people unhappy with the grader and 
where the grader had been and where the grader hadn’t been 
and, you know, the garbage in the local dump. And there was 
always good coffee row conversations and just sort of the fabric 
of our daily lives in the municipal, particularly in my case when 
I grew up in the rural municipal areas. 
 
So as I say it’s a fierce source of pride for people to belong. I 
was from the rural municipality of Wood River No. 74. You 
know, and people definitely are aware of the number of their 
municipality and the name, and it provides a real history of the 
area. 
 
In fact just recently I was looking at some of the history books 
that were created. I think it started in the 1970s when we had 
the 75th anniversary of our province, and people were given 
grant money to go home and write about their local histories. 
And in my local history book, it’s not just the towns and 
villages who were represented, but it was the rural 
municipalities and a lot of talk about the school districts. 
 
And in my dad’s home quarter that my grandpa homesteaded, 
there was the Harwood School. And that was again another 
incredibly important part of the community fabric where people 
would gather and meet. And in fact my dad was telling me that 
there’s still some . . . The Harwood School burned down I think 
in 1963, but dad said there’s some valuable coins that are still in 
the basement there, and maybe we should go and dig them up 
sometime. So I don’t know if that’s ever going to happen but, 
you know, it’s just a nice legend that I may want to pass on to 
my kids sometime about what happened when the school 
burned down at Harwood. And certainly that was a little bit 
before my time. 
 
I went to school in town. I didn’t go to the local school, the 
local one-room school house. But that’s part of my stories 
growing up were those stories of my dad. His sister was one of 
the very first teachers there, and his aunt was also one of the 
first teachers there. And just rereading those stories in the 
history book a couple weeks ago, I just found it to be very 
refreshing and dear in many ways to realize that those stories 
still exist, and I’m glad they were written down. 
 
So when it comes to the demise of that kind of community life 
or the shrinking of population, we have to have a way for 
communities to voluntarily reorganize themselves so that it 
makes sense. And I think the section 51.1 in this Act is 

attempting to do that. Certainly the minister indicated that 
SUMA and SARM are supportive of this, and he actually said 
that this is a response to a request from the SUMA to create 
these types of legislative amendments. 
 
He did go on to say near the end of his comments that the 
ministry did consult extensively on these amendments with both 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association and through 
them also with the municipal administrator associations. And I 
know the minister has some ties, having worked in that area 
himself, so obviously he’s well placed to do the consultations. 
He indicated the consultations took place in April, between 
April and September of last year and there was all kinds of 
meetings, presentations, and sharing of drafts.  
 
So I think the minister is attempting to listen to those concerns, 
and his staff have made a real effort to incorporate those 
concerns and bring them into reality in this draft of section 51.1. 
So the first part of the section gives some definitions of the 
former municipality and the local government Act and then the 
urban municipality. 
 
And it says here . . . they can make an application, so that’s 
51.1(2) where it says:  
 

The councils of at least one rural municipality and at least 
one urban municipality may apply to the minister to 
incorporate as a municipal district.  

 
No. 3 says the application mentioned must be in the form that 
the minister requires, which is a typical kind of clause. And 
then the minister, if he is in agreement under subsection 4, 
would provide the incorporation and give a name to the district 
and allow for the establishment of a new council of the district. 
 
So I think, you know, one of the tricky parts is, when you have 
rural municipalities and urban municipalities amalgamating, 
there’s obviously two pieces of legislation that come into being, 
so there’s provisions in this new Act to cover off with that kind 
of responsibility as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think at this point that’s probably the extent of 
the comments I wanted to make on this bill. I think it’s a good 
idea. I think, you know, the minister is listening to the rural 
organizations, urban organizations, that are requiring this kind 
of change. Obviously, you know, no government wants to force 
amalgamations, so we’ll see how this goes and if it will actually 
address the growing concerns in these areas of about capacity 
and the ability to raise, basically raise enough taxes to manage 
the rural municipal affairs and the smaller urban affairs as well. 
 
So I think, as I said, other people will want to comment, but at 
this point, I would like to adjourn the debate on Bill 116, The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 
2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



4540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2014 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 117 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 117 — The 
Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 
2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 117, to wade 
into the debate on this one, is an Act to make a consequential 
amendment to The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995 resulting 
from the enactment on The Municipalities Amendment Act, 
2013. And as you’re aware, Mr. Speaker, I just spoke to the 
proposed amendments to The Municipalities Amendment Act, 
2013 which was the previous Bill 116. 
 
And so what happens here is our good friends over at Justice 
have gone carefully through all other bills that might be 
impacted by the changes made to The Municipalities Act. The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, one of the biggest things they 
did was they had to add the phrase municipal district in a 
number of clauses, and I didn’t go through that in my comments 
on the previous bill. But if you can imagine wherever rural 
municipality shows up in The Municipalities Act, they’re 
proposing amendments to add the words municipal district as 
well to that clause. So then that’s fine for The Municipalities 
Act. But what about other Acts? 
 
So what people had to do, and I just keep thinking how useful 
the search or find feature is on computers these days because it 
used to be in the old days, you’d have to go through line by line 
and read the legislation to find these things. But nowadays we 
have the opportunity to hit find and put in the word, and away 
we go. So, is Mr. Speaker willing to make a guess on how many 
bills would have the requirement of changes in this? Possibly 
not. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the changes that are required for this 
bill and the consequential amendments Act, there’s only one 
other Act that is actually affected by it. I was surprised by that. I 
thought it might be more. But at any rate, the Act that does 
require changes — and I know you’re sitting on the edge of 
your chair just waiting to find out what it is — it is The 
Non-profit Corporations Act, surprisingly. And why is that? 
Well, there’s a section in The Non-profit Corporations Act that 
actually defines the word municipality. So in order to reflect the 
changes in Bill 116 that are being brought forward, there’s a 
need to amend it. 
 
So what we have is in subsection 2(1) of The Non-profit 
Corporations Act is being amended, in this case in the 
definition of municipality by adding, comma, municipal district 
after rural municipality. So it would now read, municipality 
means a city, town, village, rural municipality, municipal 
district, or northern municipality. 
 
So I think, you know, again I’m quite surprised that there 

weren’t any other bills that required this definition change, but 
it looks like it’s only The Non-profit Corporations Act that has 
the definition of municipality that is requiring changes. 
 
The minister in his comments was very brief in terms of what 
he had to say about this bill, understandably. And what he said, 
Mr. Speaker, was it makes an amendment to a bilingual Act as a 
result of the introduction of The Municipalities Amendment Act. 
So that’s the other reason why this is being done separately, is 
because The Municipalities Act is, or sorry, The Non-profit 
Corporations Act, 1995 is actually a bilingual Act. And so why 
not take a whirl at it in French as well? We can talk about it. 
And here in French the new clause is going to read like, well we 
don’t have it in the explanatory notes. But: 
 

Le paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés 
sans but lucratif est modifié à la définition de « 
municipalité » par adjonction de «, district municipal » 
après « municipalité rurale ». 

 
So in French the new phrase for municipal district is district 
municipal. And so I think that’s pretty straightforward, but 
because it’s a bilingual Act it had to be done separately. And as 
the minister indicated, it’s just going to ensure that the statute 
applies to municipal districts in the same way as it did to former 
municipalities that have now merged to become a municipal 
district. 
 
The minister closed his comments by indicating that the 
amendments will provide flexibility and choice for interested 
urban and rural municipalities to voluntarily join together to 
form a new type of municipality for the benefit of their 
residents. And certainly that’s giving some of the flexibility I 
think that the good folks over in the municipal level of 
government have been asking for. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think this is just a continuing part of the 
story of Saskatchewan in many ways where we see, as I said, 
555 rural municipalities or more, maybe 560. I know Big River 
is 555, so I know for sure there is that many. And I looked 
recently and I think there was up to 560, or I think the highest 
number of municipalities is in the northeast area. So perhaps 
one of my colleagues across the way would know what the 
highest municipality number is. The Big River is no. 555, but 
there are not 555 municipalities. There is certainly quite a few 
less than that. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, that’s about all I have to say on 
this bill. And I would like to move to adjourn debate on Bill 
117. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 117, The Municipalities Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being near the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

http://www.publications.gov.sk.ca/details.cfm?p=737
http://www.publications.gov.sk.ca/details.cfm?p=737




 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4509 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4509 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4509 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4509 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4509 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4509 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4510 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Celebrating Canadian Athletes at Sochi Olympics 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4510 
 St. Gregor Family at Brier Competition 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4510 
 Saskatchewan Musician Wins Prestigious Award 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4510 
 Impaired Driving Awareness Week 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4511 
 Regina Hosts Women’s University Volleyball Championship 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4511 
 Premier’s Award of Excellence to Lakeland Resident 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4511 
 National Nutrition Month 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4512 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Financial Support for Care Facilities 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4512 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4512 
 Grain Transportation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4514 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4514 
 Provision of Surgeries in Regina 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4515 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4515 
 Carbon Capture Project 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4516 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4516 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Crisis in Ukraine 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4516 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4517 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Crisis in Ukraine 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4517 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4520 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4520 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 127 — The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4520 
 Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4523 
 Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government Administration Act  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4524 
 Bill No. 130 — The Executive Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government Administration Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4527 
 Bill No. 126 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4527 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4529 



 

 Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4529 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4529 
 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4529 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4530 
 Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4530 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4531 
 Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4531 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4531 
 Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4532 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4532 
 Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4533 
 Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4534 
 Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4535 
 Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4536 
 Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4537 
 Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4540 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


