
























































Hansard: March 31, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 42A  MONDAY, MARCH 31, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5003 
 March 31, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you some guests in 
your gallery that indeed are from your part of Saskatchewan. 
The Camerons have joined us, Ron and Stacy Cameron and 
their four kids: Brody, 17; Alexa, 10, maybe they can just give 
us a wave; Mazie’s 8; and Wyatt is 7. There’s Wyatt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the chance to meet Ron and Stacy at 
Riderville on the occasions that I happened to get to Riderville 
during Grey Cup. And they indicated to me that Mazie was 
particularly interested at a very young age in politics, and 
interested in the legislature and was interested in meeting, if we 
could arrange that some day. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad we’ve 
been able to do that. We’re going to meet with them a little bit 
later on and talk a little bit about this building and what they 
may have just witnessed here at question period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Camerons are farmers, organic farmers in southeast 
Saskatchewan near Redvers. Storthoaks is where they make 
their home. He also works in the energy sector and she’s a 
health care aid. So they’ve got two full-time jobs between the 
farm and what they’re doing, and then their kids are involved in 
archery and ball and in dance, Mr. Speaker. So they’re just a 
great example of really the best that we can claim of our 
province, not our resources but our families and our people. 
And we want to say to them that they’re welcomed in this 
particular Assembly and that I look forward to meeting them a 
little bit later on. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if all members would 
join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Premier in welcoming the Cameron family to the Assembly. 
To Ron and Stacy, it’s great to see a family taking an interest in 
the democratic process and having a good family outing, seeing 
what goes on in the Assembly today. And so I would again just 
extend a welcome and wish you all the best as you’re busy 
raising your family in your part of the province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll have a couple of rounds of introductions. First, 
helping us to mark Adult Learners’ Week, we have students 
here from SIIT, the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies, in both the construction careers apprenticeship 
program as well as the educational assistants program. 
 
And so I’ll just ask them to wave as I read out their names: 

Tamara Tanner, Sheldon Dustyhorn, Laban Kuria, Steven Lerat, 
Claire Akapew, Morningstar Asapace, Priscilla McNab, 
Santanna Nagy, and Shania Obey. And they’re also here 
accompanied by their instructor, Linda Bird. And I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming these students from SIIT, 
which is doing great work across the province. Welcome all of 
these students to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And while I’m on my feet, this 
morning we had an opportunity to highlight some of the good 
works that have been undertaken by Mitacs, and this is a 
national network focusing on research and science. And so I’d 
like to highlight the presence of Forrest Parlee who is the 
director of partnerships at Mitacs; Christopher Bowman, the 
director of business development.  
 
As well, we have some entrepreneurs that have participated in 
and benefited from the program: Suzanne Paschall who is with 
Indie Ink Publishing, David Callele is also here from 
Experience First Design. And importantly, most importantly we 
are also able to welcome some students who have benefited 
from the program: Richard Lomotey and Lorie 
Peters-Whiteman are also here. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome these fine 
individuals that are helping to make that transition from 
learning to earning all the more propitious for everyone 
involved. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members to join in 
welcoming these students and participants to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the guests from the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology here, both Ms. 
Bird and the students. If I gather from the names throughout 
Treaty 4, I think there was a strong Kawacatoose presence 
amongst the names there. But good to see those students here 
today at their Legislative Assembly and to help celebrate Adult 
Learners’ Week. 
 
And as well the individuals from Mitacs, congratulations on the 
scholarships both to the officials with Mitacs itself, but 
entrepreneurs and students that have taken advantage of the 
offerings of Mitacs. Good to see you here today celebrating this 
important enrichment of research and science in our province 
and in our critical post-secondary education sector. And I’d be 
remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t say a very special hello to Lorie 
Peters-Whiteman. Good to see you here in your Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, Tom Graham who is sitting in the east gallery. And 
as we all know Tom in various roles that he plays, but he’s 
president of the Saskatchewan Division of CUPE, the Canadian 
Union of Public Employees. He’s always been a strong voice 
for working women and men here in Saskatchewan, but he’s 
also a strong advocate for the public interest and all that we do. 
So he’s very interested in what we do here in this legislature. I 



5004 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2014 

ask all members to welcome Tom to his legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming Mr. Graham to the 
legislature today. I spoke at their conference recently, and it was 
at that time that Mr. Graham was acclaimed as the 
Saskatchewan president, so I was able to congratulate him 
there. So I’d like, on behalf of all members, to congratulate him 
on his recent acclamation. 
 
Later today, I will find out whether I’m acclaimed to be the 
candidate in my own constituency, and I will be looking to Mr. 
Graham for advice in that area. In any event, on behalf of all 
members, I would like to welcome him to the Assembly today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition against Saskatchewan health care laundry 
privatization. And we know that in May 2013, the Government 
of Saskatchewan had announced its plans to privatize health 
care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over to a for-profit, 
Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linens, and that as a result of 
that decision to privatize health care laundry, six non-profit 
health care laundry facilities will be closed within two years in 
the communities of Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, 
Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon. And we know that the 
privatization of health care laundry will mean the devastating 
loss of over 300 good-paying jobs, devastating local economies 
and families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in the 
devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse vital taxpayer dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 
an Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 
privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 
risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 
over laundry and thereby will have a significantly reduced 
ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents that 

are in support of safety on Dewdney Avenue and rerouting the 
heavy-haul truck traffic from Dewdney Avenue. The residents 
state that any further delays by that government are 
unacceptable in addressing an unsafe condition created by that 
government. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program also known as RPO. These families 
are very proud homeowners in their communities. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 
ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 
the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 
destroyed for many families in the North. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 
government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
It’s signed by many people of this province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud to stand today to present a petition on highways once 
again. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer, respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to commit on repairing 
and upgrading Highway 908. 

 
And Highway 908 is the highway that serves the English River 
First Nation and the community of Patuanak. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the people that have signed this petition are primarily from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse but, as I’ve said before, there are petitions 
signed from all throughout the province. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 



March 31, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5005 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present the 
following petition for real action on climate change. The 
residents who signed the petition want to bring to the 
legislature’s attention the following: that Saskatchewan 
produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions per capita in all 
of Canada; that Saskatchewan’s emissions have continued to 
grow to 74 million megatonnes as reported by Environment 
Canada in October 2013 and show no signs of decreasing; that 
the Saskatchewan government has failed to tackle climate 
change, reduce emissions to the province’s own targets, or put 
in a real plan to protect the natural environment; that slashing 
programs such as the Go Green Fund and the EnerGuide for 
Houses energy efficiency programs set the province on a 
backward course; and that since 2009 the Government of 
Saskatchewan has reduced climate change funding by 83 per 
cent, including another 35 per cent cut in the 2014-15 budget.  
 
So in the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan enacts a real plan and allocates appropriate 
funding in the provincial budget to tackle climate change 
by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, helping families 
transition to energy-efficient homes, and encouraging 
everyone in the province to take real action to protect the 
environment. 

 
The petitioners come from the communities of Canora, 
Melville, Prince Albert, and Wadena. And I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Middle Lake Avengers Win Gold at Hoopla 
 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to recognize the amazing basketball season of the Middle 
Lake Avengers senior girls. Mr. Speaker, this team of young 
women were dedicated to working hard to achieve their 
personal and team goals. 
 
With many young girls wanting to participate on the team, the 
Avengers started their season by entering a grade 9-10 team in 
the Horizon Central Athletic Association league. 
 
This gave the new players the practice and confidence they 
needed to participate with the senior girls. It was a great success 
with seven wins and only one loss. From there the team took off 
with tournaments in Foam Lake, Humboldt, and Kenaston, all 
of which the team ranked second place. After Christmas the 
team participated in multiple tournaments where they placed 
mostly first and second. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Middle Lake Avengers were excited to host 
the annual Avengers Athletic Basketball Classic where they 
won this tournament for the first time since 2008. This led the 
team to the Saskatchewan High School Athletic Association 
regionals where they advanced to the all-important Hoopla 
championship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very excited to announce that all their hard 
work and practice time paid off. The Middle Lake Avengers 

won gold for the first time ever in the 1A Hoopla championship 
division. Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all the Avengers 
senior girls team on their great season and recognize their team 
and their coach, Trevor Otsig, on all their wonderful work and 
their win of a gold medal this season. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Truth and Reconciliation Commission Hearings 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission wrapped up nearly four years of 
public hearings which gave survivors of Canada’s residential 
schools a chance to tell their stories of abuse. 
 
For over a century, Aboriginal children were removed from 
their families and forced to attend residential schools. The 
trauma of being ripped away from their families was horrible 
enough for these children, but we know many of them also 
experienced horrendous abuse. The treatment of these children 
and their families is an incredibly dark chapter in our history. 
 
I attended the Truth and Reconciliation Commission hearings in 
Prince Albert and in Saskatoon, and I am still deeply moved by 
the heartbreaking stories I heard: heartbreaking stories about the 
children that were taken, heartbreaking stories about the parents 
that were left behind, and heartbreaking stories about the effects 
on the next generations. 
 
To all those who courageously shared their stories with the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and to all those who 
couldn’t share their stories but who still carry the burden of that 
trauma, we as a society must ask forgiveness for failing them so 
profoundly. And we must take seriously the task of working for 
healing and reconciliation to bring people and communities 
together and to work for better and brighter shared futures. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 
 

Adult Learners’ Week 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 
is pleased to mark March 29th to April 6th as Adult Learners’ 
Week in Canada. The week promotes the importance of adult 
literacy while raising the profile of lifelong learning and access 
to education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, adult literacy, adult basic education and training 
as well as lifelong learning are important to our growing 
economy. As part of the Saskatchewan plan for growth, we 
need to add 60,000 more people to our workforce by 2020, so 
our government is committed to supporting adult literacy, adult 
education, and lifelong learning initiatives in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, the government has provided a record investment 
of 5.5 billion in post-secondary education funding to ensure 
learners are well trained to enter our labour market. 
 
Our post-secondary system also provides inclusive 
programming for adult learners to begin, continue, or upgrade 
academic studies and other training. In 2014-15 the 



5006 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2014 

Government of Saskatchewan is investing 25 million in adult 
basic education and foundational skills programs in 
Saskatchewan, which will increase the number of ABE [adult 
basic education] training seats to 8,580. The budget also 
provides 31 million through the provincial training allowance 
for living allowances and child care costs for those in ABE and 
short-term skills training programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is pleased to commemorate this 
week as Adult Learners’ Week. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Transgender Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize the third 
annual Trans Awareness Week in our province. This week 
provides an opportunity to inform and raise awareness about 
challenges facing the sex- and gender-diverse community, 
while celebrating the lives of transsexual, transgender, and 
intersex people across Saskatchewan. 
 
I would also like to recognize the important work of TransSask 
Support Services in helping provide services to meet the needs 
of trans-identified and gender-diverse people within 
Saskatchewan. We believe that all people of Saskatchewan 
should have the resources and support to lead their lives 
however they wish to and to have their needs accommodated 
without being hindered by discriminatory practices. 
 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms that all 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights, and 
that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth 
in that instrument without distinction of any kind. The acts of 
violence and discrimination directed towards people because of 
gender identity or gender expression are unacceptable. I’ve 
called for greater protection by changing The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code to include the terms gender identity and 
gender expression as prohibited grounds for discrimination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to recognize and celebrate 
Trans Awareness Week and TransSask for their important work 
supporting the sex- and gender-diverse community and to 
pledge continued support to the goal of helping transgendered 
people feel safe and supported in their communities. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Strong Kids Campaign Megathon 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 
the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley and myself had the 
great opportunity to attend the YMCA [Young Men’s Christian 
Association] Strong Kids Campaign Mega Carnival. 
 
The Megathon began with the Mega Swim-a-thon, which is a 
swim equivalent to Wascana Lake, which was preceded by the 
Mega Carnival which featured the Riders challenge, carnival 
games. The Mega Cannonball was next, and the evening 
finished off with the Mega Endless Cycle, which is a 
challenging three-hour cycle event. 

Mr. Speaker, the megathon is an event focused on getting 
children, youth, and families active in the community, and they 
raise awareness about childhood obesity and inactivity. In 
Canada, one in five children are overweight or obese, which can 
lead to many chronic health conditions. Childhood obesity rates 
have tripled over the last 25 years in Canada, and around 93 per 
cent of children are not meeting the required 60 minutes of 
activity a day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is working to ensure that all 
families, no matter their financial situation, can help their 
children to become more active through the active families 
benefit. This fully refundable tax benefit helps families with the 
cost of their children’s participation in cultural, recreational, or 
sports activities. Healthier children is something that we are all 
eager, in this province, to see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
the YMCA Strong Kids campaign on a successful megathon 
event and thank them for the work they are doing to promote a 
healthy lifestyle for all of our children across Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Café Contributes to Community 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 
the House to share the story of the Happy Nun Café in the 
southeast town of Forget in your constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Owned by locals Don, Shannon, Tim, Donna, Dave, and 
Dorothy, the café has ran with the philosophy of feeding your 
soul as well as your body and believing in the future of rural 
Saskatchewan. One of the most important ways they do this is 
providing their community with opportunities to express 
themselves onstage through music and giving their guests an 
opportunity to experience live music. The owners prepare and 
serve the food and follow with their own musical performance, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They took the value one step further a year ago by donating all 
of the proceeds from the open mike nights to Souls Harbour 
Mission in Regina to help those who cannot afford to feed 
themselves. In the last year, Mr. Speaker, they have donated 
over $10,000 to Souls Harbour. I was fortunate to attend a 
recent open mike night when the Walbaum family from 
Stoughton, consisting of Aaron, Jacquie, and two of their three 
children, Micah and Aaliyah, showed off their talents to the 
crowd. Ten-year old Micah performed a song she wrote and 
accompanied herself on the guitar, and she was absolutely great. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing and 
congratulating the owners and performers of the Happy Nun 
Café on their successful business and contributions to the 
community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Support for Public-Private Partnerships 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in a 



March 31, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5007 

scrum, the member from Athabasca was asked whether the 
construction of new bridges in Saskatoon ought to proceed 
using a P3 [public-private partnership] model. Given the track 
record of the members opposite, we expected a long-winded, 
process-focused answer which ignored the merits of the P3 
model. However, this time the member from Athabasca 
surprised us. He said, “Saskatoon needs a bridge. We can’t 
leave money on the table. It’s good for the economy so we’ve 
got to take advantage of it.” 
 
That member agreed with the federal NDP [New Democratic 
Party], which said the P3 model can enable greater value for 
money for some infrastructure projects. The member decided to 
stand with his federal leader, Thomas Mulcair, who said a P3 
can be the right solution in certain cases. 
 
The member from Athabasca is in agreement with the Finance 
minister of the Manitoba NDP who said, “Public-private 
partnerships can provide an opportunity for the public sector to 
build projects more efficiently.” The member from Athabasca 
knows that stubbornly refusing federal dollars simply for the 
sake of ideology just isn’t good Saskatchewan common sense. 
 
So now the question remains, Mr. Speaker: will the leader of 
the members opposite join the member from Athabasca, stand 
with their federal leader, and support the P3 process when it 
makes sense in providing the infrastructure this growing 
province needs? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Federal Funding for Health Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Canada’s health 
accord expires today. What this means for the province of 
Saskatchewan is that we will lose $1 billion in federal funding 
for health care over the next decade. 
 
This is a direct result, Mr. Speaker, of a federal government that 
has very little interest in supporting Canada’s most cherished 
social program. It’s also the direct result of a Premier that has 
refused to stand up for Saskatchewan and demonstrate real 
leadership on this important file. My question to the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker: why has he refused to stand up to the federal 
Conservatives on the health accord? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I reject the premise of my hon. friend’s question with 
respect to, especially with respect to the health file. 
 
Actually, Mr. Speaker, our province has demonstrated 
leadership through things like the innovation Health ministers’ 
working group where we have seen millions of dollars saved as 
a result of the joint purchase of pharmaceuticals, for example; 
where we’re overseeing and have sponsored a number of 
innovation initiatives that will result in efficiencies right across 
the country in terms of best practices, in terms of improving the 
deployment of health care resources in looking at scope of 
practice, Mr. Speaker. 

And moreover, what we have also expressed is a 
disappointment with the federal government’s funding formula. 
We had asked as a province that there be a separate innovation 
fund that could be allocated to provinces that were 
demonstrating a willingness to move out, to set bold goals in 
the health care sector as we have done here including surgical 
wait times, including our goals around emergency services, that 
those provinces be recognized. 
 
However I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that what we have 
said we needed to avoid was what we saw in the ’90s where, 
rather than an escalator, a permanent escalator as a part of 
health care funding going forward, we saw cuts to the provinces 
from the federal government. We’re not there, thank goodness. 
We see increases. We’re still advocating for innovation 
funding, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll continue to do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we’ve seen 
from the Premier on this particular file is actually pretty 
embarrassing. While the federal government refused to renew 
the Canada Health Accord and said it will scale back federal 
funding of health care to the tune of $1 billion for 
Saskatchewan over the next decade, the Premier actually 
supported the federal government and said it’s fine, that the 
provinces will fill the void, as if that is some small, little void 
that needs to be addressed, while the parliamentary budget 
officer says this will place a huge fiscal burden on provincial 
governments and make it increasingly difficult for them to 
afford to deliver health care. 
 
My question to the Premier: does he agree with the 
parliamentary budget officer, and why doesn’t he stand up for 
Saskatchewan’s interests? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, obviously we would like to 
see larger increases than what the federal government has 
agreed to provide the provinces. And let’s understand the 
debate here. The debate is around the size of the increase in 
funding in transfers that are going to come from the federal 
government. Would we like to see those at a higher level? Yes. 
Have we communicated that to the federal government, along 
with other premiers in the country? Yes, we’ve done that, Mr. 
Speaker. Moreover, we’ve taken the additional step of 
suggesting to the federal government that they consider an 
innovation fund, especially to be applied to those provinces that 
are prepared to set goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in health care today, in terms of a government 
standing up for Saskatchewan people, in health care today we 
have a government that is not shying away from setting bold 
goals in terms of reducing wait times for surgery. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re making significant progress on that front. We have not 
shied away from setting important goals around emergency care 
and other parts of the health care system. We are going to 
continue to do that, and we would want a federal government to 
recognize those kinds of initiatives with innovation funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work towards that, Mr. 
Speaker, but it is important to note that we are talking about the 



5008 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2014 

level of increase here from the federal government in terms of 
transfers and not an outright cut, fortunately, as we saw from 
the Liberal government in the ’90s. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is that the Premier has 
been far too consumed with promoting his lean pet project, 
telling other provinces that they should follow suit, Mr. 
Speaker, and unsuccessfully begging the Prime Minister for an 
innovation fund. 
 
If only the Premier would listen to front-line health care 
workers like registered nurse Laurelle Pachal who has a letter in 
the paper today. She says, “Right now, there are nurses feeling 
pressure to put patient care needs on hold . . .” She goes on: 
 

Nurses on units have been ‘volun-told’ to participate in the 
patient-flow project, and describe feeling heavily 
scrutinized by lean specialists monitoring with clipboards 
and stopwatches, often while also under the pressure of 
deliberate short-staffing because shifts have not been 
replaced or vacant lines remain empty. 

 
Patient needs put on hold because of lean; deliberate 
short-staffing: this is the reality in hospitals and care facilities 
today in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. To the Premier: how 
much does he need to hear before he’ll put a stop to this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the lean project has already 
recovered more in savings to the taxpayer than it cost the 
government. We’ve been able to see those savings in two years 
of the four-year program. Moreover we’ve seen improvements 
in patient care, in patient-centred care initiatives right across the 
piece. So, Mr. Speaker, obviously we’re going to continue with 
the program that’s delivering those sorts of results. 
 
We’re certainly open to improvements to the lean program as it 
moves forward. That has been stated over and over in this 
Assembly, and it remains the case today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier has tunnel vision 
when it comes to lean, and he’s ignoring the other needs, the 
important needs, the basics that we have in health care. 
 
Registered nurse Laurelle Pachel also says this: “My unit’s 
nurses are mandated to attend lean training for their June 
education day instead of the clinical education that improves 
nurses’ clinical practice and delivers yearly skills 
certifications.” She goes on to say: 
 

So in June, nurses will make paper airplanes! They also 
will hear about Muda, Muri and Gemba. They will hear 
that lean is great, that it’s improving their work, and that 
it’s engaging them. But they don’t see that happening . . . 
 
They won’t feel collaborated with, consulted or engaged 

— and may be resentful and disillusioned. Decisions and 
directives are not putting patient-care issues first. 

 
[14:00] 
 
So we have nurses saying that patients’ needs, Mr. Speaker, are 
being put on hold because of lean. We have deliberate 
short-staffing of shifts in the health care. We have nurses who 
are being forced, Mr. Speaker, to take paper airplane lessons, 
learn Japanese terminology, instead of taking the clinical 
training that they should be having. That’s the reality in our 
health care system today. My question to the Premier: how on 
earth is this acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition quotes from a letter to the editor today, and we want 
to hear from that particular member of SUN [Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses]. We have heard from many other members of 
SUN. We have heard from doctors. We’ve heard from the SMA 
[Saskatchewan Medical Association], his previous employer 
when he was a researcher there, who have said that lean is a 
good thing, that what we are doing in this province is the right 
thing to do. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the president of SUN’s 
message to all of the members, March 27th, very, very recent, 
she says this. She thanks nurses for joining the lean 
conversation and says: 
 

I feel hopeful and encouraged that the positive aspects, and 
there are many [she says], can be translated into practical 
benefits for patients. [She says] We’ve made it clear and 
we’ll go on the record again, that there’s absolutely no 
doubt that lean has helped identify waste and make 
improvements and we will support our members’ 
continued engagement at work. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s from the president of SUN. Now the hon. 
member says, well we’re focused on one thing or the other and 
not results. Here are some results that came out last week: 
number of people waiting for surgery more than 18 months, 
down 97 per cent; number of patients waiting more than one 
year for surgery, down 93 per cent; more than six months, 83 
per cent; more than three months, 70 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
That is results for Saskatchewan patients. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, $40 million to one US [United 
States] consultant, flying senseis from Japan, paying them 
$3,500 a day plus airfare, Mr. Speaker — this government has 
lost its way. They’ve signed a fat cash cow contract when it 
comes to lean. 
 
We keep hearing incredibly concerning details about the quality 
of health care here in Saskatchewan. We hear about chronic 
short-staffing in hospitals and in care facilities. We’ve heard 
about families, Mr. Speaker, that hire private care providers to 
go into the hospital because there are not enough front-line 
staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, absolutely we need a federal partner in health 
care. We need the federal government, and they should 



March 31, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5009 

absolutely renew the Canada Health Accord. But we also need a 
provincial government, Mr. Speaker, that is focused on fixing 
the basics and not focused on pouring untold millions into its 
flagship lean project, a project, Mr. Speaker, that front-line 
health care workers are saying is getting in the way of patient 
safety and is getting in the way of quality of care for patients. 
 
My question to the Premier: when will he listen to front-line 
health care workers? When will he stop wasting taxpayers’ 
dollars on the fat contract? When will he start fixing the basics 
in health care and seniors’ care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the president of SUN, as of 
late last week, on the 27th of March, the president of SUN 
representing the front-line workers — and you can ignore the 
fact that it is read in quotes because it doesn’t fit with the line of 
questions he came up with prior to question period — says, “I 
feel hopeful and encouraged that positive aspects, and there are 
many [she adds parenthetically], can be translated into practical 
benefits for patients.” Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen similar quotes 
from patients involved in lean, from the nurses involved in the 
front line in lean. 
 
There are concerns. There’s 40,000 people working in the 
health care sector. We’re going to listen to those concerns and 
seek to adjust and improve lean. But we’re not going to, Mr. 
Speaker, do away with a program that’s already saved more in 
tax dollars than it costs. And we’re not going to do away with a 
program that improves patient-centred care, Mr. Speaker. And 
when it comes to focusing on results, we’ll put our record up 
against his party’s record any day of the week, because we’ve 
seen surgical wait times come down. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what’s happening today in the 
province? A thousand more nurses are working today than they 
were under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. Almost 300 more doctors 
practising today than there were under the NDP, more nurse 
practitioners, more front-line workers, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why, that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing some 
improvements, with the recognition that more work needs to be 
done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Care of Landfills 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The landfill at 
Katepwa started burning in October and it was finally put out 
late last week. The fire started on October 12th. Environment 
officials didn’t even go to the scene until January 30th, and they 
were surprised to find out how big the fire still was three 
months later. To the minister: why did it take so long to 
investigate? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much to the 
member for the question. It’s always a pleasure to talk about 
this government’s environmental record compared to members 
opposite, that’s for sure. 

Mr. Speaker, the fire at Katepwa, as the member indicated, has 
been under way for quite some time. I understand, as recently as 
last week, that it was extinguished. Environmental officials 
have been on site. I’ve been getting regular reports on it. And 
the most recent report that I received was very favourable, that 
indeed it was extinguished. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Katepwa needed this government 
to help hold up its end of the bargain and put the fire out. 
Instead the government didn’t even show up for over three 
months, despite concerns about residents’ health from the 
smouldering fire. And what the government said to local 
officials is that the ministry is “not a service provider.” 
 
The Katepwa emergency management official wrote back, 
saying, “I must note that smaller towns, villages, and resort 
hamlets have very limited staff or no staff. We do expect some 
assistance on matters we are not experts in.” Local officials 
believe that this fire would not have lasted so long if the 
provincial government had lived up to its responsibilities. To 
the minister: why did this government refuse to help put this 
fire out, and why did the landfill have to burn for almost six 
months? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much for the 
question. This government is very proud of its record in dealing 
with communities about environmental concerns. Whether it’s 
Kindersley, whether it’s Katepwa, or any other community, this 
government takes our responsibility very serious. 
 
We just recently went through SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] and SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association], and the meetings that we 
had with those communities are very favourable about the way 
this government treats the environmental concerns that they 
have and the innovation that this government is putting forward, 
something that we never saw from members opposite for 16 
long years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, if this government takes it so 
seriously, why did the Provincial Auditor blast them in 
December for failing to properly regulate, monitor, and inspect 
Saskatchewan’s 700-plus landfills? 
 
And when we hear that this government didn’t even attend to a 
landfill fire for three months and it didn’t help put the fire out 
and let it burn for almost six months, that’s a major concern to 
the people of Katepwa and to Saskatchewan people. 
 
To the minister: when will this government take seriously its 
responsibility for landfills? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 



5010 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2014 

Speaker. Thank you for the question. This government does 
take it very serious. As the member indicated, there are some 
700 landfills in the province. And we will put our record up 
against the members’ record any day of the week as we work 
together to address the challenges that are put in place, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We certainly want to work with those communities. We realize 
that things can’t be done overnight. Certainly members opposite 
did not address it when they were in government. We continue 
to look at it through revenue sharing and other members . . . We 
work with communities, with rural municipalities. We will have 
a solution. It will be an innovative solution that we can be proud 
of. That’s more than I can say for the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

New Bridge for Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
week we heard two different stories from this government about 
a second bridge in Prince Albert. The Minister of Highways 
said this government is adamant that P.A. [Prince Albert] does 
not need a second bridge and that this government will not help 
fund one. But then the Premier said this government would 
actually consider supporting a second bridge for Prince Albert 
but only if it is a P3 bridge. 
 
So to the Premier: which is it? Does this government think 
Prince Albert needs a second bridge or not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the member for his 
question, and I want to thank him for his support of P3s in the 
province. We have one member over there at least who’s going 
to get beyond the ideology of at least the provincial NDP — not 
the federal NDP perhaps because they already also support P3s. 
But the Leader of the Opposition just can’t bring himself to 
support a P3 even if it means a school in his own constituency, 
Mr. Speaker. So kudos to the member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work with the city of Saskatoon. 
As you know, they have a proposal to PPP Canada 
[Public-Private Partnership Canada]. 
 
I was asked in Prince Albert, if the people of Prince Albert were 
going to put their own money up and were going to apply to 
PPP Canada, would we consider being a part of that? I said, Mr. 
Speaker, we’d never turn down a meeting under those 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current request has been for the province to 
completely fund a new bridge, and the traffic numbers simply 
don’t warrant it. That’s what the study has shown that was 
actually sponsored by the city of Prince Albert together with the 
ministry. But we welcome the support of the member for P3s. 
We hope that it continues, Mr. Speaker, through schools and 
through other infrastructure that we need to build in the 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
P.A. Daily Herald reported: 
 

Regarding the perennial issue of a second bridge over the 
North Saskatchewan River, Wall said the government 
would monitor the success of the commuter bridge in 
Saskatoon based on a P3 and would be willing to converse 
with the mayor and city council should they choose that 
road. 

 
So this government has been steadfastly refusing to admit that 
Prince Albert needs a second bridge. But the Premier now says 
that the government would talk, would talk to Prince Albert 
mayor and council if and only if the city chooses a P3 bridge. 
 
So the question of whether or not P.A. needs a second bridge 
shouldn’t depend on what model is being proposed. It either 
needs a second bridge or it doesn’t. So once again to the 
Premier: which is it? Does he think Prince Albert needs a 
second bridge or not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member for 
Athabasca has got me cold, Mr. Speaker. I admit to my 
admission, Mr. Speaker. We said simply to the people of Prince 
Albert through the media that if the city was going to go ahead 
with a proposal to PPP Canada which would require the city of 
Prince Albert to make an investment, would we talk about that? 
Absolutely we would, Mr. Speaker. We’ve talked about the 
bridge project with them even after the report was done by the 
Ministry of Highways together with the city of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and if there’s ever a doubt that this government’s 
serious about infrastructure in the municipalities, just witness 
the budget that was just passed in this legislature last week with 
twinning in the budget, Mr. Speaker, for southeast 
Saskatchewan and passing lanes for 7, Mr. Speaker. We see in 
the budget the Regina bypass, the most significant Regina 
infrastructure project in a very, very long time, and yes, an 
interest as well in proceeding with the commuter bridge for 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, this side of the House is about 
building infrastructure for a growing economy. And unlike 
members opposite, we’ll look at traditional builds and we’ll 
look at P3s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Prince Albert 
need commitment, not talk and not just a play of words, Mr. 
Speaker. No wonder the people of Prince Albert and area are so 
frustrated with their local Sask Party MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] because they are so ineffective and they 
refuse to stand up for what matters to the people in Prince 
Albert and area. 
 
The people of Prince Albert and area and the people of northern 
Saskatchewan deserve so much better from this government, 
and that’s why today we are standing up for them and we are 
asking the question. So once again to the Premier, we need 
some financial commitment here today. Will he just admit that 



March 31, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5011 

Prince Albert needs a second bridge? And when will he finally 
say the words, we as a government, the provincial government, 
as Premier, I will commit to building a second bridge and will 
put real money into that second bridge? Will he stand up in this 
Assembly and say those words for the people of Prince Albert 
and area? Will he do that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s questions are a 
bridge too far in terms of the measure of this government’s 
commitment to Prince Albert. Because of the voice of members 
of this side of the House in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
seen historic investment in that vital city in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve seen a historic investment in brand new child care 
spaces. We’ve seen a new gym for Carlton, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
seen brand new Pineview Terrace long-term care beds. We’ve 
seen new mother-child programs. We’ve seen brand new 
addiction beds built in that community, Mr. Speaker, because of 
the efforts, because of the efforts of our MLAs who represent 
Prince Albert and area, Mr. Speaker. All of those projects 
represent additional investment over what they used to get when 
NDP members represented them. 
 
The bottom line is this, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s a twinning 
project on 11 and expediting that with the federal government 
to the benefit of P.A. and area; whether it’s other infrastructure 
and issues, we can work together with the people of Prince 
Albert. Whether it’s work with Paper Excellence to get that mill 
reanimated at least in terms of cogeneration, this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, once again when it comes to P.A., has a 
record of action versus talk from members opposite. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Environmental Protection 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a new report from the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change today and it’s a 
very concerning one. The head of the IPCC [Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change] says that the findings in the report 
should “jolt people into action.” 
 
Unfortunately when it comes to this government, we don’t see 
action on climate change. We see continual cuts. This 
government has cut climate change funding by 82 per cent since 
2009. To the Environment minister: how can he possibly justify 
that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Thanks for the question. Certainly when we talk about 
environmental records in Saskatchewan, one fact is indisputably 
true. The worst record in this province’s history was from 1991 
to 2007. Greenhouse gases increased some 60 per cent over that 
16-year period. What did our population do? It went down, Mr. 
Speaker. What did greenhouse gases do? They went up. What’s 

happening now, Mr. Speaker? The population is up. 
Greenhouse gases on a per capita basis are down 1.8 tonnes per 
person, Mr. Speaker. That’s our record compared to theirs. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the fact that this government has 
cut funding for climate change programs by 82 per cent since 
2009 isn’t surprising. It’s concerning, but it’s not surprising 
because this government has made it abundantly clear it does 
not prioritize sustainability and environmental protection. This 
government is delaying the Technology Fund. It watered down 
SaskPower’s conservation target. It cut environmental 
protection and environmental assessment. It says it’s a fallacy 
that we can increase our reliance on renewable power. It slashed 
our emission targets and presided over a significant increase in 
emissions. That’s this government’s shameful track record on 
the environment. And as a resource-producing and 
trade-dependent province, it’s reckless for us to have this kind 
of track record. 
 
To the Environment minister: with such a dismal record on the 
environment, how can he possibly justify the further cuts that 
we see in this year’s budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated 
earlier, the member’s facts just aren’t true, Mr. Speaker. When 
we look at the record of this government and the very proud 
environmental record that we do have, we can talk about the 
nearly $70 million that has been invested in the Go Green Fund, 
Mr. Speaker. We can talk about projects under that fund that 
have helped us reduce the greenhouse gas emissions in the 
province. Whether it’s the Aquistore project, whether it’s a 
wood pellet project, whether it’s the high-level wind turbine 
and storage technology that we are working together with 
Cowessess First Nations on, Mr. Speaker, this government has a 
very proud record. 
 
We can talk about the two air monitoring zones that we created, 
the stabilization of the greenhouse gases on a per capita basis. 
We became a leader in clean coal technology, Mr. Speaker. We 
have people from around the world coming here looking at us, 
and we are being a leader in that way, very far from what the 
members opposite did. Mr. Speaker, we’ve began testing our 
northern lakes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today we are talking about the budget. In 
2004 do you know what the NDP did in their budget, Mr. 
Speaker? They cut 200 people and they closed offices around 
the province, Mr. Speaker. A far cry in 10 short years. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 310. 
 



5012 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2014 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 
question 310. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 123 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 123 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
wade into the discussion about Bill No. 123, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes Repeal Act, 2013. What this bill does, Mr. Speaker, is 
exactly what it says it does. It will be . . . The new legislation 
will repeal a number of public and private health Acts, related 
Acts that, as the minister said, are obsolete and outdated. And 
that’s where I think some interpretation may come in whether 
or not in fact some of these Acts are in fact obsolete. 
 
But the public Acts that are included that will be repealed are 
The Dental Care Act, The Medical and Hospitalization Tax 
Repeal Act, The Mutual Medical and Hospital and Benefit 
Association Act, and The Senior Citizens’ Heritage Program 
Act.  
 
I think the one very interesting piece, Mr. Speaker, is the repeal 
of The Dental Care Act. I know for any of us who grew up in 
the 1970s in particular, Mr. Speaker, a big part of the regular 
visits in the schools were to the dental health nurse, Mr. 
Speaker. And it was both preventative, and children also had 
the opportunity to have some minor dental work done in their 
school. This is in essence . . . Well this was brought in by the 
Blakeney government in the 1970s as a form of prevention, Mr. 
Speaker, the second phase of medicare, as it were, in terms of 
some of the prevention things that need to happen. 
 
And I have many . . . I can’t say that I loved going to the dental 
nurse. But I do know that it was something very appreciated by 
my parents — the youngest of seven kids, one income in my 
family, and a very busy schedule my parents had. So that 
opportunity during class time to go out to see the dental health 
nurse and see if there were any problems, have a fluoride 
treatment, and deal with any minor cavities was something that 
happened in schools throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact it wasn’t until, I don’t think I saw a dentist or 
visited a dental office outside of my school until I was in grade 
7 and knocked my front tooth out playing softball, Mr. Speaker. 
So it was all those years . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . My 
colleague asks if it was a fast pitch. It was in fact a bad bounce 
on very rocky, or very bumpy terrain, Mr. Speaker. So that put 
an end to my softball career, Mr. Speaker. But in fact those 
many years of seeing a dental nurse in the school kept myself 
and all my cohorts out of needing further, more extensive dental 

care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think about my community and my constituency now at 
this point in time, Mr. Speaker, and I know there are many 
people in Saskatoon Riversdale who either can’t afford dental 
care or getting to a dental office is a big deal, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s why having clinics in schools was a very beneficial thing, 
and I think would be today. My colleague from Regina 
Lakeview pointed out that in fact in Alaska they have a program 
that they’ve modelled very much after Saskatchewan’s original 
dental care program. So I think to call that model obsolete is 
perhaps not the word that one would use, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that there are many . . . I think about the pediatric 
clinic actually at St. Mary’s School, or where the first pediatric 
clinic started at St. Mary’s School. Again it’s about bringing 
health care and bringing services to where families are and 
where children are, to do that preventative work to ensure that 
kids have what they need and grow up healthy and happy and 
have improved opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a few other pieces here that are repealed, and I know 
I’ll have an opportunity in committee to ask some further 
questions. Actually my colleague from Regina Lakeview had 
talked about the repeal of The Medical and Hospitalization Tax 
Repeal Act, and he pointed out that many people don’t 
remember that. I certainly don’t, Mr. Speaker. But there used to 
be a hospitalization or medical tax that was across the province 
on the property taxes, Mr. Speaker. And that’s been quite a long 
time since that’s happened. 
 
So another thing that’s being repealed is The Mutual Medical 
and Hospital Benefit Association Act, and again my colleague 
from Lakeview points out that what this relates to is one method 
the community clinics or one Act where community clinics 
were created. And so we now have legislation that allows for a 
couple of other ways that community clinics will be 
incorporated or could be incorporated, so this Act will no longer 
be needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I know on Bill 123, An Act to repeal miscellaneous 
obsolete Public and Private Statutes, we will have an 
opportunity in committee to ask further questions. So with that, 
I’ll complete my comments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 123, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 
(No. 2). Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 



March 31, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5013 

that Bill No. 123, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 
(No. 2) be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 124 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 124 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) 
Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la 
loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 
(No. 2) be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana 
. . . excuse me, Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — And proud of it, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter the discussion on Bill No. 124, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes Repeal Act. And this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, again 
says what the . . . It’s repealing miscellaneous statutes, a 
number again. 
 
The minister, or actually it was the House Leader, the 
Government House Leader who spoke on behalf of the minister 
in his remarks and said that this bill will repeal a number of 
public and private related Acts, that again are, he uses the 
terminology obsolete and outdated. And as a result, three other 
pieces of legislation require minor amendments to remove 
references to an Act that is being repealed, The Health 
Information Protection Act, The Insurance Premiums Tax Act, 
The Pharmacy Act, 1996. And each of these Acts will have 
references to The Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Act 
removed as it is being repealed under The Miscellaneous 
Statutes Repeal Act. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleague, again from Regina 
Lakeview, spoke to this bill as well. And it was interesting. You 
do look at the bill, Bill No. 124, so often you look to the 
minister’s comments to see what the bill is about. But if you 
look directly at the bill, it is specific around The Co-operatives 
Act and how it relates to the previous bill that I just spoke to, 
Bill No. 123, affecting a bilingual piece of legislation. And my 
colleague went on to say that The Co-operatives Act . . . it 
affects The Co-operatives Act and makes some changes in that 
Act to reflect that there’s nothing much being said by the House 
Leader on this bill or on the Minister of Health that references 
anything about The Co-operatives Act. 
 
So this bill in particular, what it does, Mr. Speaker is, where 
community clinics in the past have been incorporated under 
what was called The Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefits 
Association Act, this was one of the ways that community 
clinics could be incorporated. And when the previous 
legislation proposes to get rid of that Act, there needs to be 
amendments to The Co-operatives Act to reflect that, and these 
amendments have to be in both English and French. So that is 
what this bill is about, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 124. And when we 
move it, when we get this bill to committee, we will have some 
further questions about that. So with that, I will conclude my 
comments. 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 124, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 
2013 be now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
[14:30] 
 

Bill No. 125 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 125 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join Bill 125, 
The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013. Just to make some 
comments I guess on legislation that’s coming forward and to 
again thank the committee members. I want to acknowledge the 
colleagues in the House that came together to form a Traffic 
Safety Committee hearings that we went around the province. 
 
And this legislation is bringing in some of those 
recommendations and will deal with some of those situations 
and I guess recommendations that were brought forward by the 
committee and recommendations that were provided to the 
Legislative Assembly after going through the summer, last 
summer, and doing the hearings, going through a lot of 
information. This clears up some of the safety issues. And I 
want to talk a little bit about that and get into that. 
 
But again I just want to thank both sides of this House coming 
together to find ways of improving and, you know, preventing 
injury and saving lives. And that’s what we were asked to do. 
And I think the committee came together with 26 
recommendations. Of course we have our own minority opinion 
on one that we brought forward, and we hope at some time the 
government will look at that. 
 
But having said that, Bill 125, there are some areas in it, and 
we’ll have a lot of opportunity, I know, in committee to ask 
questions. But I just want to talk a little bit and looking at the 
booster seats was one thing. We had Dr. Martin bring forward 
from the Paediatric Society, a committee. And we heard from 
Dr. Martin, and she made it very clear. She’d referred to 
weights of children that are in booster seats, car seats, and 



5014 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2014 

heights. But also, you know, when you look at the age limit that 
she recommended was nine. And I know the government’s 
moving on a number of her recommendations, but unfortunately 
instead of going to the age of nine, for some reason seven was 
chosen. 
 
Now I just want to give you an example, my own 
grandchildren. You know, some of them are, for their age, 
seven, they’re fairly tall. And you know, they’re heavier. We 
know that. But we also have some of my grandchildren who are 
actually, when you look at their age of them, they’re not 
meeting the height or the weight, and they might be eight. And 
it’s unfortunate they don’t have to now be in a car seat. 
 
And after hearing what the doctor had to share and what the 
recommendations and why and the accidents that, I guess, the 
doctor’s concern that they had, when you see a child who’s not 
properly in an adult seatbelt and you think that child’s safe in 
there, the damage that can be done. I mean from that, I have to 
say honestly with my own vehicle, my grandchildren now, we 
have both, me and my wife, in our vehicles — and we have a 
lot of grandchildren, so trust me — we make sure that they’re in 
car seats for a reason because of safety. And it’s something we 
took for granted, I have to be honest, you know. If I wouldn’t 
have heard of the injuries that you can prevent and save injuries 
to our, you know, our children and children of the province, our 
grandchildren, you want to do that. 
 
I think we have a little bit more work to do on this. And in light 
of the recommendations, for some reason whether we didn’t, 
you know, within the committee we missed it, or whatever, with 
the age of seven, and that was decided. I’m not sure. But in 
committee, I’d like to ask more about that and find out. And we 
will be asking that. And maybe there is a chance to look at that 
and see, maybe get more information, and maybe there’s a good 
reason to change it or amend it, whatever. But anyway having 
said that, right now it’s coming before us at age seven, not nine 
as was recommended. And that in itself, we’ll work that out. 
 
The other area, you know, I want to talk about, we did make 
some great gains in impounding vehicles when somebody’s 
been under the influence of alcohol. There might be different 
reasons why and different levels. We know .08, there is 
provisions in there. But it also talked about some of the 
recommendations that came forward, was for between I guess 
the warning range is between point five and eight. And from my 
understanding, we chose to go ahead with the probationary 
driver’s licence. Your vehicle would be impounded for 72 hours 
if you were in that category. But that was for a driver’s licence, 
somebody with, you know, a probationary driver’s licence. 
 
Unfortunately we did take it serious enough and listened to the 
expert opinion and I guess the evidence that was, you know, 
came out of Alberta and BC [British Columbia] clearly stating, 
if you look at the numbers when they went with impounding, 
they saved lives. That piece of legislation did by saying no, 
we’ll do a 72-hour impoundment for even in the warning area 
of all drivers in those provinces. Clearly the data, the evidence 
was clear. 
 
And I think the different individuals or organizations that did 
the reports to the committee made it very clear what this . . . and 
the lives and injuries that were saved by, you know, taking this 

next step and moving it. And it’s unfortunately that’s one part 
of it, I have to say. And we’re going to talk about that, and we 
can in committee, we’ll do some work on that area. But that is 
truly another area where we wish, you know, that would have 
been followed, following evidence, you know, and the data that 
was provided and I guess the evidence that I think just about 50 
per cent of lives were saved by that, involving that 
impoundment in that category. 
 
So it’s unfortunate the government, you know, didn’t introduce 
it that way. But you know, there’s opportunity we can ask more 
questions. And maybe at the end the day, you know, there’s 
opportunity for government to amend, and there’s a way to do 
that. And maybe, you know, the members opposite and with 
committee members and members of the . . . We could bring it 
forward to say we can do better, and we have to do better. 
Saskatchewan people deserve better. And maybe that’s one area 
we could move on. 
 
You know, there’s about 26 recommendations that were made. 
But these are just some of the areas we’re talking about in this 
bill. And I know myself and my colleagues, we will have more 
questions when this bill goes to committee, to make sure that 
we do the due diligence and the good work that we’re asked to 
do on behalf of Saskatchewan people and those concerns. It’s a 
way to bring those issues. But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I have 
no further comments on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 125, The Traffic Safety Amendment 
Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 128 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 128 — The 
Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to enter 
into the debate on Bill No. 128, An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act and to repeal The Public 
Service Essential Services Act. And this is quite a bill before us. 
It has quite a history connected with this government in so 
many different ways. And of course it really does talk about 



March 31, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5015 

how ineffective . . . how a government can go about in so many 
wrong ways to build strong, good legislation to serve the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if there was ever to be a case study when this gets finished 
. . . Who knows when it will get finished actually because as we 
understand it will go to the Supreme Court. It’s going to be 
heard in the Supreme Court in just a short while, and that means 
the story is not over yet. And here we are, seven years, seven 
years in on something that I think is critically important but 
could have been handled in so many different ways. 
 
And there were so many opportunities to do the right thing, to 
say, how can we step back from our ideology that we know and 
I think we can all say was wrong-headed when it comes to 
protecting people, making sure they have the services they need 
but at the same time protecting the right of people to fair and 
collective bargaining? There’s got to be a way of balancing that 
out. And we’re talking about balance, aren’t we, Mr. Speaker? 
And clearly this was a case of that being thrown out the 
window. 
 
So it’s been seven years and we are not finished it. We are not 
resolved it. And while we may finish this chapter, you know, 
the second reading today, it doesn’t mean at all that it’s 
finished, which is unfortunate because I think in Saskatchewan, 
we have a long, long history of people serving, working men 
and women serving people and their families through all sorts 
of extraordinary situations to make sure people are safe, that 
they’re healthy. And somehow this went all wrong. 
 
And so today we are here to debate this Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act and to repeal the public services 
essential services Act. And I need to say that of course there’s a 
couple of parts to it. Of course the one that we often refer to 
right off the bat is, we call it the essential services legislation. 
But there’s some other parts to it too because we have to deal 
with amendments regarding minimum wage and that type of 
thing and minimum age. 
 
And of course what we’ll see in this omnibus legislation that’s 
become known as The Saskatchewan Employment Act formally 
. . . When it was in the House being debated, it was Bill 85. But 
now it’s a piece of legislation, a piece of legislation that was 
passed just about a year ago but yet to be enforced because 
there are no regulations. 
 
So we’re still using the old legislation. We’re using the old 
labour standards. We’re using the old occupational health and 
safety. We’re using the old trade union Act because of the rush, 
the rush to get this done and the cavalier attitude of the 
government to say, well why don’t we just get it done, and then 
it’ll be done? 
 
And then people are . . . But people then say, so what is the 
legislation that we’re following? Is it labour standards or is it 
employment standards? What’s the definition of employee? All 
of those kind of questions. And where do I take my concerns 
to? Is it the Labour Relations Board? They will be the people 
you take the concerns to when you have employment standards 
infraction, but if you’ve got a labour relations thing, then you 
go there. Labour standards thing, where do you go with that? 
Well you go to the ministry. So it’s just really quite, quite 

confusing. And so we have a lot to say about this, and we’ll 
have a lot to say in committee about this. 
 
But I do want to talk a bit about the seven long years, that how 
this winding road . . . And it’s not nearly over yet as we await 
what the Supreme Court says. What will happen in committee? 
And of course there will be some requests for amendments. And 
last year, Mr. Speaker, as you will remember, there were several 
last-minute amendments. And I’ll talk about some of those in 
just a minute. 
 
But I think that first we need to review this long and sordid 
story about essential services and the Sask Party government 
that started out with Bill 5. And it was introduced on December 
19th, 2007. And clearly at that point, people were taken aback 
because there were no signs that this government was going to 
be doing something as extreme as Bill 5 and 6. They were 
coupled together. And people were not prepared, and we had 
quite a lot of unrest in that year of 2008 as the government 
rammed this through. 
 
And of course I remember clearly when the International 
Labour Organization, ILO, ruled on it, saying there were major 
problems with the legislation, major problems with the 
legislation. Of course the minister at the time just said it wasn’t 
the ILO’s best day when they ruled accordingly. But then we 
had, just following that, Judge Ball’s ruling. 
 
And the whole issue really became around consultation and 
dispute resolution among other things, but those were the two 
big things, and just the way the government really acted in a 
way that was not respectful of the role of labour in a modern 
economy, especially in an economy such as Saskatchewan’s 
because in so many ways it was the working men and women 
who built this province and were there. And if you’re looking 
for a middle-class economy both to provide the services, to 
provide the necessary labour to make things work, it just wasn’t 
a respectful, a meaningful way to engage those people who 
were so important to our economy. 
 
And now of course then the government of the day then decided 
that it would appeal Judge Ball’s ruling. And of course then we 
were off to the Supreme Court, and that’s where we’re waiting 
upon right now. And we’ll wait and see what the arguments are 
and what the outcomes are in terms of essentially the right to 
strike and what are the parameters around that. 
 
[14:45] 
 
In the meantime the government decided that they would 
introduce Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. They 
said, well if we’re going to rewrite the essential services 
legislation . . . Because they’re going to have to do that. They’re 
going to have to redo Bill 5. They might as well make a bigger 
envelope for it. And they wanted to create this omnibus piece of 
legislation, the employment Act, and of course here we are. 
And it’s still struggling to make it work as we await the 
regulations. 
 
And we are curious about what are the implications of this 
legislation as people will, you know . . . Mr. Speaker, we often 
see the situation where people are kind of forewarned that 
changes are afoot because, you know, there’s been debates in 



5016 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2014 

the legislature. There will be notices. There will be different 
things. People are aware that we’re talking about these issues in 
the House. But here we already have a case of an amendment to 
Bill 85, the employment Act, and that Bill 85 has not been 
enacted. And so we’re kind of in limbo here where we’re 
amending things that aren’t even in force. And we have before 
us the essential services component which may be impacted by, 
in just a few months, a ruling from the Supreme Court of 
Canada. 
 
And of course there was an opportunity, and I would say a year 
ago there was an opportunity. And we had the media talk about 
this, and we talked about it really. We could have had an olive 
branch and say listen, why don’t we get together and work to 
make sure that labour legislation is the best it can be? And 
that’s important for all sides — the government side, for our 
perspective as . . . you know, in our roles advocating for fair 
and balanced legislation. But the government decided to rush 
forward, that it had to have this legislation passed. And here we 
are almost a year later and nothing’s really changed. Nothing’s 
really changed. 
 
And we just have a lot of questions about what was the driving 
force behind that then? What was the driving force behind that? 
What was the driving force behind the December 19th, 2007 
introduction of Bill 5? Well I think it’s about ideology, isn’t it? 
It’s about just the world view this government has when it 
comes to working men and women, and especially those who 
are organized and I would say those who are unorganized as 
well, that somehow they feel that they’re not worthy of the 
respect that they should get. 
 
And at the end of the day I have to ask, I really have to ask, and 
we’ve seen this, about why is this legislation before us. So 
much of it is unnecessary and should have been worked out in a 
much more appropriate way. People do want to make sure our 
highways are safe, that our hospitals and health care is 
accessible for those essential situations. But we all appreciate 
the fact, when it comes to fairness, there has to be a process. 
There has to be a way that people can have fair collective 
bargaining. 
 
And so with this, we have a lot of questions, and I know that 
there has been some that people have brought forward to the 
House. And I know that SEIU [Service Employees International 
Union] West for example — and the minister is well aware of 
this and so are members and I’m sure the staff of the ministry as 
well — talks about some of the needed amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act. 
 
Now it’s really important, Mr. Speaker, that we recognize the 
fact that now that this legislation is open and what’s odd now 
because you have this huge piece of legislation called the 
employment Act, that actually covers several former pieces of 
legislation that actually you can access. And I do plan on 
raising concerns about all parts of the employment Act because 
now it is open. For example though, if I had a concern about 
workers’ comp issues, I really couldn’t talk about that in this 
bill because there’s not a section relevant to that. But this bill 
does cover all sorts of things, whether it’s labour standards, 
now called employment standards, occupational health and 
safety, that type of thing. 
 

SEIU West raises concerns about division 14, talking about 
establishing multi-employer bargaining units within the health 
sector. And of course that was an issue that was raised over a 
year ago because this government had talked about how are you 
going to organize the bargaining units. And of course their 
concern was, you want to make sure that they’re bargaining 
units with . . . In fact they were doubling up the number of 
bargaining units and particularly in health regions and 
throughout the province where you wonder, how much more 
bureaucracy are we going to have to deal with in terms of new 
bargaining units and that type of thing? And how . . . 
 
It works through and it talked about the Dorsey commission and 
the regulations and the subsequent health labour relations 
reorganizations that they insist must be continued in division 14 
in the health sector. And it’s really important that they take a 
look at the amendments and that those amendments be carried 
out. 
 
And it does go on. SEIU does talk about the fragmentation of 
the bargaining unit and the issue around supervisory employee 
and what impact it will have and the potential to lead to the 
creation of three or more new bargaining units within the health 
sector, which leads to an increase in the number of collective 
agreements to negotiate and the minister. 
 
And it’s been so ironic that this government here has been so 
over-the-top in its commitment to lean and cutting red tape, but 
when it comes to bargaining, here we might have a situation 
where you might start to create three or more new bargaining 
units. And all the impact of this in terms of the health region is 
huge. You know, the Premier today even alluded to the fact that 
there are over 40,000 people who work in the health region, and 
how are you going to break this up? How are you going to 
fragmentize this? And that’s really, really important that we try 
to use some common sense, that we try to make this as 
effective, and try to reach the goals in making sure people have 
fair collective bargaining agreements. But fragmenting it and 
breaking it up could be a real problem. 
 
I’m also concerned about what the driving force is behind the 
changed definition of employee in section 6-1(1)(h)  of the Act. 
It talks about how this is really quite a different circumstance 
and it could result in fewer working people having access to 
collective bargaining within their workplace. Again a real 
concern about that. 
 
And they go on and talk about setting arbitrary limits upon the 
ability of a health care worker to gain experience, training, and 
access towards upward mobility within the health care structure. 
So again, problems with that. And of course the whole issue of 
minimum age at which employees may be employed at any 
class of employment. It’s not readily apparent why these two 
matters have not been set up in the Act itself. 
 
And so we have lots of questions that we want to make sure that 
they are not lost protections. But I did ask the minister in 
committee a year ago about what has been the result of the 
lowering of the minimum age and what’s been the impact of 
that. What’s been the impact in our schools? What’s been the 
impact in our completion, our graduation rates? We know for 
example that one of the challenges in our high schools is having 
people complete grade 12. In fact this government has set out in 



March 31, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5017 

its vision, in its plan, that we see an increase in grade 12 
completion rates. But what has been the impact of employment? 
And I will have questions about that. 
 
I want to go on and talk about some of the problems identified, 
and I’m referring to SEIU West here, but I know other unions 
have raised this too. I’m talking about the definition of essential 
services in section 7-1(1)(c) — far too broad. It really remains 
unchanged from The Public Service Essential Services Act and 
talking about problems around that, and you know, how the 
definition was replied on by employers who justify business as 
usual and the overdesignation of essential employees within the 
health regions in the event of work stoppages. And they say if 
this issue is to be properly addressed, it needs to have a clearer, 
shared understanding of what constitutes essential services, and 
that’s important. 
 
They talk about using the British Columbia labour relations 
code definition, and I think that might be something we talk 
about in committee. And I think this is quite important because 
it was that dilemma, you know, it was so ironic that in fact 
many of the health regions said they needed so many people to 
be designated essential that in fact it was above the number of 
people actually working when you took into account the 
unfilled positions. 
 
It talks about the public employer and what’s going to happen 
with that, and we’re not sure of what that all means until we see 
the regulations. And again this is the issue with so much of the 
legislation this government puts forward is it’s all going to be, 
the devil’s in the detail in the regulations. And this is really, 
really important. 
 
Significant issues around timing and process issues are put into 
Bill 128, and we’re not sure what the implications of all of that 
will be. In terms of the time frame, there’s no time frame 
provided for the employer that furnished notice to the union, 
and that may be some problems. 
 
The unilateral designation of essential services by employers, 
and it talks about the dispute resolution options for people to 
reach an agreement and how they can apply to the LRB [Labour 
Relations Board] and what this may all play out to be. So we’re 
waiting to see how that plays out. And so in the whole case of 
the idea of a single arbitrator or arbitration board under section 
7-22 does not lend to a fair and balanced resolution for 
outstanding issues. 
 
And so it talks about the mandatory items but that they must 
also, arbitrators must also consider general economic conditions 
of Saskatchewan. So they call them the permissive items, 
include terms and conditions. But the whole thing is, when you 
talk about the whole economy of Saskatchewan, what that 
means for an arbitrator in terms of . . . The economy of 
Saskatchewan’s quite broad and has a lot of different variables 
to it. And what that may mean in terms of how the arbitrators 
may rule, whether or not they’re considering or focusing just on 
health sectors, maybe health sectors in other provinces, that is a 
question that we have to ask. 
 
And of course the SEIU West questions the changes made 
under section 7-36, as the initial fine to a trade union has 
doubled, and it’s setting it to $100,000. And why the change to 

$100,000? And I will have a lot of questions about that in 
committee because I find it interesting, and these will be the 
questions that I have in committee. 
 
Essentially we saw a doubling of fines for occupational health 
and safety, and this happened about two years ago. And yet we 
have seen that part of The Occupational Health and Safety Act 
that was brought into force . . . All of that Act was brought into 
force except for one key part, and that was the part about the 
occupational health and safety fines. That is still not enforced. 
And daily, almost weekly we read about the new fines against 
employers who are breaking occupational health and safety law. 
And they’re being fined, and we think that’s a good thing. But 
we are disappointed that in fact the fines are about half of what 
they should be because the new fine structure was passed two 
years ago and has not been brought into effect. And we have 
questions about that. 
 
And when we see this piece of legislation where the fines are 
being doubled for trade unions to 100,000, will that same 
standard that’s being used for employers, where employers are 
not being . . . Fines are not being doubled even though the 
legislation is passed, but it’s not in place. It’s not in effect. Will 
this happen with this specific piece, specific section, 7-36? 
We’ll have that question for the minister and we’ll have some 
good conversation about that as well. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So we just have to ask, what is the rush? What is the rush? And 
you know, we could have taken some time to get this right. We 
could have got all the parties together and said, let’s get the 
essential services piece right and make sure it’s balanced and 
it’s fair and it respects labour’s right to fair and collective 
bargaining. And a dispute resolution mechanism, or whether 
you call that the right to strike, we need to make sure that that is 
treated in a fair way. We could have done this so much better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about The Employment 
Act. And it was really, you know . . . We were all here on 
December 3rd last year when the firefighters came and did their 
annual legislative lobby. It was the 15th annual legislative 
lobby in . . . And they talked about their concern that was in Bill 
85. Of course Bill 85 was passed but not enforced. 
 
And it was so ironic that the next day that Bill 128 would be 
introduced. But Bill 85, to the firefighters, had a very unfair 
solution to their bargaining situation in some of their locals. 
And it talked about section 3, how The Fire Departments 
Platoon Act sets out an exemption stating that firefighter unions 
in cities of a population of less than 10,000 did not have access 
to binding arbitration. Really it only affected one local, and that 
was Weyburn. And so the only option they had, if they didn’t 
produce a collective bargain, was to serve strike notice, 
something they never chose to do. In Weyburn they’ve never 
done that. 
 
And they go on to talk about how, for the others, the mandatory 
binding arbitration process specified in The Fire Departments 
Platoon Act for the other seven locals produced labour stability. 
And in fact if you took a look at firefighter collective 
agreements in Saskatchewan from 1969 to 2013, you would see 
that 146 of 198 contracts, or 74 per cent, were freely negotiated. 



5018 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2014 

So it seemed to be a process, a process that was working. But 
what happened was that Bill 85 and division 15, which really 
was a replacement for The Fire Departments Platoon Act, 
raised the population threshold in the final stages — and I 
remember that day when they did this — went from 10,000 to 
15,000 and ultimately to 20,000. So as a result of that, 
firefighters in Yorkton, North Battleford, and Swift Current 
joined Weyburn as those locals that had no access to the 
arbitration system that was in place. And in fact we know that 
these were already amongst the lowest paid professional 
firefighters in Canada. And then they would not be able to 
apply for interest arbitration like firefighters in Regina, 
Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert. 
 
So this was really a problem, and it’s really something that the 
firefighters have argued that something be done to take its 
place. That actually this government step back and say, maybe 
we made a mistake. And I’ll be asking this in committee. Are 
they prepared? Are they entertaining issues around or 
consideration of amending the employment Act so that these 
folks would have access to interest bargaining? 
 
And so this is a real problem and I think that they do something 
to help the four smallest firefighters’ locals, and have them, you 
know, have the same access to the kind of bargaining process 
that you have in Saskatoon or Regina and Moose Jaw and 
Prince Albert. So this is really, really important that we do 
something about this. And this is just one of the examples of 
many that we have where, as I said, this government has not 
taken the type of time and consideration to have good labour 
legislation here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the other one that I want to talk about is around minimum 
wage. And today we just heard of course that the minimum 
wage goes up to 10.20 on October 2014. So those summer 
students that will be looking for work, this will be the third 
summer that they will be paid $10.00 an hour. We think that’s 
unfortunate. And of course going up 20 cents is not an awful 
lot. It is about time that they actually did make an 
announcement. Of course it’s sort of a mixed blessing and we 
have some disappointment. We thought it would be higher than 
that. 
 
We know that Manitoba’s 10.45; BC is at 10.25; Ontario, 11; 
Nova Scotia’s 10.40. That goes up to 10.40 tomorrow. So 
somewhere between 10.40 and $11 would have been a more 
reasonable number. And we have to see — we are looking for 
it, maybe we’ll get some insight into this — the indexation 
formula. But we are behind eight provinces and territories. And 
then if we index it at this level, that means that we’ll always be 
behind, that we always will be behind, you know.  
 
And I know that the government takes a lot of pride in the 
individual taxpayers now pay no Saskatchewan income tax on 
their first 18,650. But of course we know that if you’re full-time 
minimum wage, you’re actually making much more than that. 
You’re at 20,400. 
 
So I think that while they can . . . You know, it was really 
interesting. There’s a comment about, that was made about 
using income tax to solve, you know, this fact that you’re 
paying poverty wages. But really, people just want to be paid a 
fair wage and they want to pay fair taxes. It’s not an either-or 

situation. It’s not an either-or situation. And I think that this . . . 
We’ll be looking forward to hearing more about this. And of 
course we’re not going to hear the formula until quite a bit later 
in the year and what the formula will be made up of. 
 
And so he’s saying that the change in minimum wage will 
always be announced on or before June 30th of each year and it 
will take effect in October. So maybe on one hand that’s getting 
ready for the season, Christmas rush, and people employed in 
that. That’s good. But I know for students, they’re going to be 
one year behind in terms of having a fair wage. 
 
And so we are looking forward to seeing what the regulations 
will be. And of course when we asked this question last week, 
the government was sort of really taking its time in terms of 
getting this minimum wage regulations out. But it was so ironic 
because last year that was yet another reason why they said they 
had to get the employment Act passed, because they wanted to 
get the regulations for the minimum wage regulations out. But it 
will be at least a year before that is actually . . . You know, a 
year will have passed, a year will have passed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a lot that I can 
really talk a lot on this issue because it’s a very, very important 
one, and one that we really should be focusing on, about what’s 
really important to working women and men. And I would have 
to say — and I know this is one that the minister and I have 
often talked about and we share a lot of agreement — it is really 
around making sure Saskatchewan is a safer place to work. And 
I would rather be talking about occupational health and safety 
and those concerns. Previous year we saw a situation where, 
well about 60 people had died from workplace incidents. We 
don’t want to see that kind of thing occur again. 
 
We know that in the changing workplaces in Saskatchewan, 
whether it be agriculture and of course forestry, was 
announcements last week. But of course in our workplaces in 
the health regions, in our highways, all of these places where 
people do work, we have to make sure they’re as safe as 
possible, you know. And I could go through the different 
sectors whether it’s . . . construction is also one that needs a lot 
of attention. 
 
We just have to strive to do a much better job and we need to 
focus on the issues that are important and not be distracted by 
ideology. And here we are seven years later, seven years after 
the fact, and I remember that, 2007, in the different situations 
that caused some concerns. But you know the working women 
and men were always there to make sure people were safe, and 
that if there was a critical situation that they were looked after. 
 
So we were disappointed then. We continue to be disappointed 
about how this takes away from what really needs to be the key 
issues here in Saskatchewan. And I haven’t even begun to talk 
about what the costs would have been over these seven years in 
terms of what it’s cost the public purse in terms of court costs, 
developing a bill like Bill 5 just to have it thrown out. And now 
we’re repealing it. What was the total cost of that failed 
adventure by this government? 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to say that we won’t 
be here next year debating yet another amendment to The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act, but I have a funny feeling we 



March 31, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5019 

will be. And we’ll be here for many years to come, as this 
government can’t seem to get it right in terms of labour 
legislation. And I think that we’re going to have . . . it’s going 
to be a piece of work that needs to be corrected, needs to be 
corrected. But of course this government’s ideologically bound 
by some inability to consult and work with people who make 
this province what it is. I just feel that we’ve got to do better. 
We can do better, and we need to do better. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that we’ll have a 
lot of questions in committee because of course, as I said the 
employment Act is a large piece of legislation. And so not only 
are we going to be talking about essential services, we’re going 
to be talking about minimum age. We’re going to be talking 
about minimum wage. We’re going to be talking about 
occupational health and safety. We’re going to be talking about 
the firefighters sections and what’s happening there. Because 
you know, once we get into committee and we’re talking about 
amendments to legislation, this bill allows us to have the 
opportunity to ask those kind of questions. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no further 
comments at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Education and Minister of Labour 
Relations and Workplace Safety that Bill No. 128, The 
Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 be now read 
a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 129 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 129 — The 
Executive Government Administration Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 129, An Act respecting the 

Administration of the Executive Government of Saskatchewan, 
making consequential and related amendments to certain Acts 
and regulations and repealing certain other Acts. Mr. Speaker, 
this bill is a rather extensive bill in that it covers quite a number 
of the Acts and pieces of legislations in government. And it also 
deals with regulatory powers that change how the government 
is organized. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Normally when we look at these types of bills we’re always 
concerned to see if there are unintended consequences, if there 
are things that are happening that may cause some difficulties 
down the road. I think the main issue for me, after many years 
on both the government side and on the opposition side, is that 
there needs to be transparency in how decisions are made. And 
so when I look at this particular legislation, I have a few 
questions that I will raise here about that particular issue. 
 
Now one of the things that the minister’s stated was the 
intention of government in presenting this bill was to remove 
confusion about how ministries are organized and how 
ministerial responsibilities are assigned. If this bill 
accomplishes that, I think that’s a good thing. But the point 
becomes, will it do it in a straightforward manner or does it 
actually create some other layers or veils that will cause some 
difficulty for the whole operation of government? 
 
And so one of the interesting aspects of this is quite an 
interesting governance issue which relates to how our 
parliamentary democracy works in Canada or in other countries 
in the Commonwealth, and that relates to this melding of the 
executive branch within the legislative branch. We know that 
there are many times where it’s difficult to assert the power of 
the legislature over and against the executive, when the Premier 
and the executive effectively controls the government caucus. 
And one of the things that this particular bill does is to further 
consolidate that power of the Premier as it relates to the 
regulations establishing ministries. 
 
Up until this point, any of those types of regulations are set up 
in a way that allows for legislative review under our standard 
review of regulations by the legislature, but in this Act it ends 
up changing the rules so that the regulations created by the 
Premier and Executive Council or the cabinet will not be 
subject to review by the legislature. Mr. Speaker, I think it may 
be important for especially the members of the legislature on 
the government side who are not part of the executive to take a 
good hard look at this one single provision because it does then 
eliminate the ability of this body to deal with that particular . . . 
to look at the regulations and how they’re created. 
 
And so what are those regulations, and what do they relate to? 
Now when you look at the legislation, it’s pretty wide open. It 
is the, you know, regulatory power that you can designate 
words to mean anything you want, all those kind of things. But 
I think practically where this raises some concerns for us here in 
the legislature is as it relates to the ministerial appointments, the 
appointments of legislative secretaries, the ability of Executive 
Council to pay those legislative secretaries and pay for their 
travel and other kinds of things. 
 
This is I think a way of the Premier spreading the tentacles right 



5020 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2014 

throughout all of the members of the legislature on the 
government side. And when there isn’t a control here in the 
legislature about how these things work, then it becomes an 
interesting question about diminishing the power of the 
legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that we all need to look 
carefully at how these things are done because when you 
undermine that oversight role, you also undermine some of the 
ability to monitor how money is spent. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that this is just a point that is interesting, but it maybe 
gives a little more power to the Premier’s office than they 
actually need. 
 
And as the members know, I’ve often talked about this role and 
this trend to diminish the power of the legislature, increase the 
power of the executive branch. And, Mr. Speaker, I think there 
are aspects of this particular bill that go towards that particular 
issue. 
 
Now there’s some other changes that are made in the legislation 
related to advisory committees to ministers. And one of the 
interesting ones is that this again takes away power of ministers 
to appoint advisory committees that they might use in their 
activities without getting the approval of cabinet. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, what the legislation does is say that the appointment of 
advisory committees to ministers will require cabinet approval 
in all cases. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if there’ve been some problems 
with this in the five years of this government; maybe we can 
find out some of that when we get into committee. But it raises 
some interesting questions around that control. Presently the 
advisory committees, if they’re under one year, the minister can 
appoint them without concern and basically get some advice on 
some very specific issues. And that’s not necessarily something 
that’s done without a fair bit of public information. But this 
appears to consolidate control around ministers’ advisory 
committees more directly into the Premier’s office and to the 
Executive Council side. 
 
So I would say once again, this is an area where ministers need 
to take a bit of a look at this legislation to see what’s the 
intention here. Why is this being put there? What are the 
problems that have arisen now that are requiring this kind of a 
change? 
 
The next provision in this one relates to the federal-provincial 
agreements and the fact that they don’t require cabinet approval 
if the expenditure is under $50,000. Now I don’t know if this is 
a reflection of the fact that the present federal government has 
some pretty small amounts of money that they send to the 
provinces or that, you know, what specifically it’s dealing with. 
But it’s interesting to say that you will basically eliminate any 
need to have that show up in the cabinet approval. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that you end up with cabinet 
approval of all kinds of contracts done in various ministries is 
for accountability and transparency. And what we know is that 
if we don’t have a record of it through an order in council or 
something that’s public, it may take a long time before the 
public ever even knows about some of the agreements that are 
entered into. And I think a step that moves away from that 
accountability is not a positive step. And so I say on that 
particular clause once again, let’s take a good hard look at it and 

ask some questions because we want to make sure that the 
public has as much information as possible around how 
government works and how public money is being spent. 
 
Now there’s quite a few provisions in the Act, and actually the 
bulk of the Act relates to making changes in names around the 
words ministry and department. And I don’t really have any 
comment about that other than it’s a fair task to change all of 
that wording in all of the pieces of legislation. And I’m sure 
we’ll get amendments next year and the year after and the year 
after that, as other pieces of legislation are being changed. 
 
Now I think practically there’s a couple of other changes where 
I ask the government to be careful. One of them is around the 
whole treasury board issue, where they’re saying that they’re 
going to change The Financial Administration Act to provide 
that treasury board can have non-ministerial members. And this 
here says it’s consistent with all of the cabinet committees and 
how the government operates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been a traditional protection for cabinet 
and cabinet decisions when those decisions are made by 
cabinet. I’m not sure whether there’s been sufficient legal 
advice sought on this particular issue, but I know that in a 
number of situations over the years there have been questions 
raised when non-cabinet members are part of a committee and 
decisions are made. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll give you one 
good example that I was involved with, and that involved the 
situation where the judges of the Provincial Court of 
Saskatchewan were suing the government and the cabinet, and 
the issue became discovery of the discussions and minutes of 
what happened in cabinet. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was clear from the cases that any 
discussions that took place within cabinet where there were no 
non-cabinet members, no MLAs available, all of that was 
covered by very clear rules around cabinet secrecy. But caucus 
meetings where the same issues were discussed, where there 
were both cabinet and sitting MLAs, those documents and those 
discussions were all available to the court for review for 
discussion of what was happening in the discussions around the 
compensation for Provincial Court judges. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this legislation, the way it’s worded here 
appears to raise concerns about ever having protection of 
cabinet secrecy around certain decisions and discussions that 
are made. And so I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this may be 
one that the Attorney General should be looking at again to 
make sure that the right protections are there. But this melding 
or this muddying of the water between what is a cabinet body 
and what is cabinet body with legislative members in it, I think 
has long-term consequences for the institution of the cabinet 
and the secrecy of that discussion that can take place there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, maybe we’re at a point where we don’t need 
a place where there can be fully protected discussions on 
decisions that are made. But I’m not sure we’re there, and I 
think there are times and there are places where there need to be 
protected discussions, in camera discussions, that are protected 
by law. And, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a risk in this 
legislation that that protection will be further eroded. And I 
expect that when we get a chance to talk to the minister, who I 
think bringing it forward it’s either the Premier or the Attorney 



March 31, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5021 

General, we’ll have a chance to talk about some of those 
questions. But they’re very serious questions, and you don’t 
always know exactly where that protection will be needed or 
where it’s required. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s something in this 
bill, I think, that’s going to cause difficulties for future 
governments, no matter what the political stripe, as we move 
forward. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Bill 129 has some changes that I think have 
taken quite a bit of thought, but I also think there are some 
dangerous parts of this legislation that we will need to look at, 
and we’ll get a chance to ask some of the questions about that in 
committee. But it may be that the ministers who are bringing 
this bill forward will want to take a look at some of those issues 
before it goes to committee. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 129, The 
Executive Government Administration Act be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 130 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 130 — The 
Executive Government Administration Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government 
Administration Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 130, An Act to make 
consequential amendments to certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Executive Government Administration Act. I 
think primarily this bill is another aspect of Bill No. 129 that we 
were just discussing, but it does relate to the bilingual bills that 

are changed, and that’s one of the main reasons for this 
particular legislation.  
 
I think the other aspect of this goes right back to my concerns 
about this melding of the legislative powers together with 
executive powers. And I’m asking that the ministers involved 
with this take a good, hard look at what they’re doing here 
because it does raise these same questions about the ability to 
rely on the traditional protections of cabinet when you meld 
together so many different people. And the issues in this 
particular Act relate to permitting members of the legislature to 
be chairpersons of Crown boards even though they’re not part 
of Executive Council, some issues like that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of aspects around this 
melding together of the Executive Council functions together 
with the legislative council that I think bear some clear scrutiny 
because we could end up having unintended consequences of 
these changes as it relates to issues down the road. Now 
obviously the goal for legislation like this is to be more 
transparent and more accountable. If there are things that defeat 
that goal, then they should be rooted out as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I say once again, take a good, hard look at 
this particular legislation as it relates to that muddying of the 
distinction between the cabinet and members of the legislature 
because I think it is a dangerous area and that we need to be 
careful looking at it. With that, I have no further comments. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 130, The 
Executive Government Administration Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2013 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committees, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 



5022 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2014 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. This House stands 
adjourned till tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:35.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5003 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5003 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5003 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5003 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5003 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5004 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5004 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5004 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5004 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5004 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5005 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Middle Lake Avengers Win Gold at Hoopla 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5005 
 Truth and Reconciliation Commission Hearings 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5005 
 Adult Learners’ Week 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5005 
 Transgender Awareness Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5006 
 Strong Kids Campaign Megathon 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5006 
 Café Contributes to Community 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5006 
 Support for Public-Private Partnerships 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5006 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Federal Funding for Health Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5007 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5007 
 Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5008 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5008 
 Care of Landfills 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5009 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5009 
 New Bridge for Prince Albert 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5010 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5010 
 Environmental Protection 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5011 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5011 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5011 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5012 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5012 
 Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5013 
  Wyant (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 5013 
 Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5013 
  Wyant (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 5014 
  



 

 Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5014 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5019 
 Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government Administration Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5019 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5021 
 Bill No. 130 — The Executive Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 
 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government Administration Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5021 
  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5021 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


