
























































Hansard: April 07, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 46A  MONDAY, APRIL 7, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5087 
 April 7, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to request leave to 
make a statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has requested 
leave to make a personal statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Number of International Trips 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I 
misspoke outside the Chamber regarding the number of 
international trips I had taken since becoming a minister. I 
provided incorrect information to the Premier regarding this, 
which caused incorrect information to be repeated in this 
Chamber. I apologize for misspeaking regarding this. I took one 
international trip to Australia in 2008 in addition to the trip in 
Ghana and UK [United Kingdom] in June of 2013. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has requested leave 
for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure 
for me today to be able to introduce Mr. Jean-Christophe 
Fleury, the consul general of France, who makes his office and 
domicile in the city of Vancouver but who is responsible for the 
province of Saskatchewan as part of his duties. With him today 
is his spouse, Hyunsun Shin. 
 
And also accompanying the consul general is Mr. Frédéric 
Kaplan, the minister counsellor for economics, the embassy of 
France in Canada; and Mr. Vincent Martin, the honorary consul 
of France for Saskatchewan. Mr. Martin may be known to some 
of us here as the CEO [chief executive officer] and president of 
Areva Resources. Mr. Speaker, these fine guests are 
accompanied today by Melinda Carter, the senior protocol 
officer; and Laurie Hutton the international officer. 
 
I have a few comments I’d like to add, Mr. Speaker, as part of 

this introduction. This is the consul general’s first visit to the 
province of Saskatchewan, having arrived at his post about five 
months ago. And he thought it was important to come and I 
think, from what I learned over lunch, he’s really quite happy 
with his visit here. He has learned quite a bit about the province 
already and has more to learn, I’m sure. While in 
Saskatchewan, he’ll be meeting with the Lieutenant Governor 
and various government representatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year Saskatchewan’s exports to France valued 
$76.8 million with some of the top exports including of course 
uranium, pulses, oil seeds, and other food items. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, France has the second-largest nuclear power program 
in the world and Areva, the French nuclear giant, holds interests 
in four separate Saskatchewan uranium deposits. 
 
Now besides an economic friendship, Saskatchewan has 
historic ties with France, with many of our first 
French-speaking settlers to Saskatchewan coming from that 
great country. Those settlers brought with them a little bit of 
France as reflected in the names of some of our communities 
which they established, communities such as Ponteix, 
Montmartre, Domremy, St. Brieux, and St-Denis, which are 
also the names of municipalities in France. Currently both of 
our universities in Saskatchewan have a number of initiatives 
that they have signed with French institutions, so there is some 
give-and-take and back-and-forth between those institutions of 
higher learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m eager to continue to strengthen the bonds that 
we have, that we share with the country of France, and I’d ask 
that all members of this Assembly join me in welcoming Mr. 
Fleury and Ms. Shin to Saskatchewan’s legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Provincial Secretary on behalf of the official opposition in 
welcoming Mr. Fleury and Ms. Shin as well as Mr. Martin who 
are here in the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. And the 
Provincial Secretary accurately points out the historical ties that 
our country and our province has with France but, as 
importantly, the important ongoing ties that we have 
economically and socially. So on behalf of the official 
opposition, bienvenue. Welcome here and wish you all the best 
as you have your meetings for the rest of your duration here. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce to 
the Legislative Assembly a group of teachers who are here in 
the legislature to attend the 16th annual Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. The institute 
began on Saturday, April the 5th and will conclude on 
Wednesday, April 9th. 
 
This group has already met with a number of people including 
members of the judiciary, representatives of the Chief Electoral 
office, and the Clerks. Earlier today they met with caucus staff 
from both sides of the House, the Sergeant-at-Arms, and the 
House leaders. Over the next two days, they are scheduled to 
meet with caucus Chairs, caucus Whips, several MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly], cabinet ministers, and 



5088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2014 

the Minister of Education. 
 
I would like to introduce them and their guests, and if they 
would wave when I mention their names please: Ms. Karen 
Blackwell Jones from the Dinsmore Composite School; Mr. 
Thomas Claxton, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon; Mr. 
Kenneth Harris, Spruce Ridge School, Estevan; Mr. Terry 
Leibel, Wynyard Composite High School; Ms. Kara Lengyel, 
Naicam School; Ms. Chylisse Marchand, Redvers School; Ms. 
Sarah Moar, École canadienne-française, Saskatoon; Mr. Eric 
Neudorf, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon; Mr. David 
Pratte, Caswell School, Saskatoon; Ms. Heather Saarela, Arcola 
School; Mr. Riley Sharp, Swift Current Comprehensive High 
School — he just graduated, I think — Ms. Meagan Smith, 
Vanier Collegiate, Moose Jaw; Mr. Rod Walker, Creighton 
Community School; Ms. Jennifer Ives, observer from the 
Parliamentary Education Office in British Columbia; Mr. 
Taylor Gunn, student votes/civics, Toronto. 
 
I would like to make special mention of our steering committee, 
composed of four teachers who have attended past institutes and 
officials from the Ministry of Education. From the Ministry of 
Education, Mr. Brent Toles, consultant, social sciences 
curriculum unit; and Ms. Cindy Chow. 
 
Steering committee members are: Ms. Corinne Harcourt, 
Engelfeld School; Mr. Pat Orobko, Unity Composite High 
School; Mr. Douglas Panko, Vanier Collegiate, Moose Jaw; 
Ms. Laurel Labarre Amid, École Massey, Regina. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome this group to the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Speaking 
of teachers and students, I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, a group seated in 
the east gallery. They are from the Southeast Regional College, 
Piapot First Nation adult basic education class offered here in 
the city of Regina. They’re accompanied by a steadfast and no 
stranger to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, teacher, Bev Kulach. I 
believe they’ve also got Jeffrey Moser along for keeping 
company. And again, a group of 17 adult learners that are here 
at their Legislative Assembly. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them later to get their take on 
the tour thus far, on the state of affairs here in the Assembly, 
but it’s always really good to see visitors, particularly adult 
learners, here at their Legislative Assembly. So if all members 
could please join me in welcoming this group from Piapot 
Urban First Nation and Southeast Regional College to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m delighted to join the member opposite, especially 
in light of the week that we’ve just recognized here within 
Saskatchewan, that is the week celebrating adult learners. It’s 
recognized through the United Nations and in fact across more 
than 40 countries. And so I join the member opposite in 

offering a warm welcome to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, these students and these adult 
learners from Southeast Regional College. We know how 
important it is, especially when we relate to our robust 
economic activity and that connection between learning and 
earning. 
 
So I ask all members to join me in welcoming these learners to 
their Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce a few people to the legislature today. First off, we 
are joined in your gallery by Dave Burdeniuk and Casey 
MacLeod. They are with SaskEnergy’s communications 
division. And joining them today, Mr. Speaker, are three 
individuals, three individuals that we are highlighting some of 
the great work that was done this very cold winter, this very 
cold March. We have Mr. Brian Gossard. He’s the general 
manager for TransGas, southwest division. Give us a wave if 
you wouldn’t mind, gentlemen. We have Mike Kronberger, 
district operation supervisor with TransGas, southwest district; 
and we have Mr. Chris Rink, district mechanic operator with 
TransGas, southwest district, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These gentlemen are joining us today. There’s going to be a 
member’s statement here in members’ statements highlighting 
some of the very difficult and extreme work that they went 
through to ensure that gas flowed to the rest of the citizens of 
this province as they continued to service their equipment on 
the coldest days of one of the coldest winters of the year. These 
gentlemen said, Mr. Speaker, in discussions that they don’t see 
anything special. This is just what they do. But they do it in 
very extreme weather conditions to make sure that the rest of us 
have warm homes. 
 
And I was a little disconcerted, Mr. Speaker, when they 
commented that they have some improvements they want to do, 
some things they want to change before next year, and they 
only have seven months before it has to be working again. So 
please, Mr. Speaker, if you could join with me and welcome 
them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join the government in welcoming all these guests that are 
here from TransGas and SaskEnergy. There’s no question that 
while we don’t have natural gas in the North, we appreciate 
some of the calls and some of the extra work that many of our 
employees in the Crown corporations do throughout the 
province. 
 
So again on behalf of the official opposition, we welcome you 
here today. We thank you for your continued service and to say 
that you represent your company and your Crown very well, 
and the people of Saskatchewan are very proud of you all. 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 



April 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5089 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave for an extended introduction. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to all the members. In recognition of National Victims of Crime 
Awareness Week, our government has declared April 6th to 
12th Victims of Crime Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. 
During this week, we are not only recognizing the effect crime 
has on people but also the dedication of the volunteers who help 
victims of crime. 
 
Seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have seven 
volunteer victim support workers, volunteer board members, 
and staff we are recognizing for their work with victims of 
crime. They are marking their 10th-, 15th-, 20th-, and 25th-year 
anniversaries with victim services programs in their 
communities. 
 
For volunteer victim service support workers we have Deanna 
Brown and Joann McKay from Regina region victim services, 
and Pat Stevenson from the Regina victim services. For 
volunteer board members, we have Theresa Deboth from the 
northeast regional victim services and Glen Herman, a founding 
board member who has been with the southwest victim services 
for 20 years. 
 
And for staff, Mr. Speaker, we have Helen Christensen from the 
Prince Albert victim services, and Jill Hay who has served as a 
volunteer victim support worker and employee with Regina 
victim services for 25 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the volunteer board members and staff here today, 
along with 300 others from across Saskatchewan are what 
makes these programs so effective. They exemplify the adage, 
those who can, do. Those who can do more, volunteer. 
 
I would also like to mention Phyllis Smith, Sandy Rediron, and 
Caroline Ratt-Misponas of north Sask victim services, Dale 
Ebert of Prince Albert victim services, Irene Nowosad from 
Prince Albert regional victim services, Philip Gunther from 
Regina victim services, Dorothy McFaul from Saskatoon victim 
services, Brenda Weppler from south west victim services, 
Vicky Procyk from southeast victim services, and Rheta 
Renwick from Regina region victim services. Mr. Speaker, 
these people are also celebrating their 10-, 15-, and 20-year 
anniversaries. Although they were not able to be here today, 
their work is no less appreciated. 
 
[13:45] 
 
As Minister of Justice, I’m grateful for the opportunity to meet 
these individuals that do such important work. Every time I talk 
to them, I come away with the feeling that Saskatchewan is 
home to some of the kindest people in Canada. The great work 

these people do is a reflection of our province and its people, 
and I’m very proud to have them in attendance here today. I’d 
like them to know that no one is more cherished than someone 
who lightens the burden of others. 
 
To show our appreciation of their efforts, Mr. Speaker, I’d now 
like to ask members to join me in applauding our guests for 
their accomplishments and welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Minister of Justice in welcoming our guests to the 
legislature today. I was very pleased to hear the long service 
that many of these members have because they would 
remember when I was the minister of Justice and working very 
closely with the development of the victim services. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this whole program and the ability to provide support 
to communities, to victims, but also to local law enforcement 
and the courts is a very important thing that we do here in 
Saskatchewan. And I’d like to congratulate all these members 
for all of the many years of service. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If I 
may join with members in the House today who’ve welcomed 
some special guests, Mr. Speaker, I do want to welcome the 
consul general for France and the delegation that’s joined us 
here today. We very much appreciate the relationship that 
continues between France and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t also acknowledge and 
thank Areva for their great contribution to our province here. It 
was a pleasure to work alongside them and on their behalf with 
the federal government to try to ease some of the restrictions on 
ownership, and we hope to see some progress as a result of 
CETA [Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and 
Trade Agreement]. This was an important development, and 
we’re grateful for the participation of the French in this as well 
as Areva. And as the Government of Saskatchewan, I hope we 
were able to be of help, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also had a chance to visit with the teachers. I want to join with 
members and welcome them here. This is a very important 
institute. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, there are constituents in the House 
today, and some who are not constituents but very close to 
Swift Current who’ve been recognized by the minister 
responsible for TransGas and they will be appropriately 
highlighted, as the minister’s pointed out, a little bit later on. I’d 
like to draw attention to a good friend of mine, the general 
manager for TransGas in the area, Brian Gossard. Brian is an 
expert fisherman. The Deputy Leader of the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] talks about catching walleye at Last 
Mountain Lake and other places, and this is impressive, Mr. 
Speaker. But Brian fishes down in the muddy South 
Saskatchewan where you got to catch them with skill. And so I 
also just want to welcome my friend, Brian, to his Legislative 
Assembly as well. 
 



5090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to join with the Premier and welcome a couple of guests. I do 
look forward to maybe chatting a little bit of fishing with the 
guest that’s here today. And that’s right, there are some pretty 
big fish. I always explain to our northern members that the 
walleye down south are a lot bigger than the ones they grow up 
north. And it’s something that they don’t necessarily appreciate 
when I make that point, but something that we in the South 
recognize. 
 
I do want to join, both with you as the Speaker and with the 
Premier, in welcoming the teachers that are here today: the 
steering committee of Mr. Brent Toles, and the crew that’s here, 
and the fine cadre of teachers that have joined us here today. I 
enjoyed meeting them briefly at lunch. I look forward to getting 
to know them over the next couple of days. And I thank them 
for being on really the front lines of democracy every day in 
classrooms across Saskatchewan, and the role they fulfill in 
infusing an interest in their students in being involved in their 
community and their democratic processes.  
 
So I ask all members to welcome those teachers, the steering 
committee for this Saskatchewan Speaker’s Teachers’ Institute 
on Parliamentary Democracy here today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and to all 
the members of the Legislative Assembly, I have three special 
guests in the west gallery I’d like to introduce to you. The first 
one, it’s not Willie from Duck Dynasty, that’s my middle son, 
Dylan, Dylan Lawrence and his wife Kayleigh. And the little 
one they’re holding is my grandson, Jordison Rider. And he is, 
definitely got grandpa around his little finger. So it’s truly my 
pleasure to introduce them into the House today. 
 
And if I can, I’d also like to say hi to Mr. Panko, who actually 
coached all three of my boys in high school football in Vanier. 
So thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of education. And we 
know that education is one of the most vital services that 
government provides to citizens, that this government has failed 
to deliver a long-term plan and vision and the necessary 
resources to prioritize the delivery of educational excellence. 
And we know that this government has failed to develop a real 
plan to close the Aboriginal education gap, support English as 
an additional language students, support community schools 
and their communities and students. And we know that we must 
build the best education system for today and for 
Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality of education for Saskatchewan, 
that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best practices, 
that is developed through consultation with the education 
sector, and that builds strong educational infrastructure to 
serve students and communities long into the future. 
 
And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 
relates to the unsafe conditions on Dewdney Avenue and the 
call to reroute heavy-haul truck traffic from Dewdney Avenue. 
They note that any further delays from that government are 
unacceptable in addressing a problem created by that 
government. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again, I stand and present a petition on highway improvements 
necessary for the province of Saskatchewan and, more 
particular, for northern Saskatchewan. And the road I’m 
presenting this petition on, Mr. Speaker, is the road that serves 
the English River First Nation or the community of Patuanak, 
which are one and the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have signed petitions from all throughout 
Saskatchewan. On this particular page, the people that have 
signed petition are primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to commit to repairing and 
upgrading Highway 918. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people again that have signed these 
petitions and other petitions are from all throughout 



April 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5091 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
pleased to rise to present a petition for real action on climate 
change. And the undersigned residents of this province want to 
bring to our attention the following: that Saskatchewan 
produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions per capita in all 
of Canada; that Saskatchewan’s emissions have continued to 
grow to 74 million megatonnes as reported by Environment 
Canada in October 2013 and show no signs of decreasing; that 
the Saskatchewan government has failed to tackle climate 
change, reduce emissions to the province’s own targets, or put 
in a real plan to protect the natural environment; that slashing 
programs such as the Go Green Fund and EnerGuide for 
Houses energy efficiency program set the province on a 
backward course. And the folks in the prayer that reads as 
follows: 
 

Respectfully request that this Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan enacts a real plan and allocates appropriate 
funding in the provincial budget to tackle climate change 
by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, helping families 
transition to energy-efficient homes, and encouraging 
everyone in the province to take real action to protect the 
environment. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Canora, 
Regina, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Technicians Work Hard During Record Cold Weekend 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure there will 
be unanimous support in this House for agreeing this past 
winter was very, very cold. This past winter was one of the 
coldest in the last 30 years, and February was one of the coldest 
in the last 50 years. During the record cold weekend in March, 
while most of us huddled in the warmth of our homes, the men 
and women of SaskEnergy and TransGas worked 24-7 to make 
sure gas kept flowing. 
 
There are many stories of our technicians going above and 
beyond. Chris Rink spent all night at the Success compressor 
station. At 2 in the morning the main compressor quit and Chris 
had to brave the minus-50 wind chill for an hour to manually 
restart it. 
 
Mike Kronberger was running a mobile compressor by Belle 
Plaine. At the end of his 12-hour shift, Mike didn’t go home. He 
went out and picked up tarps and mobile heaters and made a 
makeshift tent to ensure the compressor would not freeze up. 
 
It’s because of the hard work of technicians like Mike and Chris 
that there wasn’t a single outage of gas on that record cold 
weekend. So while all of us and our families slept comfortably, 
it was the workers at SaskEnergy and TransGas that made sure 

we stayed warm. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Rwandan Genocide 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, today marks the 20th anniversary 
of the start of the genocide in Rwanda. On the evening of April 
6th, 1994, President Habyarimana’s plane was shot down as it 
approached Kigali airport. And in the early hours of April 7th, 
1994, 20 years ago today, Rwanda descended into the utter 
madness of genocide with the systematic killing of the Tutsi 
minority population and anyone willing to defend them. 
 
The genocide lasted for 100 unspeakably horrific days. As 
many as 1 million people were brutally killed, and the global 
community was largely silent. In fact countries frantically 
removed their peacekeeping troops from Rwanda, and the 
United Nations contingent dropped from 2,165 to just 270. 
 
Thirteen Canadian peacekeepers remained in Rwanda including 
Lieutenant General Roméo Dallaire, the commander of the UN 
[United Nations] force; as well as Major General Guy 
Tousignant and Major Brent Beardsley. These peacekeepers are 
heroes. We thank them for their service, and we pay tribute to 
those who lost their lives and to the survivors. 
 
Rwanda has witnessed incredible reconciliation between 
perpetrators and victims, and Rwandans have rebuilt their 
country in remarkable ways. Mr. Speaker, may the Rwandan 
genocide always serve as a reminder never to turn away and 
always to live up to our responsibility to look out for one 
another. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to welcome all of our guests to 
the Assembly but to remind them as well not to participate in 
events on the floor, which includes applause. Thank you. 
 
I recognize the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society Gala  
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
Friday night I had the opportunity along with several colleagues 
to attend the Night with STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society] Gala. Colleagues included the member from Eastend, 
Moosomin, Qu’Appelle Valley, Wascana Plains, and Estevan 
and Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 400 people attended this gala to celebrate 
STARS in Saskatchewan and to keep them in the air, as a 
fundraiser. The event raised over $130,000 to keep STARS air 
ambulance flying and saving people across our province. Mr. 
Speaker, entertainment was provided by country music stars 
Paul Brandt and Codie Prevost. 
 
Our government is delighted to work in partnership with 
STARS, which has provided a safe, rapid, highly specialized 
emergency medical transport system for the critically ill and 
injured for over 25 years. Since the launch of STARS in our 
province in April 2012, approximately 774 patients who were 
critically ill or injured have been assisted by STARS. STARS is 
a first-class organization that provides the highest quality care 



5092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2014 

to critically injured patients across our province. 
 
We will continue to work with STARS to look for innovative 
ways to help those in medical distress. Mr. Speaker, I ask that 
all members join me in recognizing and thanking all the 
sponsors and organizers of Friday’s gala for supporting such an 
important organization to the people of our province. Most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank everyone who 
played a role in organizing the gala — from the sponsors, the 
fundraisers, the organizing committee — who made it such a 
successful evening to help critically ill and injured people 
across our province. Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Pink Revolution Bullying Prevention Week 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was honoured to 
speak at the flag-raising ceremony outside Saskatoon city hall 
this morning to celebrate the official recognition of Pink 
Revolution Bullying Prevention Week, sending a signal to our 
city and our province that we will not tolerate bullying in our 
community. 
 
This year Pink Revolution is held between April 7th to 12th, 
and I encourage all members to participate and to make a 
difference through this important initiative. When we get 
involved and wear pink, we spread the message that bullying, 
violence, and discrimination motivated by sexism, racism, 
ethnocentrism, heterosexism, ableism, and ageism are not 
acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, discrimination is a social disease that affects the 
way everyone lives, works, plays, studies, and treats one 
another. It creates barriers to success by fostering prejudice and 
hate. 
 
Pink Revolution is more than just a symbol against bullying, it’s 
a commitment to celebrate diversity, learning from one another, 
being understanding of differences, and seeing the unique 
abilities that every person can share with the world when we 
work together. 
 
Pink Revolution was created as part of the Bullying Prevention 
Network, a joint initiative of the Avenue Community Centre for 
Gender and Sexual Diversity, the Boys and Girls Clubs of 
Saskatoon, Core Neighbourhood Youth Co-op, Momentum 
Martial Arts, the restorative action program, the Saskatoon 
Police Service cultural resources unit, USSU [University of 
Saskatoon Students’ Union] pride and youth launch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in promoting 
diversity, preventing bullying, and taking action to make our 
world a safer place as part of the Pink Revolution. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Paragon Awards 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend, I 

had the pleasure of attending the annual Regina and District 
Chamber of Commerce Paragon Business Excellence Awards. 
The Paragon Awards represent the recognition of members of 
the business community that have demonstrated exceptional 
performance in a number of specific areas. 
 
The categories and their award recipients for this year are, 
Young Entrepreneur, Kip Simon of 22 Fresh; Community 
Involvement, Alliance Energy; Community Alliance, Jack FM 
Hospitals of Regina Foundation; Export Achievement, Alliance 
Grain Traders Inc.; Customer Service Excellence was 
Diabsolut; Marketing and Promotion Achievement, LK Auto 
Collision; Diversity, MicroAge; Environmental Excellence, 
Namerind Housing Corp.; New Business Venture, the Mortgage 
Centre — Design Mortgages; and finally the Business of the 
Year Award went to Magna Electric. 
 
Congratulations to all the nominees and the recipients for their 
hard work and their innovation. 
 
Saskatchewan is currently enjoying unprecedented growth and 
success on a global scale, and these businesses are an essential 
part of this success. Their commitment to the business 
excellence serves to strengthen not only Regina but all of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the Regina and District Chamber of Commerce 
and all the deserving recipients of the 2014 Paragon Awards. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Sarcan Worker Retires 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday evening I had 
the pleasure to take part in a very special retirement party at 
Sask Abilities in Yorkton. My friend of 30 years, Donna Moore, 
celebrated her retirement after 22 years at Sarcan. 
 
Donna was born in 1957 with what some would see as 
insurmountable challenges. She endured many reconstructive 
surgeries in her younger days but tired of the discomfort, and 
was very comfortable with who she was. Those who know her 
today only see a woman with an amazing work ethic and a 
loyal, generous, and loving heart. 
 
She was born in Kamsack, endured surgeries in Saskatoon, was 
educated in Moose Jaw, and by 13 years old was looking after 
babies. She moved to Yorkton at 18, worked in the Abilities 
Centre ceramics and sewing departments. She left for work at a 
housecleaning company and a business supply company before 
starting at Sarcan in 1991. She quickly became affectionately 
known as The Little General. Her volunteerism is legendary, 
mostly with the Yorkton Terriers. She is their biggest fan and, 
although she is very loving, she hates the Melville Millionaires. 
 
I joined many of her past and current employers, fellow staff, 
community, and family members at her party, sharing stories 
and a PowerPoint. She made sure I had the organizers include a 
picture of, quote, her and her friend, Brad Wall, who phoned 
her on her 50th birthday. I may be her friend, but I think the 
member from Swift is her favourite MLA. 
 
For me, the evening was summed up by her latest manager, 



April 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5093 

Steven Rosowsky. He said the measure of success is not on how 
much you own or of your accomplishments, but about your 
relationships and the people who love you. Judging from the 
people there who showed Donna love, there is possibly no one 
more successful. 
 
Happy retirement, my friend. God bless. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

National Victims of Crime Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday marked the 
beginning of National Victims of Crime Awareness Week. This 
week is a time to bring special attention to the needs of victims, 
reawaken the dialogue on how we can assist those whose lives 
have been affected, and make communities aware of the 
services that are available. 
 
Years ago Saskatchewan adopted a declaration of principles 
respecting the treatment of victims of crime. As our province 
moves ahead, we’ve remained committed to offering victims 
their due respect, privacy, information, and understanding. We 
are privileged to have in our presence volunteers who have 
devoted years of their life to help their fellow community 
members recover following an act of crime. 
 
In addition to those in attendance, there are many other 
volunteers across this province. Last year alone, volunteer 
victim support workers gave nearly 9,000 hours of their time to 
help thousands of people in Saskatchewan. Their work is a 
testament to the kindness that makes our province such a great 
place to live. 
 
So to those in our communities who have been victimized by 
crime, let us send a message of compassion and support. To 
those who have volunteered to help the affected recover, let us 
extend our gratitude for their admirable service. Mr. Speaker, I 
invite all members to join me in recognizing Victims of Crime 
Awareness Week. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Conditions in Personal Care Homes 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know this is the 
government that took out any reference to appropriate staffing 
levels from the seniors’ care home regulations. This is also the 
government that removed the basic minimum quality of care 
standards from those regulations. 
 
The member from Melfort recently gave us a bit of insight into 
the government’s thinking on this. He said the two-hour per day 
guarantee was far too high, Mr. Speaker. He actually said 10 
minutes would be an appropriate amount, with a check-in in the 
morning and a check-in before bedtime. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
completely out of touch with the reality in care facilities across 
Saskatchewan. My question to the Premier: does he agree with 
his MLA that 10 minutes of care is acceptable, and is that why 

they watered down the regulations when it comes to personal 
care homes, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we do in fact have 
minimum standards within the manual that special care homes 
need to follow. That’s a nearly 200-page document, Program 
Guidelines for Special-care Homes, that does act as a minimum 
standard. In terms of staffing, we’ve moved to an individualized 
way to develop a care plan for each of our residents rather than 
relying on guidelines, on regulations that were written in the 
1950s and never updated in that time, that spoke to the time that 
we would spend for our clients and for our residents. But we’ve 
moved towards individualizing that care based on the needs of 
each individual resident. So whereas it may be applicable for a 
certain care standard for one individual, may not be the same 
requirements that another individual would need. 
 
At the same time what we’ve been doing is adding staff to 
long-term care. Nearly 750 full-time equivalents have been 
added to the long-term care system just in the last seven years. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, residents in care and their 
families have a very different story to tell from what the 
minister is stating. 
 
Savannah Gunderson lives in Sunset Extendicare. Her husband, 
Don, is here today because the quality of care for his wife and 
the other residents is not even close to acceptable. 
 
He doesn’t blame the front-line workers, Mr. Speaker, because 
they’re run off their feet. Rather Don blames this government 
for scrapping minimum care standards and for failing to fix the 
basics when it comes to seniors’ care. Every day, Mr. Speaker, 
Don sees first-hand the need for minimum quality of care 
standards and appropriate staffing levels. 
 
My question is to the Premier. Why won’t he restore minimum 
quality of care standards and why won’t he set targets for 
appropriate staffing levels in care facilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, what we’ve done over the last year is identify that we 
know that there are some issues within long-term care that we 
do need to address. Some of that may be on the equipment side; 
some of that may be on the staffing side; but each of our 156 
facilities will have different needs. 
 
What we know through the CEO report that took place last year 
was that in some cases it was because of aging facilities and the 
lack of some lifts that could not be accommodated. What we’ve 
done through the Urgent Issues Action Fund is provided dollars 
for over 700 pieces of equipment. Whether that be lifts, tubs, 
slings, special mattresses, those pieces are being installed this 
spring and should be available for use as we move through the 
spring and into the summer. 
 
In terms of staffing, we have allocated additional dollars for 



5094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2014 

staffing within some facilities that did identify that staffing was 
their major concern. What we’re also doing is providing record 
levels of funding for health regions to make those 
determinations about staffing outside of the Urgent Issues 
Action Fund. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is the government that forced 
health regions to slash their urgent requests for much needed 
repairs and equipment and staff in our care facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don was on the CEO tour, but the problems with 
his wife’s care continue. They remain there, Mr. Speaker. 
Savannah is cognitively aware, but she has largely lost the 
ability to speak due to a stroke. She can’t speak up and advocate 
for herself. So if it weren’t for her husband, Don, significant 
concerns would go unaddressed because the workers are far too 
busy to take notice. 
 
Don has repeatedly raised concerns related to Savannah’s 
feeding tube, wounds that weren’t properly cared for, no 
headrest on her wheelchair, and foot care not being done, Mr. 
Speaker. And the list goes on. Again, Don doesn’t blame the 
front-line workers, who he recognizes are run off their feet, but 
he sees this government’s decision to scrap minimum care 
standards and their failure to fix the basics in seniors’ care as 
the root of the problem. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he listen to Don today? Will 
he listen to the concerns that Don is raising about Savannah’s 
care or will he dismiss his concerns like he has with the other 
families who have come forward? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, quite earnestly, we do 
not dismiss cases that come before this House or that are raised 
by our members on this side of the House or by members of the 
opposition. We take them seriously. The Minister of Health and 
his office takes those particular issues seriously. They do 
involve loved ones, people in the province of Saskatchewan 
who deserve optimal care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, on behalf of the minister, will undertake that our 
government will look into this specific case. It is incorrect 
though to inform the House, to characterize what’s happened in 
the province as the elimination of minimum standards, Mr. 
Speaker. There are minimum standards. They’re not measured 
in terms of time. 
 
I think it is also important for this House to remember that since 
taking office we have added to the front-line staff very 
significantly, with more needed, with more needed. But 1,000 
more nurses or so practising today in the province of 
Saskatchewan than when they were in office — more front-line 
workers, Mr. Speaker, and more doctors. Now there’s more 
needed. We still have cases like this that are acceptable to 
precisely no one in Saskatchewan, but we’re going to continue 
to make progress. We will continue to provide record funding to 
the regions, urgent action funding for long-term care, and we 
will properly resource the complement of human resources in 
the health care system. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Don and Savannah’s case is one, 
but it represents many, many Saskatchewan families, Mr. 
Speaker, who are not receiving the care and the dignity that they 
deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was this government that removed the minimum 
care guarantee, removed the base level of care that people could 
expect, that seniors could expect, people could expect who are 
in care, Mr. Speaker. They go on about individualized care, but 
if you listen to people like Don and Savannah, that is not 
occurring as it should be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Don’s also frustrated with the lack of activities available in 
facilities, and sees inadequate staffing levels as the cause. 
Savannah gets just 12 minutes of activity per day, Mr. Speaker, 
12 minutes. Now I know that’s in the ballpark of what the 
member from Melfort was talking about when it comes to 
attention on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, but it is not acceptable. 
It’s not conducive to a good quality of life, Mr. Speaker. Don 
and Savannah deserve better, and Saskatchewan people deserve 
better. 
 
So this government has untold millions of dollars to pour into 
its lean pet project, Mr. Speaker, while they forget and they fail 
on the basics, Mr. Speaker, while Saskatchewan people in care 
suffer. My question to the Premier: what will it take for him to 
recognize that minimum care standards and appropriate staffing 
levels are required for better care in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve said before, we do certainly have minimum care standards 
that are not based on the time that is spent, but is based on 
needs of each individual resident. We do an evaluation within 
weeks of them coming into long-term care facilities. That is 
updated on a quarterly basis to gauge whether or not their needs 
have changed, either increased or decreased, and plans are made 
according to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to what we’ve done, we’ve taken a 
different approach. When the members opposite were in 
government, when long-term care issues were raised the 
members opposite’s response to that was to simply put in place 
a plan to just increase the rates that people paid in long-term 
care. We’ve decided to do something different. We’ve taken an 
approach to look specifically at the concerns that were raised 
through the CEO tour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have identified $10 million as well as $3.8 
million in ongoing dollars. Some of that’s been put, as I’ve said, 
to equipment. Others has been put into . . . Recreational hours 
have been increased. That was Sun Country, one of the asks that 
they asked for. They’ve increased recreational programming, 
particularly on weekends, which was one of the areas that 
Cypress has put some money to. As well Regina Qu’Appelle is 
also doing gentle persuasion. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 



April 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5095 

Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Travel Expenses 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
know about the $200 personal lunch with a friend in London, 
but we don’t know if this friend accompanied the Minister of 
Social Services on her entire trip. To the minister: did her friend 
from Saskatchewan go with her to Ghana as well, or did they 
just meet up for the London portion? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my friend was with me on 
the trip. And to be sure that the members opposite are aware of 
this, my family paid for their own trip at all times. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we understand that a receipt 
inadvertently submitted as the registration fees for the FASD 
[fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] conference was actually a 
receipt for Ghana travel visas for herself and two others. Are we 
then to assume that person was also one of the other two people 
on . . . that she paid for their travel visas? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. There was the $250 
registration fee that I didn’t submit, I confused with the $285 
visas. And I on Friday repaid the $190 that was mistakenly 
charged to the taxpayers of this province. And again my family 
paid for their own trip. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The conference that 
the Minister of Social Services arranged to attend in Ghana was 
from June 6th to June 8th. It was a three-day conference, but the 
minister actually spent eight days in Ghana and she claimed her 
meal and incidental per diems every single day. To the minister: 
what did she do on those extra days, and why did taxpayers 
have to foot the bill for her extra time in Ghana? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
opposite is aware of my schedule, that I had meetings for the 
conference. And then on the Monday, I actually had a meeting 
as well and it was with the . . . On the Monday, I had meetings 
that were involving the community college, the Tema 
community college board of directors, and I toured the campus. 
 
The Tema community college was actually developed with the 
assistance of the province of Saskatchewan about 25 years ago. 
The college was looking at possible joint opportunities with 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] and SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies] and, Mr. Speaker, this is work that I carried on. 
Mr. Speaker, the work that we did when we were in Ghana was, 
I believe, very, very important for the people of this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of her itinerary. 
On Thursday we did ask her to table her itinerary for both the 
Ghana portion and the London portion. Will she do so today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Yes, I will release that. I thought it was 
already released today. But I want to make sure that the 
members opposite have an idea of the work that was carried on 
when I was over there. There were eight meetings as well as the 
conference and some media that I did over there. I spoke with 
the Speaker and the chamber of commerce. I talked to the High 
Commissioner. 
 
There was a Dr. Lutterodt from the clinic who has actually 
practised here in Regina for over 30 years. And he saw the 
work, the possibility of more work that we could be doing in 
conjunction with the people of Ghana. I went to the Tema 
community college again and talked about what we could be 
doing in partnership with our educational opportunities. And a 
really important meeting was with the Minister of Health where 
I brought forward the declaration from the conference where we 
actually implored her to look at FASD as an important part of 
what they’re doing in their education system. Mr. Speaker, this 
issue was way beyond the borders of any province or any 
country. It’s something that we have an opportunity to deal with 
as a nation and a national nation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has tried to claim that 
her four-day layover in London was a filler between her time in 
Ghana and another conference in Prince Edward Island. But the 
conference in Prince Edward Island started 10 days after the 
conference in Ghana ended. The minister could have come 
home and worked for a week before going to Prince Edward 
Island. Instead she tacked on extra days in Ghana and claimed 
all her per diems, and then she hung out in London with her 
friend and sent the bill to the taxpayers. 
 
To the minister: why didn’t she either take those 10 days off 
and pay all the expenses herself or just come home and work 
for a week, instead of racking up bills for the taxpayers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
doesn’t have my itinerary for over in London, then I guess I 
should have sent it to him earlier. But I think right now is the 
opportunity to tell him the work that we did do when we were 
over there. 
 
One of the most important things that we did when we were 
over there was meeting with the minister responsible for 
diversity, the deputy director, and we talked about what they are 
doing in their disability structure. And you know, the member 
opposite is well aware that we are developing a comprehensive 
disability strategy. 
 
Over in the UK, they have four points, which is employment, 
education, transportation, and access to goods and services. I 
spent a lot of time talking to them about the work that could be 
done. And when we came back here, we talked in Saskatchewan 



5096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2014 

about having six pillars. We added to the work that was done 
over in the UK because we now have support for community 
caregivers, we have community inclusion, and we have housing 
that wasn’t discussed over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also included things like talking about the 
social impact bonds, which is something I had never heard 
about till I got over there. But I assure the members opposite, 
they’ll be hearing about it soon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been asking for the 
itinerary to be tabled, as has the media, for a number of days, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
On Thursday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier didn’t have a lot of 
answers about the very costly trip taken by the Minister of 
Social Services to Ghana as well as London. I asked a very 
specific question, Mr. Speaker: who designated the $200 
personal lunch for the Minister of Social Services and a friend 
as an official debrief meeting, and who signed off on that 
expense? When I asked repeatedly, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
did not have an answer, and he actually said this: “We’ll get 
that information to the member. I do not know the answer to 
that question.” 
 
So my question to the Premier: what is the answer? Who 
designated the 200 personal lunch as an official business 
debrief, and who signed off on it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I have reviewed in detail the 
schedule of meetings for the Minister of Social Services while 
in Ghana at the conference, then the meetings she had 
subsequent to the conference, Mr. Speaker, in Ghana, as well as 
her schedule in London, where very germane meetings took 
place to her file, a meeting she took for the Ministry of Finance 
with a bank, Mr. Speaker, as well as a meeting that has frankly 
spawned the idea on this side of the Atlantic for social impact 
bonds. And the minister is quite right: members opposite are 
going to hear and see actually what came of that particular trip. 
 
With respect to the answer to the Leader of the Opposition’s 
question, the cabinet secretary mistakenly noted the expense as 
he has highlighted here today, and it’s been paid back. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the comments that the Premier 
makes about what was learned during these meetings, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve heard the scrums and the interviews that the 
minister has provided on this, Mr. Speaker, comments about, a 
discussion about what is a disability — very rudimentary, basic 
things, Mr. Speaker, that don’t require a trip to London to figure 
out that information. 
 
We learned five minutes before question period today, Mr. 
Speaker, that the cabinet secretary, the Premier’s right-hand 
adviser, is repaying $7,016.77 in limo services that were 
booked for the Minister of Social Services and the Minister of 
Finance. To the Premier: how many other cabinet ministers 

have inappropriately billed taxpayers for limousine services 
while out of country on trips? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, officials of the government, 
staff in my office have been working through the weekend to go 
through expenses which were released today, ’13-14 expenses 
of the ministers that have travelled, Mr. Speaker. Actually we 
went through this exercise to answer precisely the question the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition has put. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance has noted today, quite 
publicly, that the same official booked the same car service for 
meetings that he had in London. It’s a part frankly of the same 
mission or a part of that, an adjunct to that same mission. Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Finance was also not comfortable with 
the expense because he believed he could have achieved his 
meetings in a taxicab, and so he too has paid for the difference, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s the extent of it. 
 
Although, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t gone beyond the term of the 
life of this government, and I would hope that if we were to find 
out, Mr. Speaker, for example that New Democratic ministers 
or members of Executive Council billed for personal functions 
while they were away, that they also would remit it back to the 
taxpayers. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, last week when we asked about 
the $200 personal lunch that was listed and described on the 
FOI [freedom of information] that was released as a debrief, 
official government business lunch, Mr. Speaker, I asked the 
Premier last week, who deemed that to be official debrief and 
who signed off on it? Last week as I recall, the language that 
the front bench was saying was that it was a clerical error, that 
it was an oversight. 
 
Just to clarify the Premier’s remarks of what he just said, is it 
now his position that it was the cabinet secretary who described 
that as a business lunch and signed off on it as an expense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mistakenly, yes. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, last week when commenting on 
this, the Minister of Social Services said, “I did what everybody 
was doing.” And now, Mr. Speaker, we see expenses being 
repaid also for the Minister of Finance. My question, Mr. 
Speaker . . . It sounds like when looking at the remarks from the 
Minister of Social Services and the statements being made by 
the Premier that this approach is widespread within 
government, and other cabinet ministers are following this 
approach for ministers, as well as political appointees. It does 
not sound like an isolated incident. 
 
My question to the Premier: has he ordered a full investigation 
into the expenses of not only the cabinet secretary, but his other 
ministers also? 



April 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5097 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social 
Services was following the practice of this government. The 
practice of this government has been, since elected, to reduce 
the travel costs, the record travel costs that were set by NDP 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker. In fact we have cut in half 
ministerial travel since we took office, versus what members 
did, Mr. Speaker — cut it in half, apples to apples comparison. 
We use the same travel reporting that the members opposite 
used in government. In fact it is the same officials . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh no. It is precisely the same 
method, and the deputy leader knows it, and it’s 50 per cent less 
than the NDP. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services, in four 
years, her total travel is $104,000. In one year of travel, when 
the member for Athabasca right there was a Social Services 
minister, $122,000. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services 
said she was doing what everyone else was doing, Mr. Speaker. 
My question to the Premier which I asked and which there was 
not an answer . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Has he 
ordered an investigation into the expenses, Mr. Speaker, of the 
cabinet secretary, and is he investigating the expenses of the 
other cabinet ministers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have looked at the 
expenses of ministers. That’s precisely what I said a couple of 
answers ago. And we have found these two instances, booked 
by the same official, and the money’s been repaid now quite 
appropriately by the same official. And when the Minister of 
Social Services said she was following the practices of 
government, what she meant I think, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s 
been a 53 per cent reduction in ministerial travel from ’12-13 
versus ’06-07 when they were in office, a 63.5 per cent 
reduction on exec air use. Those are the government-owned 
aircraft. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite used them 63 . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the deputy leader, the deputy leader just 
said because you drive your own vehicle. Absolutely, Mr. 
Speaker. I drive my own vehicle to work and back and then 
back again. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The bottom line is this: apples to apples comparison. And I 
know this seems to be not sinking into the Leader of the 
Opposition or members opposite. And he should talk to some of 
his colleagues who are former cabinet colleagues who also have 
expenses to be reviewed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He should consider that under the Saskatchewan Party, 
ministerial travel is down, Mr. Speaker, by 53 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, political staff down, advertising down. Mr. Speaker, 
we do look after the taxpayers’ money, and I think that’s why 
the parties are represented in this room the way they are. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — When was the Premier informed that it was not 
a clerical error but in fact the cabinet secretary had signed off 
on the expense and had deemed it a business lunch? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Clerical error, mistake, we knew this last 
week. The story is the same. This was a mistake, and it was 
immediately paid back by the official, not the minister, when it 
happened. 
 
Let’s remember the instances that . . . Let’s remember all the 
facts around this story. The Minister of Social Services had the 
choice to fly, as per government policy, business class to this 
conference. She flew economy, Mr. Speaker. She stayed, Mr. 
Speaker, she stayed with her friends while they were in Ghana, 
in part to help save money. Mr. Speaker, there is some pattern 
they’re trying to establish that doesn’t exist. 
 
The pattern that exists here is that the NDP while in office in 
their last year spent double what this side of the House has 
spent in ministerial travel. And it’s hard to figure out how they 
did that because I don’t think they actually did go anywhere and 
promote the province of Saskatchewan. The answer of course 
comes in a 63.5 per cent increase in the use of the NDP’s 
private taxi, executive air, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That policy has changed on this side. And moreover, we do 
think we can do better in terms of reporting, better than the 
process that existed when members opposite were in 
government, and better admittedly than the process we’ve used. 
And that’s why we will go to semi-annual disclosure of both 
ministers and their staff, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to take 
the trust of taxpayers seriously. We will continue to watch out 
for taxpayers’ dollars. That’s what we do on this side of the 
House. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 132 — The Public Guardian and Trustee 
Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 132 be now 
introduced and read a first time, The Public Guardian and 
Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved first reading of Bill No. 132, The Public Guardian 
and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 



5098 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2014 

recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 133 — The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant 

la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 133, The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved first reading of Bill No. 133, The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 134 — The Financial Administration 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 134, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 
2014 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
first reading of Bill No. 134, The Financial Administration 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
 

Bill No. 135 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 135, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
first reading of Bill No. 135, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 136 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 136, 
The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
introduced and read for a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and Resources has 
moved first reading . . . Well sorry to interrupt. I didn’t realize 
you were talking. The Minister of Energy and Resources has 
moved first reading of Bill No. 136, The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — The next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committees this afternoon and this 
evening, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 7, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5099 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I had to assume we weren’t ready to adjourn 
yet. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. tomorrow 
afternoon. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:38.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Number of International Trips 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5087 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5087 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5087 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5087 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5088 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5088 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5088 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5088 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5089 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5089 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5089 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5090 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5090 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5090 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5090 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5090 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5091 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Technicians Work Hard During Record Cold Weekend 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5091 
 Rwandan Genocide 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5091 
 Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society Gala  
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5091 
 Pink Revolution Bullying Prevention Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5092 
 Paragon Awards 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5092 
 Sarcan Worker Retires 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5092 
 National Victims of Crime Awareness Week 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5093 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Conditions in Personal Care Homes 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5093 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5093 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5094 
 Travel Expenses 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5095 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5095 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5096 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5096 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 132 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5097 
 Bill No. 133 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5098 
 Bill No. 134 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2014 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5098 
 Bill No. 135 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5098 
 Bill No. 136 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2014 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5098 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


