
























































Hansard: March 26, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 40A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 26, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4943 
 March 26, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
going to make a request for leave for an extended introduction, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are fortunate 
today to have a number of guests in your gallery, and permit me 
to make the introductions to you and then through you to all 
members of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will begin with friends from the Netherlands. 
In fact more specifically, His Excellency, the ambassador from 
the Kingdom of the Netherlands has joined us today, Mr. Cees 
Kole. He is joined by someone who’s no stranger to this 
Assembly or the public life of the province, Judie Dyck, the 
honorary consul for the Netherlands to the province of 
Saskatchewan. And then from the government, Mr. Speaker, 
Norma Morrow, senior protocol officer, is joining them as well 
as Laurie Hutton, international officer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to welcome His Excellency to this 
Legislative Assembly. We want to thank him for furthering the 
relationship between our respective peoples, our nations, but 
also with a specific focus today certainly on the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have certainly links in our 
province to the Netherlands, in part because of the number of 
people in the province who trace some heritage to the 
Netherlands, and also very much due to the seminally important 
moment in the history of Europe when so many Canadian 
soldiers played a big role in liberating the Netherlands from 
Nazi occupation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While His Excellency is here, he has already been about the 
business of his country and in the furtherance of the relationship 
with our province. He’s been to the Boundary dam clean coal 
project, Mr. Speaker, the largest per capita public project in 
terms of CO2 mitigation, Mr. Speaker. We’re grateful for the 
interest of the Netherlands because they too have a lot to show 
the world, to teach the world in the area of CCS [carbon capture 
and storage], the Netherlands being a significant energy 
producer in terms of oil and in terms of natural gas, which of 
course will be of great importance, even more than it has been, 
going forward. Based on the events in the Crimea, we know the 
strategic importance of the Netherlands to a stable, safe, and 
secure Europe, Mr. Speaker. And we want to acknowledge that 
today as well. 

Mr. Speaker, His Excellency has been meeting with ministers. 
He has been looking at issues around trade, innovation, and 
education. And so we want to thank him, and we want to thank 
Judie for their presence here, for the meetings they’ve held. And 
we want to say thank you as well for the relationship that we 
have with the Kingdom of the Netherlands and with the people 
of the Netherlands and welcome him officially and formally to 
the Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, we also have a 
distinguished group, a welcome delegation from our twin 
province in the People’s Republic of China, the province of 
Jilin. I’m going to make the introductions and just ask each of 
our guests if they would just give us a wave when I mention 
their names. Joining us today is the vice-chairman for the 
Provincial People’s Congress of Jilin, Mr. Wang; Mr. Jin who is 
the director general of environment and resource protection; 
Mr. Wang, the deputy director general, foreign affairs office of 
Jilin province; Mr. Shi, director of rural economic management 
station of Jilin province; Ms. Huang, director of European and 
American affairs division, foreign affairs office, Jilin province; 
Mr. Zhu, deputy general manager, Haoyue Group of Jilin as 
well. And joining them from our Ministry of the Economy is 
Victor Zhang, and also international relations Executive 
Council officer Yang Geng. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the twinning relationship between the province of 
Saskatchewan and Jilin dates back now 30 years to 1984 when 
then Premier Grant Devine and leadership from Jilin signed and 
formalized the relationship, Mr. Speaker. And it’s been an 
active partnership. Very recently, I think it was in February, the 
Minister of Advanced Education and Jilin renewed their 
agreement to establish exchange and co-operation relationships 
in primary, secondary, and post-secondary educational issues, 
Mr. Speaker. This remains a top priority for the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s growth plan, that we would further educational 
partnerships in Asia and specifically in China and more 
specifically with our sister province who are grateful for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and Jilin are twins. We also share 
some common characteristics. Jilin is a prolific producer of 
agricultural products in China, Mr. Speaker, and they’re also a 
major producer of petrochemicals. That industry is also 
important to Jilin. These things we share in common, in 
addition to now three decades of working together. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we hope for many, many more decades going forward 
in terms of this relationship between Saskatchewan and Jilin. 
And we welcome our friends and our partners from Jilin 
province in the People’s Republic of China here to the 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the Premier in extending a welcome on behalf of the 
official opposition to the delegations that are present here in 
your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To Ambassador Cees Kole, we are very pleased that you are in 
the province today. And of course there are many reasons why 
we respect and appreciate the Netherlands. You know, we can 
think of some of the things like good cheeses and good beer and 



4944 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

a good place to vacation and also their ability to win medals 
when it comes to speed skating, Mr. Speaker. But more 
importantly we appreciate the Netherlands because of the role 
that they play in Europe and the role that they play in the world. 
And we think of the important role that the Netherlands has 
played within the EU [European Union] post-World War II. But 
we know that that there are current challenges as well, as we all 
think of the stability that we want to have within Europe and 
throughout Eurasia. 
 
So I would like to on behalf of the official opposition extend a 
word of thanks to the ambassador for his role and the role of the 
country he represents. And of course to say a special hello to 
Ms. Judie Dyck, no stranger to functions around Regina, 
representing and doing a fine job as honorary consul. So I’d ask 
all members to join me in welcoming the ambassador from the 
Netherlands. 
 
And I would also of course extend my welcome to the Chinese 
delegation from Jilin province. As the Premier accurately 
pointed out, this a relationship that has gone on for some time, 
and the exchange of ideas, the exchange of knowledge of course 
is very important, the exchange of people. And that’s a 
partnership that has been built up over years and has been to the 
benefit of both sides of the friendship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would on behalf of the official opposition welcome this 
delegation to the province and wish them all the best as they 
tour and visit and have discussions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
pleasure I get to introduce a couple of gentlemen in our gallery 
today. We have Mr. Dave Knight, general manager of Sakâw 
Askiy Management. They hold the forest management 
agreement with the Government of Saskatchewan and 
coordinate the management of the FMA [forest management 
agreement], Mr. Speaker. They have eight member companies, 
two of which are First Nations. Joining him today is Mr. Terry 
Kuzma, woodlands manager for Carrier Forest Products. Carrier 
operates the Big River saw mill that I think we heard about in a 
member’s statement earlier this week, Mr. Speaker. These two 
gentlemen are also joined by one of our devoted public 
servants, Shane Vermette. 
 
These gentlemen are here today as we’re going to be talking 
about a little later on the timber dues, Mr. Speaker. And these 
three gentlemen, and they represent a far broader group, have 
done a substantial amount of work, working with basic numbers 
and working our way forward to find a very market-based 
system, Mr. Speaker, and it is no small task and a service to our 
province and to the forestry sector. So if all members could join 
me with welcoming them and thanking them for the work and 
service they’ve done to our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
minister in welcoming the guests from the forest industry in 
Saskatchewan to the legislature. They are building on a long 
tradition we have in this province of making the most effective 

use of our forest assets, and I know that they are continuing to 
build on that. And we’re looking forward to the announcement 
today around a new taxation structure which will complement 
what they’re doing and also make sure that the resources are 
used in the most appropriate way. So with that I’d like to 
welcome these members to the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to welcome a delegation that’s seated in your gallery 
and maybe request extended leave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 
members. We have a delegation here today that are all wearing 
purple. I guess you could say they’re doing so with purpose. It 
is Purple Day, a global day to recognize and call for awareness 
as it relates to epilepsy. And it’s a pleasure to have friends join 
us here today as well as family. 
 
So I’d welcome to their Assembly here today, we have certainly 
some very courageous children, some great families. I would 
introduce my sister Shauna Weninger — if you can give us a 
wave, Shauna — her son and my sidekick, Nolan, who’s a 
courageous young man also dealing with epilepsy; my other 
nephew, Carson, who’s also courageous just on a whole host of 
other fronts. And some very good friends seated beside them, 
Steve Ryan and Haley Ryan, if they could give us a wave, and 
their son, Knox. Knox, if you can give us a wave. He’s a 
courageous young man living and dealing with epilepsy as well. 
Members might also recognize Steve and certainly his brother 
who plays a little bit of football. Nice to have you here today, 
Steve. 
 
I’d also like to welcome a constituent and good friend, Jacqui 
Cameron, who’s here today. She’s not joined by her son Rylan 
here today, who is an 11-year-old and maybe the biggest Rider 
fan in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and an incredibly 
courageous and brave young man as well who’s also living with 
epilepsy. 
 
And it’s through this delegation here today that I’ve learned an 
awful lot about epilepsy and the challenges for young people 
dealing with it, for all people dealing with it, certainly for 
families. There’s a couple of other people I should reference 
there, some good friends of the delegation that are here and 
friends of myself as well, Jennifer Britton that’s here today. 
And we have two young friends I think of Nolan and Carson, 
and that would be Trey and Angel. And if they can give us a 
wave. So I ask all members of this Assembly to welcome this 
fine delegation to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4945 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support of 
education. And we know that education is one of the most vital 
services the government provides to citizens, and that this 
government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision 
and the necessary resources to prioritize the delivery of 
educational excellence, that this government has failed to 
deliver a real plan to close the Aboriginal education gap, 
support English as an additional language students, support 
community schools in their communities, and students. 
 
And we know that this government would rather talk about 
standardized testing than hear from teachers and parents about 
addressing the real needs of today’s classroom, and that this 
government has adopted a P3 [public-private partnership] 
privatization approach to building the new schools the province 
needs, even though the scheme will cost more than traditionally 
built schools and will leave out community needs in the designs 
of the schools. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that we must build 
the best education system for today and for Saskatchewan’s 
future. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 
provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan that 
reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best practices, 
that is developed through consultation with the education 
sector, and that builds strong educational infrastructure that 
serves students and communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
the safety on Dewdney Avenue and the important need, 
immediate need of rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic from 
Dewdney Avenue. They note that it’s unacceptable for this 
government to delay any longer addressing a problem created 
by that government and ensuring the safety of all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting of 
heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, and be 
developed through consultation with the city of Regina, 
communities, and residents. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition. And this petition’s in relation to 
housing, as many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program also known as RPO. These families 
were very proud homeowners in their community. And 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly ignored 
the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled the RPO. 
That means the dream of home ownership is destroyed for 
many families. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Saskatchewan 
Party government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option 
for responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
the communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from Beauval, but many, many others have signed 
many, many other petitions. And I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Purple Day for Epilepsy 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand to 
recognize the International Day for Epilepsy or Purple Day. Mr. 
Speaker, epilepsy is a condition of the brain characterized by 
recurrent seizures. Purple Day works to bring awareness about 
epilepsy in an effort to dispel harmful myths and to inform 
those who live with this condition that they are not alone. There 
are approximately 50 million people living with epilepsy. That 
is an estimated one in every 100 people or 1 per cent of the 
people around the world. Here in Canada, more than 300,000 
citizens are living with this condition. 
 
There is currently no cure for epilepsy. However, through 
surgery, medication, and lifestyle changes many people are able 
to control their seizures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Purple Day was created by Cassidy Megan, a 
young girl from Nova Scotia who lives with epilepsy. She 
wanted to bring awareness about epilepsy in an effort to fight 
against the stigmatization of this condition. In 2009, with the 
help of the Epilepsy Association of Nova Scotia and the Anita 
Kaufmann Foundation, Purple Day was launched 
internationally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing 
March 26th as Purple Day and thank Cassidy Megan for all her 
work to make this day possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 



4946 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as mentioned today, 
March 26th is Purple Day, the global day for epilepsy 
awareness. I stand today to speak to this important cause, not 
only to offer support for people living with epilepsy and their 
families, but also from seeing the challenge first-hand through 
my family. My nephew has epilepsy. I’ve shared in the stresses 
and the challenges. I’ve also learned directly from constituent 
families like Jacqui Cameron and her courageous son, Rylan. 
It’s from these experiences that I know recognition like this and 
actions are so important. 
 
In 2008, Cassidy Megan, a 9-year-old girl in Nova Scotia living 
with epilepsy, founded Purple Day. Cassidy’s goal was to 
ensure people living with epilepsy never felt alone. The 
importance of the goal cannot be underestimated. Many of us 
are touched by epilepsy. It’s a condition that affects thousands 
of Canadians, and each year 15,000 more people learn they 
have epilepsy in Canada. 
 
Many have described dealing with the condition as a feeling of 
being powerless — powerless to stop the attacks or supporters 
and family feeling powerless in their inability to help. We are 
not powerless. As a society, it is our job to raise awareness and 
to create a better understanding. Our governments must also do 
a better job of supporting research, providing supports, and a 
much better job of ensuring that specialists are available for 
those in need in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all my colleagues to join with me in 
recognizing Purple Day. I call on all members to take a moment 
to learn about epilepsy and to focus on improving supports, and 
how we as a society can end the isolation of individuals and 
families dealing with epilepsy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Theatre Company’s New Office and Rehearsal Space 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday the 
grand opening of RuBarb Productions Incorporated’s new 
office and rehearsal space took place in my constituency and 
was attended by the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport. Mr. 
Speaker, RuBarb Productions was founded in 2006 with the 
dream to give opportunity to local artists to develop their art 
and passion for the arts right at home in Moose Jaw. It united 
the facilities and talent of Moose Jaw and area to form an 
exceptional organization presenting high-quality live theatre 
experiences to the community, including Broadway musicals 
such as the phantom,  Anne of Green Gables, The Sound of 
Music, and others. 
 
The opening of the new office and rehearsal space is an 
important step for this dynamic, community-based arts 
organization. Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 
supports RuBarb Productions through a SaskCulture capacity 
development grant as well as through artsVest Saskatchewan. 
RuBarb also received $20,000 in funding from Creative 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, community theatre contributes to the economic 
strength of our province. It brings revenues into our 
communities, and those dollars help businesses, organizations, 

and community projects. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this 
Assembly to join me in congratulating RuBarb Productions on 
the opening of their new office and rehearsal space. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Inter-school Winter Games 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the 
3rd Annual Inter-school Winter Games which took place on 
March 5th on the Kiskinwuhumatowin reserve, a former 
residential school site. The games were created to bring 
students from the Lac La Ronge Indian Band schools and the 
Northern Lights School Division together to have fun 
competing in different trapper-style events. The games were a 
great chance for our northern communities to compete in 
athletics, but also lasting friendships would be made. Mr. 
Speaker, I also have to mention that there were also excellent 
skiing and snowshoe races, which stirred a lot of excitement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this year’s games, we had six communities 
taking part in the festivities, including communities 
Grandmother’s Bay, La Ronge, Stanley Mission, Hall Lake, 
Sucker River, and White Buffalo. Mr. Speaker, each event was 
exciting and the excellent sportsmanship was shown throughout 
the week. The meals were great. A big thank you to all the 
volunteers who helped make this a successful community event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students’ teachers were treated to a good time 
by their host Project Venture, which is a Lac La Ronge Indian 
Band project that focuses on hands-on learning for students, on 
the land and in the classroom. Mr. Speaker, I want to especially 
thank Kevin Jackson and Chris Ratt, as well as all the education 
staff who helped out at this year’s event. It truly was a great 
success. Tiniki. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Company Named One of Best Diversity Employers 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to rise before you today to recognize and congratulate 
Cameco, which has been named for the fifth year in a row one 
of Canada’s best diversity employers in 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is in recognition of the fact that approximately 
40 per cent of Cameco’s workforce here in Saskatchewan are of 
First Nation and Métis heritage. Cameco has received this 
award in the past, Mr. Speaker, and it’s primarily because of 
their excellent record of Aboriginal training, employment, and 
workforce development. This recognition follows Cameco’s 
recent listing as one of Canada’s top 100 employers as well as 
Saskatchewan’s top employers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cameco is committing over $80,000 in 
scholarships to help U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 
graduate students pursue their studies in northern governance 
and development. Fourteen students, including FSIN 
[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Vice-chief Simon 
Bird and former Meadow Lake Tribal Council chief, Helen 
Ben, will receive $6,000 each to help them conduct a research 
internship in a number of northern Saskatchewan communities. 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4947 

We heard recently, as highlighted by the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford, that Cameco has now produced its first ore 
from the Cigar Lake mine. This has been a long-awaited 
announcement and one which I have a keen interest in, since 
my daughter Carla is the project accountant for Cigar Lake and 
is quite excited that this very expensive project is now 
beginning production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cameco continues to be a great corporate citizen 
in our province, and I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating them on this recognition and thanking them for 
their ongoing efforts working with our northern and Aboriginal 
peoples. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Innovation and Opportunity Scholarship Award Ceremony 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I was 
honoured to provide greetings at the Cumberland College award 
ceremony in Tisdale on behalf of the Minister of Advanced 
Education. It was a great opportunity to meet the future leaders 
of our province and learn about their various programs and 
future ambitions. 
 
The ceremony was held for the recipients of the Saskatchewan 
Innovation and Opportunity Scholarship. This program funds 
scholarships focused on innovation and excellence, Mr. 
Speaker. The scholarship is targeted at students in emerging 
fields of study where innovative work is being done. The 
opportunities category of the scholarship is targeted towards the 
priority areas identified in Cumberland College’s strategic plan 
that are important to the industry and community the college 
serves. 
 
For 2014-15, our government will commit $5 million in funding 
for the Saskatchewan Innovation and Opportunity Scholarship 
program. This will be matched by scholarship funding raised by 
the post-secondary institutions, the private sector, and 
community-based partners. Mr. Speaker, this flexibility will 
allow institutions to attract partner donors and provide student 
assistance to students that is appropriate to the level and field of 
study. 
 
Our government will continue to make investments in people by 
providing funds for post-secondary education to support our 
labour market needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
students who received the Saskatchewan Innovation and 
Opportunity Scholarship at the Cumberland College award 
ceremonies, and to wish them all the best in their studies. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Services to Children and Families 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from 
Saskatoon Centre stood in this Chamber and said, “. . . this 
government is cutting front-line workers in the child and family 

services division.” That’s just factually wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
There are no cuts to front-line child protection workers in the 
child and family services division in this budget. 
 
However, as the member from Saskatoon Centre knows, we 
have hired 90 new front-line workers to improve services to 
children and families. This budget increased funding by $8.7 
million to the child and family agenda to continue its 
cross-ministry approach to helping Saskatchewan children, 
youth, and families. This budget also increased child and family 
CBO [community-based organization] services by $12 million. 
We are moving to a model of more community-based delivery 
of child welfare services, something that fits with the 
recommendations of the child welfare review panel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an incredibly important file that concerns 
some of our province’s most vulnerable children. There is a lot 
we could be debating about in this Chamber today, a lot of real 
issues affecting families. On our side, we welcome that debate, 
Mr. Speaker. Instead, we are hearing incorrect information from 
the members of the opposition. That type of discourse is not 
helpful when dealing with issues as serious as these. I ask the 
member from Saskatoon Centre to stand in this House, retract 
his comments, and admit what the facts on this file are. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Supply of Pediatric Neurologists 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last May I raised 
concerns about the shortage of pediatric neurologists in the 
province, and I appreciate that there has been some 
improvement on this front over the last year. But I also know, 
Mr. Speaker, that the need is not being met. And I know, Mr. 
Speaker, that families have come to the legislature today on 
World Epilepsy Day to highlight the need for further 
improvement. So my question is for the Premier: could he 
please provide an update on what the government is doing to 
meet this need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 
the member opposite for his question, and we want to thank 
families that have joined us here and other families from across 
the province who are raising awareness about the needs in this 
particular area. And I also want to acknowledge and thank the 
Leader of the Opposition for recognizing progress that is being 
made, though he points out more is needed to be done. He 
won’t find an argument on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the complement of three pediatric 
neurologists now. We are working on succession planning and 
recruitment. Mr. Speaker, that’s my understanding in terms of 
the human resource plan for the area, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
also point out for the House that we’ve taken the issue of 
specialists in all areas very seriously and the area of pediatrics 
very seriously as well, Mr. Speaker. That is why today there are 
25 per cent more specialists overall practising in the province 
today than there were when we took office. And there are 27 
per cent more pediatricians practising today in the province than 



4948 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

when we took office, with acknowledgement that we need to 
continually improve to provide the optimal services that 
families need in Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — What many families with children who have 
epilepsy are saying is that the pediatric neurology wait-list is 
very long and families are spending a lot of time in Calgary as a 
result. And, Mr. Speaker, I can’t imagine what it’s like as a 
parent to worry about the consequences of untreated seizures on 
a child or to have to travel regularly to Calgary for regular 
medical appointments. 
 
So again I appreciate that there has been some improvement 
over the last year, but I know, Mr. Speaker, that the need is still 
not being met. The families that are here today, Mr. Speaker, 
deserve some answers, as do the many families in the province 
who are affected and living through this, Mr. Speaker. So my 
question to the Premier — and he talked about the complement 
— can he at least provide a timeline for when a full 
complement of pediatric neurologists will be available in our 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, members will know that the 
issue of physician recruitment — and this is true certainly in the 
specialties, but not limited to specialties — is a challenging one 
here and across the country. And so to answer the member’s 
question directly, it’s very difficult to say, by this date this 
province is going to be able to have the optimal number of 
doctors we want in any particular area, just as it would be the 
case for any province in the country to be able to give those 
specific dates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can share with members here and with the 
Leader of the Opposition though that this particular area is also 
manifesting itself a priority in terms of what we’re doing with 
residency positions in the province. Mr. Speaker, specifically 
you will know that this government has invested in additional 
residency seats here in Saskatchewan, significantly higher than 
they were just when we took office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s an effort on the part of the regions and the 
Ministry of Health and the post-secondary institutions to match 
specifically residency expertise to areas like pediatric 
neurology, Mr. Speaker, so that while we are providing the 
residency training here in Saskatchewan, we can also begin to 
focus those efforts towards specific specialities, in this case 
pediatric neurology. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Switching gears, Mr. 
Speaker, last Thursday morning the Premier said on the radio, 
“We don’t have a lean consultant in this province.” My question 
to the Premier: why did he say that? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve learned from this 
particular member, and we’ll want to check the context, I can 
only say that, Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan went 
through a request for proposal process when we decided to head 
down lean, as so many other health care institutions and so 
many other public and private sector agencies around the world 
have done. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we made a selection. That selection cost the 
province about point one six per cent of the health budget every 
year, Mr. Speaker — $40 million over the four years. We’ve 
already saved more than the overall cost of the contract in 
savings to taxpayers as a result of the lean initiative, and we’ve 
seen significant improvements in terms of patient-centred care. 
That’s why we’re going to continue working on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly open to improvements and 
adjustments as we go forward with this consultant and with 
front-line workers, for whom this program has been 
implemented in the first place, as we seek to hear from them 
directly. And including, Mr. Speaker, we welcome input from 
members opposite. We welcome again the Leader of the 
Opposition to redact the names of all the emails that filled his 
inbox that provided input to him so that we could see the input 
and seek to improve the lean process in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen how this Premier 
deals with criticism when it comes to lean, and that’s 
demanding apologies, Mr. Speaker. It is not an open and an 
open-minded approach in any way, shape, or form. 
 
Dale Schattenkirk is a kaizen lean black belt, which certainly 
sounds like a lean expert to me. His consulting company is 
based right here in Regina. He does lean work in health care, 
Mr. Speaker, in other provinces, albeit for a fraction of the cost 
that this government is paying. In fact Schattenkirk has even 
done work for government in the past. 
 
So it’s baffling, Mr. Speaker, why on last Thursday the Premier 
would go on the radio and say, and the context was clear, Mr. 
Speaker, and he said, “We don’t have a lean consultant in this 
province. We’re going to have one after this four-year project.” 
My question again to the Premier: why did he go on the radio 
and say to Saskatchewan people that this government had no 
choice but to hire a US [United States] consultant? Why did he 
say that there’s no lean consultant available here in our 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of the scale and 
scope of lean right throughout the health care system, we did 
put out an RFP [request for proposal]. And Mr. Speaker, there 
was not, including the gentleman that the member references I 
think would probably verify this, there was not a consultant 
here able to achieve, able to take on a contract of this scale, Mr. 
Speaker. That was certainly the understanding of the 
government, which would be why . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
members are, Mr. Speaker, members are laughing. The 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4949 

members are laughing. But this particular individual did not 
come forward and participate in the RFP for that precise reason. 
In fact I believe, Mr. Speaker, I believe the record would show 
that there was many, many positive things said about our lean 
by this particular consultant in this particular interview, in this 
particular interview. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would say, I would say that again with the 
lean project we’re talking about, we’ve already achieved more 
savings than it costs, and we’re seeing improvements in 
patient-centred care. We’re involving the front line, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll seek to improve the lean process, but in terms of 
the principle to better care, delivered more efficiently for 
Saskatchewan people, we’re going to carry on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on the radio the Premier clearly 
said that there is not a kaizen consultant in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. The fat contract that we see going to the US consultant 
really is unbelievable. Dale Schattenkirk, Mr. Speaker, the 
kaizen lean black belt from right here in Regina, has quite a few 
questions about this government’s cash cow contract with John 
Black and Associates. 
 
He doesn’t agree with how the contract is structured. He thinks 
it’s strange that this government is spending $40 million on it. 
He questions the use, the excessive use of Japanese 
terminology; questions, Mr. Speaker, the need for senseis to be 
flown from Japan and paid $3,500 per day, Mr. Speaker. These 
concerns are not coming from someone who is anti-lean. These 
are coming from a lean expert who is right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he listen to these concerns, 
admit he made a mistake, and scrap this cash cow contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what we’d seen from lean are 
savings to the taxpayer greater than the cost of the contract. 
Only the NDP [New Democratic Party] would advocate that we 
would cut, that we would eliminate a project that is saving more 
money than it costs to the government, Mr. Speaker, while 
improving patient care, while reducing the time between 
diagnosis and care, while eliminating the number of 
cancellations in terms of mental health, while saving money in 
how we manage inventory, while saving money in how we 
manage the vaccine system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to cut a program that affords 
nurses more time to be in front of the patient and working with 
the system. We’re not going to do it. Now we will look to 
improve it, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard members opposite. 
We’ve heard front-line workers in the system. The Minister of 
Health is considering these improvements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked the Leader of the Opposition to just 
redact the names of those who’s filled his inbox who have 
concerns — health care workers, he said, that have talked him 
— so that we can earnestly, earnestly, seek to improve the 
system. He’s not done that yet, Mr. Speaker. And we hope that 
he will in the future because we will continue with lean because 

it saves money and provides better care, and we seek to 
improve it, Mr. Speaker, as we do with all initiatives of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Both sides of the House have now had an 
opportunity to blow off some steam so please let’s listen to the 
questions and the answers. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen how this government 
treated the Birns family. We’ve seen how they treated the 
Bayliss family, Mr. Speaker. The approach for the open-minded 
approach, this new-found listening ear that the Premier has 
when it comes to lean, Mr. Speaker, to me is not quite 
believable. Mr. Speaker, will I question a contract that is $40 
million to a US consultant? Absolutely. Will I question a 
contract, Mr. Speaker, that flies in Japanese sensei and pays 
them $3,500 a day to speak with health care workers here in the 
province? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s others that are questioning as well, Mr. Speaker. The 
kaizen lean black belt from right here in Regina doesn’t just 
question the lucrative contract that this government signed. He 
questions the wisdom of the approach that we see that this 
government is implementing when it comes to lean. He 
questions why this government, Mr. Speaker, is setting up at 
least 15 permanent kaizen promotion offices, especially 
questions, Mr. Speaker, the hype that this government has 
created around its lean project. Again, Mr. Speaker, these 
concerns are coming from an expert right here in the province, 
someone that is pro-lean, saying, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government’s approach is misguided and over the top. My 
question to the Premier: will he cancel this fat, cash cow 
contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just yesterday, or maybe it 
was two days ago, the Minister of Health was interviewed in the 
scrum and asked about these same offices that now the Leader 
of the Opposition asks breathlessly about. The Minister of 
Health indicated very clearly to the members of the media — 
and this scrum would have been monitored by the staff of the 
Leader of the Opposition — that there are no additional costs to 
the kaizen office, Mr. Speaker. The total cost of this contract, 
the total cost is point two per cent of the Health budget, exactly 
the same as the former NDP minister of Health spent in Five 
Hills District, Mr. Speaker, with the notable exception that this 
has already paid for itself in savings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So he can get really, really loud about specific parts of the 
contract — fair enough. The bottom line is this: lean has saved 
more tax dollars than it costs. The bottom line is this: 
patient-centred care improvements are being made in the 
system. The bottom line is this: companies right across this 
province are engaged in precisely the same exercise, Mr. 
Speaker. And one more bottom line: we will seek to improve 
the current lean, including taking the member’s views, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And again I say to him if he’s concerned on behalf of those 
health care workers that have filled his inbox, just redact the 
names. Just take the names out. Send that input over. We can 



4950 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

use it to improve lean and continue with it in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, over the last two years they’ve 
spent over $17 million on kaizen promotion offices, creating 
another whole level of administration, Mr. Speaker, and 
bureaucracy within the health care system. We keep hearing 
major concerns about this lean project. We hear from nurses 
and front-line providers, Mr. Speaker, that are concerned that 
this government has lost its way, doesn’t have a focus on 
patient safety, and doesn’t have a focus on quality of care. 
 
Ken Rasmussen, a well-respected public administration 
professor, says, “Lean is yet another in a long list of shiny 
objects that government claims is a magic cure.” A lean 
supporter on Twitter says, “$40 million. I can’t stop laughing. 
Premier Brad Wall’s getting fleeced.” And now we have a lean 
expert from right here, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan who is 
questioning this government’s approach to lean. 
 
With so many concerns, Mr. Speaker, I wonder what it actually 
will take for this government and for this Premier to listen to 
the concerns that people are raising. What will be required, Mr. 
Speaker, for this Premier to listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan and cancel the fat, cash cow contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’ll take more than one tweet 
the member has to repeat in two different question periods. 
That’s what it’ll take. Day after day this Minister of Health, and 
I have as well, stood up in my place, we’ve read quotes from his 
. . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier may continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Day after day the 
Minister of Health has stood in this place — I have too — and 
read quotes from the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 
Association], his former employers, the doctors of the province, 
who’ve said this is transformational. 
 
He’s read quotes from nurses. He’s read quotes from patients, 
Mr. Speaker. He’s read quotes from those involved in the health 
care system that say this is a transformational process and one 
that must continue. Mr. Speaker, that member has stood up, Mr. 
Speaker, referenced some things that have been in the news, 
things that we’re interested in to seek improvement to the 
system, and read the same quote from one tweet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we know, because he’s said so, we know that his inbox is 
full from health care workers who are concerned about lean. 
And earnestly, we want to hear from them. Why will he not 
take their names out — if his inbox is full, if he was telling the 
truth — just take the names out, take the names out of those 
people so they’re protected and send them over, Mr. Speaker? 
So we can seek to improve lean, a project which has done what? 
Already saved more tax dollars than it costs, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Provision of Home Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the home care program in the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is stretched so thin that it is 
not able to meet the needs of new clients and it’s cutting 
services for existing clients. This has been happening since last 
week, but the Premier, the Health minister, and the Rural Health 
minister knew nothing about it yesterday. To the minister: why 
is this government not paying attention to the basics in health 
care and seniors’ care like the home care program? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on Friday the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region did 
send out a memo that had been referenced in the House 
yesterday by the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, I think 
it was perhaps a different interpretation than the Leader of the 
Opposition has indicated when he raised his questions 
yesterday, to say that people were going to be turned away from 
the home care system in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t the case. For a short period of time, 
which Regina Qu’Appelle has indicated, is that they are having 
demand issues, capacity issues within home care. For a short 
period of time, Mr. Speaker, what Regina Qu’Appelle will be 
doing is exploring and implementing some strategies on the 
short and the long term to help deal with these capacities, such 
as prioritizing those with the highest needs, Mr. Speaker, as 
well as tracking all service requests and referrals, and looking to 
see if there can be services provided at the treatment centre, 
which will I think be an effective way in the short term while 
they deal with this short-term issue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Health minister 
couldn’t even properly explain the problem. On one hand, the 
Health minister said this is probably just a short-term surge in 
demand for home care. But on the other hand, he said the 
reason for the increased demand is that the government is 
moving people out of hospitals a lot more quickly. Well if that’s 
the case, if this government is pushing people out of hospitals 
when they still need nursing care, then the increased demand for 
home care is not going to be a short-term surge. 
 
To the minister: which is it? Is it just a short-term surge in 
demand, or is this the new reality because people are being 
discharged more quickly? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to correct the 
member opposite in reference to what I said yesterday after 
question period. Mr. Speaker, what Regina Qu’Appelle has had 
some success in in the last number of months is streamlining the 
process for when patients are ready to be discharged from 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4951 

hospital. We’ve seen that’s having a positive effect in terms of 
the capacity issues are not what they were only several months 
ago, where we saw both of the hospitals in Regina at over 
capacity. But, Mr. Speaker, that does not mean that people are 
being discharged too soon from the hospital. I would hope that 
the member opposite, the member from Riversdale, wouldn’t 
want us to keep patients in the hospital longer than they actually 
require for their treatment, and when discharge needs to take 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have done, we’ve invested, I think 
significantly, in home care over the last number of years. The 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is adjusting to what they 
think may be a short blip in demand. But they will be adjusting 
their plans accordingly, depending on whether or not this is just 
a blip in time or whether or not it is a longer standing issue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The Health minister said yesterday that the 
home care program is fully staffed up, but it still cannot meet 
the demand and take on new clients while also meeting the 
needs of existing clients. That means there are significant 
restrictions on new clients, and existing clients are experiencing 
cutbacks. And the minister said yesterday that nearly everyone 
will wait a lot longer for services. To the minister: how many 
home care clients will have their services reduced, and what 
criteria is being used to make those decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe I said that 
all home care or a majority of the home care individuals, clients 
would be waiting a lot longer for services. What the region is 
going to do is look through the roster, first of all, of staff to see 
if there are additional staff in casual positions that can take on 
additional hours. They’re going to ensure that all their positions 
are optimized properly to ensure that they are staffed up and 
being able to offer services in a timely fashion. 
 
They’re looking, on a short-term basis, to see whether or not 
there are a private option in terms of nursing services, 
companies that do provide nursing services, that can provide 
some additional relief. They are reviewing all of the caseload to 
determine whether or not individuals that are on the caseload 
for home care still require the services that they did when they 
first went on the roster for home care. And they are going to 
maximize the capacity of the treatment centre by adding extra 
staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re hopeful that this is just going to be a 
short-term issue that they need to work through, and be able to 
provide . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Regina Rosemont. 
 

Student Testing 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After all the 
concern, confusion, and waste, it appears that the government 
has decided to simply plow ahead with its standardized testing 
agenda, something that’s outdated, something that’s 
old-fashioned, something that’s wrong-headed. Now it doesn’t 

seem they’re very proud of that fact, Mr. Speaker. It was sort of 
buried in the budget documents, it would appear, and it had that 
almost $5 million allocation for student achievement software. 
It was really just slipped in amongst other budget items. 
 
So my question to the minister: was the quiet announcement 
because no one from that government has been able to explain 
why students need standardized testing in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a number of 
different comments that have been made by different people, 
different positions taken with regards to evaluation of students. 
And I know the member opposite is a former teacher and I 
know he attended recently the Regina teachers’ event with Alfie 
Kohn. And I guess I would probably be more inclined to pose a 
question to him as where specifically he is and where his party 
is on that testing and evaluation of students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — What a joke, Mr. Speaker. To the 
minister: how much money is in this budget for standardized 
testing, wrong-headed standardized testing? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
doesn’t appear to want to engage in that kind of discussion, but 
I would like to tell him some of the comments that have been 
made about marks and about evaluation of students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.], March 
12th of this year, they reported on this issue, and I’m quoting, 
“Our marks are recognized throughout the world and Canada’s 
still the world leader in education. There is no real crisis here. 
We are doing great.” Marc Spooner, U of R [University of 
Regina] professor of education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have another quote from Pasi Sahlberg who 
spoke in Saskatoon recently: “. . . testing itself is not a bad 
thing. I am not an anti-assessment person . . . Problems arise 
when . . . [they] become higher in stakes and include sanctions 
to teachers or schools as a consequence of poor performance.” 
 
So everybody talks about testing and a method of evaluating 
students and, Mr. Speaker, that’s where we’re at. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s answers . . . 
He has no answer here today. I mean it’s bizarre. It’s 
embarrassing. We’ve got many people that are watching here 
today that know how many dollars have already been wasted by 
that government. In fact they haven’t been clear on that front. 
Was it $6 million last year? Was it $8 million? And there was a 
simple question about the dollars in this budget. 
 
And we have to remember that this government is wasting these 
dollars at a time where there’s needs in our classroom that 
should be better supported in the classroom, supporting 
teaching instead of testing, Mr. Speaker. We don’t see any of 



4952 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

that. And this government’s been all over the map on this front. 
It’s been confusing, I know in the fall. Now it sounds like 
they’re just full bore ahead. But he won’t share with 
Saskatchewan people how much he’s spending on this front. 
But last fall he said he’s taking a pause on this front. Now it 
seems it’s full bore ahead. 
 
I think it’s time that that minister realized the realities of 
today’s classroom, that he did the proper thing, that instead of 
pressing pause, he press stop, that he press delete, and he stop 
wasting dollars in this area that’s wrong-headed, put them to 
work in the classrooms all across Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
confirm again that we put all forms of evaluation and all forms 
of review on testing. But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read 
where those members are. I would like to read from transition 
material prepared by the Ministry of Education, information 
that was prepared in conjunction with the change of government 
in November 2007. And this is something that was prepared by 
the officials that those members opposite left . . . [inaudible]: 
 

The Assessment for Learning Program will cost 
approximately $2.25 million this fiscal year to produce test 
outcome information. Since 2000, the department has 
increased its large-scale assessment activity in Grades 4 
through to 11 in response to increased emphases on 
accountability within public administration, and to 
Saskatchewan’s standing on international test results. The 
Assessment for Learning Program has grown from 
measuring 11,000 students . . . annually to over 70,000 
students in multiple grade levels since 2003. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s what those members have left behind. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re sitting down with people like Patricia 
Prowse, Russ Mirasty, and, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to take 
this carefully and we’re going to do a lot of listening and do it 
right. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 

Streamlining Timber Dues System 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to announce changes to The Forest Resources Management 
Regulations, creating a streamlined timber dues system that is 
more market-based and consistent across the industry. Forests 
are a resource that we have in abundance. In fact, over half of 
Saskatchewan is forested, representing 34 million hectares, an 
area larger than Great Britain. 
 
For close to 100 years the forest industry has been key to the 
growth in many communities, such as Carrot River, Big River, 
and Meadow Lake. There is a lot of good news coming out of 
the forestry industry. We have seen a steady recovery from the 
economic turmoil following the US housing crisis that struck 
the industry in 2007. For example, seven of our 11 mills have 
returned to production. The increasing demand for forest 

products such as lumber, pulp, and oriented strand board from 
the United States and Asia is helping the industry to build its 
sales and expand its markets. 
 
Last year the sector generated over 650 million in forest product 
sales. And, Mr. Speaker, following on the changes and 
modernization to the uranium royalties a year ago, following on 
the levy system collapsing 10 fees and charges in the oil system 
to make it more streamlined, Mr. Speaker, we are doing a 
similar thing here with the forest sector. Our government wants 
to see this industry continue to grow. We are ensuring that this 
remains the case, thanks to a new streamlined timber dues 
system that is efficient, competitive, fair, and sustainable. 
 
The streamlined system was developed in consultation with the 
industry. It takes effect on July 1st, 2014 and combines five 
different dues systems into one. This change will help ensure 
that we can sustainably manage our Saskatchewan forests and 
generate revenues for our province and for our forest industry. 
 
The changed dues system builds upon several important 
commitments of our government, including our commitment to 
economic growth, our commitment to provide a competitive 
business environment for the forestry sector, and our 
commitment to build sustainable management and long-term 
health for Saskatchewan’s provincial forests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to express my appreciation to the industry, 
to the Minister of the Environment, to officials from both the 
Ministry of the Environment and the Ministry of Economy and, 
Mr. Speaker, to all stakeholders from the forestry sector, the 
forestry working group who spent countless hours making the 
new timber dues a reality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Any time that 
government comes forward and listens to industry people in 
developing a way that the appropriate resources are to be shared 
with the province as trustees for the people of a province, I 
think that’s a good time. And I will look forward to taking a 
good look at how these dues have been developed. It looks like 
they’re following the line of a number of changes that have 
been made in various industries over the last 10 or 12 years, and 
I think that’s a good thing. 
 
I think one of the other factors though that we always have to 
balance here is that the province takes the role as trustee of the 
forests and of the lakes and of the rivers and streams that are 
part of the forest. And, Mr. Speaker, what we need to do is 
balance the cost that we all pay in protecting those things with 
the kinds of dues that come from the forestry industry itself. 
And I know that the forestry industry sees that long-term, that 
100-year perspective, because it’s about how long it takes for 
renewing our forests. 
 
And so I will be looking very carefully at how these dues are 
structured but also how we cover the reforestation cost, how we 
deal with the firefighting cost, how we deal with the forest 
management cost in our overall structure. And I know that 
that’s a concern of the industry and a concern of those people 
within the ministry. But I look forward to seeing the details. So 
good to go ahead with this kind of a change, but we also have to 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4953 

make sure that there’s a balance right across the board. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 

 
Transportation of Commodities on Rural Roads 

 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All 
members of this Assembly know all too well the challenges our 
producers have had in moving last year’s record grain crop. Our 
government has been dealing with these issues for close to a 
year now. 
 
Through the efforts of this government, grain is starting to 
move, but it’s coming at a time when it’s difficult to truck 
commodities. As roads thaw out, they get soft and can be 
damaged very quickly by heavy truck hauls. This is especially 
true in the thin membrane or TMS [thin membrane surface] 
system. These roads were never designed to handle today’s 
heavy trucks in the first place. Over the years, we’ve seen what 
can happen to the TMS roads that have to carry heavy trucks. 
Saskatchewan has always dealt with this risk by imposing 
spring road bans that restrict the weight of vehicles on these 
roads. 
 
Spring road bans, however, make transportation of grain less 
efficient and more expensive because farmers need to make 
more trips. Traditionally, producers have tried to avoid moving 
grain during the spring road ban period as much as possible. For 
many, that is not an option this year. 
 
We’re fortunate that through our government’s record 
investment in the transportation system, we’ve been able to 
improve 8600 kilometres of provincial highway, including more 
than 1000 kilometres of rural highway surface. As a result, we 
have 14 600 kilometres of provincial highway that can operate 
at primary or secondary weights and aren’t subject to road bans. 
 
We still, however, have about 5000 kilometres of TMS 
roadways in the system. In light of the crisis in the grain 
transportation system this year, we are going to demonstrate 
flexibility in the enforcement of spring road restrictions. 
Shippers and farmers may apply to the Ministry of Highways 
and Infrastructure for permits that will allow for heavier than 
published spring weights. 
 
Circumstances where permits could be granted include roads 
where ministry staff determine heavier loads will not cause 
undue road damage during colder than seasonal temperatures. 
Haulers must hold a permit to access the heavier weights. 
Permit requests may be accessed and considered through 
ministry district offices. 
 
TMS, or thin membrane surface roads, are a structure unique to 
Saskatchewan, and one of their drawbacks is they are very 
vulnerable to damage at this time of year. Our government feels 
this balance of urgency for moving grain with safety, and the 
need for other road users. Mr. Speaker, we’re aware that this 
will not solve all the grain transportation issues. 
 

That’s why I also today drew members’ attention to two 
projects my ministry announced, as I said today. This morning I 
had the opportunity to join with representatives of the RMs 
[rural municipality] of Golden West, Reciprocity, and Moose 
Creek, as well as a councillor from the village of Alida. 
Together we announced that 31 kilometres of highway, Mr. 
Speaker, you would know very well, Highway 361 from 
Highway No. 9 to Alida, and five kilometres on Highway 47 
north of Stoughton, will be upgraded to super grids. 
 
We know there are many low-traffic roads in poor condition 
that need upgrading for both safety and heavy-haul reasons. We 
have 5000 kilometres of thin membrane surface highways in the 
province. The cost of upgrading is about $800,000 per 
kilometre to rebuild these roads to a paved standard. But many 
highways have traffic volumes less than 300 vehicles a day. A 
super grid is an engineered grid road that’s wider and safer and 
supports heavy truck traffic. They can also be built at about half 
the cost of upgrading a TMS-paved road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These pilots have the potential to provide motorists with a safe 
and more reliable road surface. At the same time, they will 
expand transportation options for shippers, producers, and 
truckers. We are very pleased at the interest municipalities have 
shown in this super-grid pilot project so far. We look forward to 
implementing these pilots and looking for other places this 
solution might be applied, like areas that have seen significant 
truck increases due to the oil resource sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly glad to have the partners of the 
RMs on side with this announcement and look forward to more 
into the future. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 
critic for Highways, Mr. Speaker, I listened intently to what the 
minister had to say. And some of our initial comments, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s no question from our perspective we see that 
Saskatchewan is a rich province. We have so many 
opportunities over the coming decades and beyond that it’s 
really important that we take as much of the opportunity to 
realize that opportunity and build for the future of our children 
and our grandchildren. But, Mr. Speaker, we see one of the 
greatest challenges that we face, immediate challenge that we 
face is the grain transportation crisis. We see that this is a huge 
challenge for the people of Saskatchewan, and in particular for 
our farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And even though I’m from northern Saskatchewan, I have the 
opportunity to listen to a lot of what my colleagues are speaking 
about when they talk about agriculture overall. And I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that from the North I can see clearly the huge 
negative impact if the governments do not get this right. 
 
When we see empty ships and full grain bins, Mr. Speaker, on 
our side of the Assembly, we think it should be the other way 
around, Mr. Speaker. It makes common sense to want to 
achieve that objective. And there’s no question, Mr. Speaker, 
that we should recognize that this grain transportation crisis is a 
huge problem not only in southern Saskatchewan, but it really 
affects northern Saskatchewan people as well. 
 



4954 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

We have to make sure that we don’t have the negative effect of 
billions of dollars of negative impact on our economy. That’s 
why it’s important that we continue supporting our farmers, 
continue supporting their industry, and continuing to respect 
what their challenges are. 
 
In saying that, Mr. Speaker, as a critic, we also support lifting 
these bans. We think it’s important to do all we can to make 
sure that we ease the crisis and the crunch when it comes to 
transporting many of our goods, not only for the farming 
community but for many of the other resource companies as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been long critical of this government that 
they have been doing too many things too little too late. They 
simply have not recognized this crisis before. And now, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re seeing an ad hoc approach of trying to resolve 
some of the challenges. And we say, shame on them. 
 
Certainly from my perspective I can see a lot of farmers out 
there that are probably very upset with this government 
because, Mr. Speaker, all they have done is given lip service to 
the crisis. And they have not moved the grain; they have simply 
went to visit the rail companies and have not forced rail 
companies to do what they’re supposed to do. They wrote a 
letter to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to taking a contingent 
of people to demand better service for our agricultural 
community. 
 
No question, Mr. Speaker, that we see that this ad hoc approach 
that this government has to dealing with the grain transportation 
crisis is something that is not acceptable to us and shouldn’t be 
acceptable to the producers as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out, I want to congratulate 
the RMs and the village leaders who were there lobbying on 
behalf of their farmers and lobbying on behalf of their region, 
and to congratulate them that that lobbying and that fight has 
paid off. We see some progress on some of the highways, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of meeting some of the crises in those 
particular communities, and we congratulate them. But there’s 
no question, Mr. Speaker, that we hope that this government 
will respond with even more investments into the rural road 
infrastructure that’s completely necessary. 
 
We also want to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that if there are some 
impacts on some of these roads as a result of lifting the ban, that 
this minister, we trust that this minister will do the right thing 
and mitigate those damages as quickly as they can. Because 
obviously, Mr. Speaker, we need a year-round road system that 
is adequate and that is able to move many other products, 
including grain, oil, and gas, and so on and so forth. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I look at this as saying it is important that the 
people of Saskatchewan know that this government made a big 
mess out of meeting the challenge on the grain transportation 
crisis, that we as a province have failed to rise up and to 
address. There’s no question in my mind when you hear the 
stories of empty ships at harbours where we see that this 
government has completely failed on the grain transportation 
front. And this step today is a very tiny step in recognizing that 
something has to be done. We need a better answer, a longer 
term vision, and a better response from the Saskatchewan Party 

government when it comes to challenges of transporting our 
grains. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, no question in my mind, there are many areas 
of our province that have crumbling roads. So we need to do 
more to fix the roads. And remember, if we’re a rich province 
we’ve got to do all we can to ensure that that wealth sustains us 
for years and years and years to come. 
 
And this government inherited a booming economy, a growing 
population and, Mr. Speaker, they have not risen to the occasion 
to address the challenges and particularly the grain 
transportation crisis. Thank you very much. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 
questions 276 through 294. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 276 to 294 inclusive. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 295 through 305. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 295 to 305 inclusive. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 306 through 308. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 306 to 308. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answer to 
question 309. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered response 
to question 309. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to continue 
where I left off. I won’t back up too much because I know it 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4955 

was interesting, but we’ll start with, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
was born of agriculture. 
 
In 1900 Saskatchewan produced 7.8 per cent of Canada’s wheat 
and Ontario produced 84.7 per cent of Canada’s wheat. By 
1910, just 10 years later, 10 years, Saskatchewan produced 50.7 
per cent of Canada’s wheat and Ontario’s share was down to 15 
per cent. Agriculture is still huge in our economic ladder. 
Agriculture is still number two, second only to oil, and is still 
the cornerstone of Saskatchewan. 
 
In politics, Mr. Speaker, parties sometimes pick a hill to die on. 
The NDP have chosen the Saskatchewan Party’s lean program 
as their hill to die on. The lean program is a program that has 
cost 40 million over four years to lean out our health care 
system. It is a paradigm shift, a huge step forward, and will 
change the face of medicine, not just Saskatchewan but 
probably right across Canada. 
 
The bonus of this lean program is that it can be used and 
adapted to other government departments. We are two years 
into the program and already we have saved over the 40 million 
invested. We can do these savings year after year. Does this not 
pass the common sense test? A program that costs 40 million 
over four years and has saved more than 40 million in two 
years, and it will continue to save. This program includes 
senseis brought in from Japan. The NDP say, this is wrong and 
just a waste of money. I ask, why is it wrong? They did the job 
we asked them to do and we are saving money. It’s working. 
We’re already saving more money than we invested in the 
program. Do the NDP have something against saving money or 
are they just against Japanese senseis? This program is a 
winner. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Let’s just take a look at one of the former NDP government’s 
programs when they were in power. They lost $90 million on 
Navigata, a voice over Internet project that was in British 
Columbia, not even in Saskatchewan where it would create 
some jobs. They tried this in British Columbia and lost. They 
said, too bad, so sad. That’s what happens in business; 
sometimes you lose. 
 
Now they stand up and criticize a program that has saved in 
only two years, the total cost of the whole four-year project, and 
will continue to save. Mr. Speaker, the members on the other 
side keep using the term common sense. The NDP’s Finance 
critic has said paying off the debt at this time defies common 
sense. They say our policies do not pass the common sense test. 
I would say that the NDP’s negative comments on our common 
sense budget sounds like more nonsense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard the acceptance of our budget by the 
general public. I’ve also heard the comments by the business 
community on a job well done, and how they really appreciate 
this budget. Now that’s common sense from the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to use several quotes now by one of 
the founding fathers of the United States of America, Mr. 
Benjamin Franklin, a true philosopher and statesman. The first 
quote is as follows, “Beer is living proof that God loves us and 

wants us to be happy.” Mr. Speaker, that quote has nothing to 
do with the budget, but it’s my favourite Ben Franklin quote. 
Now that I have everyone’s attention, the second quote is very, 
very serious and is as follows, from Ben Franklin. I quote, 
“Without continual growth and progress, such words as 
improvement, achievement, and success have no meaning.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to be part of the team that brought 
this budget to fruition. We have followed the basic rules for 
another year of growth and prosperity, namely don’t spend 
more money than you earn, and plan for growth. A big thank 
you to all, we can say, to the people who spent the countless 
hours to achieve this budget — caucus, cabinet, treasury board, 
and of course the Minister of Finance and his staff. 
 
Once again I will repeat Benjamin Franklin’s quote: “Without 
continual growth and progress, such words as improvement, 
achievement, and success have no meaning.” 
 
I will close with one more Ben Franklin quote: “Well done is 
better than well said.” To the Minister of Finance, my friend 
and mentor, I now say, well said, and above all, well done. 
 
For all the above reasons, for all the reasons my fellow 
colleagues have expressed in their speeches, I will proudly 
support this budget and will definitely not support the 
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank my 
husband for supporting me. I want to thank my family. I’m soon 
going to be grandma for the third time. I want to thank my staff 
that are back home and the people that keep my office running 
smoothly: Trudy Deranger, Brent Gerlach, and Donna Barr. 
 
Mostly though I want to thank the people of Prince Albert 
Northcote. I am so humbled and indeed honoured that they 
would choose me to be their representative MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly], and I’m so honoured to be part of 
the team of MLAs that are committed to help the future of 
Saskatchewan live up to its full potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I first joined this team of 49 MLAs, I really 
often felt like I was running, running to catch up to their 
experience, to their knowledge. They are really very much like 
a big family, and I do come from a big family, Mr. Speaker. I 
have nine siblings that keep me on my toes from time to time — 
Valerie, Kevin, Leon, Daryl, Janine, Sherry, Trevor, Travis, and 
Curt. 
 
What I found is this common bond that we have is sprinkled 
with a variety of views, and what we end up with is a 
microcosm of Saskatchewan. Whether we have farmers or 
labourers, professionals or pilots, students, teachers, 
entrepreneurs, employees, parents, spouses, grandparents, 
whether our caucuses went to university or post-secondary or 
the school of hard knocks, whether they have grown up with 
barely two dimes to rub together or millions of dollars in their 
family inheritance — all have welcomed me and all have made 
me feel part of the team. So thank you, everyone. 
 



4956 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

What this does is it provides the strength to make tough 
decisions. It creates a base that surpasses the four-year plan that 
so many governments have. Let’s take our eight-year housing 
plan for example or our plan for growth — Vision 2020 and 
Beyond. Mr. Speaker, we have listened, we are listening, and 
we will continue to listen to the people of this province. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, I had great hope that we would have a 
fruitful discussion. After all, the opposition — the negative nine 
— stood up and gave our Minister of Finance a standing 
ovation. Alas, the NDP did revert back to their partisan ways 
and in less than an hour they flip-flopped and then they 
delivered their standard fare — a great big helping of 
despondency and despair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see time and again how once our people were set 
free — free from the NDP shackles of despair and despondency 
— our province started to grow. We’ve grown as a province. 
We’ve grown as a community and as a people. This freedom 
that sets in place the opportunity to create a new Saskatchewan 
is full of hope and excitement. We are working together. We are 
meeting the challenges of growth. We are greeting tomorrow 
with a fervency that this province has not seen for more than a 
century, one that has balanced the wants, desires, and dreams of 
our people with the inaction of the past, the crumbling roads, 
and crumbling infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a balanced budget. This budget invests in 
people. It promises to support community . . . Our promises to 
support the community mobilization projects to reduce crime 
have been kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I door knocked on every door in my 
constituency, when I spoke to every single person that would 
speak to me, I took notes and I learned that feeling safe and 
reduction of crime were the most frequently cited issues. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that our government has 
supported our voice and has provided money to support the 
action that our community took. The action that took the 
pioneering spirit of our pioneers, that took the collaborative 
efforts of the first peoples that came here, combined it with the 
community-minded determination of Prince Albert. And we 
created what is called the community mobilization program, but 
in Prince Albert we like to call the Hub and COR [centre of 
responsibility]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of my community of Prince 
Albert. My community took a new approach, one never seen 
before in North America. The people of Prince Albert are 
leaders. Our people are helping themselves, their community, 
and their province. This community mobilization partnership is 
being adapted in our cities and towns across Saskatchewan and 
indeed in our country. With this budget there is increased 
funding so that we will now have 15 Hubs and three CORs in 
our province. 
 
As well as prevention, Mr. Speaker, our government provided 
more funding for enforcement. Thanks to my colleague from 
Prince Albert Carlton, there are more police officers now than 
there were when the NDP ruled. Besides prevention and 
enforcement, our government has put funding towards the 
corrections institutes in Prince Albert. Now employees and 
inmates have a safer environment. 

Not only are we keeping our election promises, Mr. Speaker, 
we are building on them. We set in place a growth plan. Our 
Saskatchewan Plan for Growth: Vision 2020 set a goal to have 
1.2 million people living in Saskatchewan by the year 2020. As 
of last count by Stats Canada, we have 1,117,503 people living 
and working here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the 49 people that are MLAs on this side of 
the House we have all of those voices represented. We have 
another goal and that is to have 600,000 people working in our 
province by 2020. Our latest reports from StatsCan indicate that 
we have 551,600 people working here with full-time jobs. Not 
only that, we have an unemployment rate that is the lowest in 
the country for 14 consecutive months in a row. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are front and centre in our budget. In my 
constituency of Prince Albert Northcote there is a lot of 
wisdom, wisdom from seniors that have experienced life. I 
enjoy interacting with these people and credit my mom, Marian 
Froess, for instilling my love of seniors. When I was just a little 
girl, my mom would take us to visit her maternal grandma. Mr. 
Speaker, we were always excited to see the na na grandma 
because every time we went to see her she would say, “Na, na, 
na, look who’s come to visit.” Mr. Speaker, this woman was 
one of our pioneers. She lived until the age of 101. I was only 
25 when she died, but I still think of her very fondly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the seniors in our province are just as special. That 
is why we provided $4.5 million for the Home First/Quick 
Response pilot program that will provide innovative care 
supports to better serve our seniors. Mr. Speaker, if we had that 
program in place when my great-grandma was alive, she would 
have never ended up in a long-term care facility. 
 
Contrast that with the record of the NDP. They dished up 
despondency and despair to those wonderful beacons of 
wisdom. Mr. Speaker, not only that, they have the audacity to 
say they are supporting seniors. But not once, Mr. Speaker, not 
even once did they raise the senior’s income plan in the 16 
years that they ruled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time of the year, many of us are filing our 
income tax. Some that are a little ahead of the game are 
finished. But everyone will have noticed, many will have 
noticed that we have an indexed income tax system. What that 
means, Mr. Speaker, is that each year, Saskatchewan residents 
will see $6.5 million in tax savings. This year that adds up to a 
total savings of $109 million since ’07, the year the people of 
Saskatchewan asked the Saskatchewan Party to govern this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people know what they need to spend their money 
on. And when we leave the money in the pockets of the people, 
they can decide where they want to spend it. Now a couple that 
earns $50,000 per year will be keeping an extra $2,775 to spend 
as they see fit, compared to when the NDP ruled. 
 
Investments in people also include investments in education and 
improving opportunities for all of our citizens. For example, we 
are investing $588,000 in new funding to expand English as an 
additional language. This budget also allocates $189.2 million 
for program funding targeted primarily for First Nation and 
Métis organizations and individuals. 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4957 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the members opposite are going to 
vote for or against the people of our province? Are the members 
from Cumberland and Athabasca going to say no to the First 
Nations and the Métis of this province? 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, my community of Prince Albert has a very vibrant 
arts and culture sector. When I was campaigning in 2011, I 
remember attending the launch of the very first ever artsVest 
program in Saskatchewan. It was launched right in Prince 
Albert. This two-year pilot program has been renewed for 
another two years with renewed federal and provincial funding. 
The combined funding results in more than $2.4 million of 
financial support to the arts and culture sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Main Street was launched in April of 2011 as a 
three-year, $1.65 million demonstration program in Wolseley, 
Indian Head, Maple Creek, and my community of Prince 
Albert. The program contributed to 41 new jobs in Main Street 
districts, 21 new businesses in Main Street districts, and $2.73 
million in private sector commitments to historic building 
rehabilitation and streetscape improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a 10 to 1 return on the province’s 
investments in these capital projects. What we are finding is 
artsVest and Main Street programs are helping to create strong 
and vibrant communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this balanced, steady growth budget also invests in 
infrastructure. In our growth plan we state that through 
municipal revenue sharing, SaskBuilds, and a future 
federal-provincial municipal infrastructure agreement, the 
Government of Saskatchewan will assist municipalities with 
infrastructure investments to meet the opportunities and 
challenges of growth. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 2014-2015 a total 
of $257 million is being allocated in municipal revenue sharing, 
based on the formula of one point of the provincial sales tax, or 
as we like to call it, the PST. 
 
Our province’s third-largest city, Prince Albert, will receive 
$7,265,631 from this budget. That is a 142 per cent increase 
from the ’07-08 budget. Not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
have capital investments in 2014-15 that total $95 million, 
funding for ongoing projects including 16 million to complete 
the new hospital in Moose Jaw and 27 million to continue 
construction of the long-term care facilities in Biggar, 
Kelvington, Kipling, Maple Creek, and Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition like to beak about how often our 
backbenchers don’t have any say. Well our budget just 
contradicts that magnificently. If you look at all these projects 
and look at all the backbenchers, we are well represented. Mr. 
Speaker, in addition to the capital investments that I just spoke 
about, we are committing new funding to the renewal of Prince 
Albert’s Victoria Hospital, the replacement of long-term care 
facilities in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, and planning for 
more long-term care beds in La Ronge. 
 
Once again I ask the members opposite: are they going to vote 
for the people of the North? Are the members from Cumberland 
or Athabasca going to have the audacity to say no to their own 
people? We’ll find out. 

Two leaders from Prince Albert have this to say about the 
funding of the renewal of the Prince Albert’s Victoria Hospital. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote Cecile Hunt, who is CEP for 
the P.A. [Prince Albert] Parkland Health Region, from CKBI 
Prince Albert, dated March 20th, 2014. And I quote, “It’s a very 
supportive gesture to the needs of Prince Albert and 
surrounding area. As a health region, I speak on behalf of my 
board of directors also — we’re very pleased.” 
 
Mr. Greg Dionne, our mayor of Prince Albert, who was quoted 
in paNOW on March 20th, 2014, says this, and I quote: 
 

“They announced today $2 million to go to the Parkland 
Health District, to do the planning under the LEAN 
program,” said Dionne. “When they start with giving 
money that way it comes right after that.” 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to have one of 
the strongest economies in Canada, and it is forecasted to have 
the second-highest GDP [gross domestic product] growth this 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the voice of 1,117,503 people have been brought 
to the table where real decisions are made. They are brought by 
the 49 MLAs that form government. It was my colleagues that 
decided, together we are going to keep Saskatchewan’s growth 
steady. What are those NDP going to say to the people of this 
province? Are they going to say no to our people? Are they 
going to say no to this steady growth budget? Are they going to 
dish up more despondency and despair? 
 
Last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the MLA for Canora-Pelly, 
Minister of Finance, delivered the seventh consecutive 
balanced, steady growth budget that invests in people. That is 
significant. Here is why. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the Legislative Assembly website, one 
will find a code of ethical conduct for members of the 
Legislative Assembly. Within this code, under the statement of 
commitment it reads, and I quote, “We believe that the 
fundamental objective of public office is to serve our fellow 
citizens with integrity in order to improve the economic and 
social conditions of all Saskatchewan people.” Mr. Speaker, our 
steady growth budget does just that. 
 
I do support the budget as presented by the Minister of Finance, 
seconded by the member from Shellbrook-Rosthern, and I do 
not support any cut-and-crumbs amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the opportunity to be able to get up and make a few 
comments on this budget. And I just want to start out by 
thanking the Finance minister, my colleague from Canora-Pelly, 
who put in an awful lot of hours, and his staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to mention treasury board. I don’t think many 
people in the province realize how many hours treasury board 
puts in in putting a budget together, but especially one like this 
where revenues are somewhat tight and you have to find 



4958 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

savings on the expense side. And treasury board did a very 
good job on that and spent many, many hours, Mr. Speaker, 
actually right through holiday time and right after New Year’s 
and before. 
 
Also to our cabinet who put many hours in, and especially our 
caucus who — I appreciate the opportunity with the 
Saskatchewan Party — who had that opportunity to have input 
into things like the budget and everything else that we do on 
this side. And that’s much appreciated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear. They’re great guys, I hear, 
too. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Very good guys. Mr. Speaker, there’s again 
a balanced budget, a $71-million surplus in a budget of in 
excess of $14 billion, Mr. Speaker. So they’ve done a 
tremendous job in that respect. But I think the most important 
line there is that: a balanced budget with a surplus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007, and I know some of my colleagues 
have talked about this already, but I think it’s worth mentioning 
again that since 2007 we’ve had the largest income tax 
reduction in Saskatchewan history, the largest property tax 
reduction in Saskatchewan history, and nearly 112,000 people 
no longer pay any Saskatchewan income tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also, with lower revenues, had to 
control spending, and spending was down $28 million. And I 
think in any business in this province, business owners would 
say that’s a job well done. And again we owe it to our 
colleagues that worked on this budget endless hours and put a 
lot of time into it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no tax increases I think were received very well in 
my constituency. I know from the ones I talked to were quite 
concerned that possibly the education tax might go up. Or you 
know, they also think of the members across when they got in 
trouble, that the PST was raised on numerous occasions. I think 
they were worried about any taxes going up and were very 
relieved to find out, when they heard what the budget had in it, 
that there was no new taxes. And that was compliments that I 
got from constituents of mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency also I know the people of 
Langenburg were very happy last year when the new school 
was announced for Langenburg. And the Minister of Finance 
has told me that there’s $5.57 million again this year to go 
towards the new school in Langenburg. And hopefully by 2016 
we’ll see that come into place and be able to be used by the 
residents of Langenburg. And I know they’re very pleased with 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another group I think that were very concerned and are very 
happy in my constituency, and for that matter, Mr. Speaker, 
right across the province, were the credit unions. And I think we 
all know that the credit unions provide a service in our small 
towns. When some of the larger institutions saw fit to close and 
move to the larger centres, the credit unions stuck with us. And 
I think that was important to the credit unions to keep their tax 
exemption, which amounted to about $7.6 million, and also 
another capital tax exemption of $5 million. So, Mr. Speaker, 
when you add that up, it’s about $12 million that they get in 

these exemptions, and I know they certainly appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know our health regions, and it varies across the 
province, but a 3.4 per cent lift for the health regions across this 
province. And again that’s important to my constituents, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a minute and talk about some of 
the quotes from the movers and shakers that we have in this 
province, some of the leaders right across the province. And the 
first one’s from Debra Button, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] president, and she says, “The 
government’s investments in our communities will go a long 
way to helping us meet the demands of growth.” And that was 
one of the concerns that I know all municipal leaders had. 
 
This one: “During a time of fiscal constraint, we commend the 
provincial government’s ability to secure a balanced budget 
while maintaining current funding levels for many important 
programs and initiatives that benefit rural Saskatchewan.” And 
that was Dave Marit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in opposition for 12 years, and I went to a 
lot of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] conventions and I went to a lot of SUMA 
conventions, and I honestly can’t remember — very, very 
seldom, if any — that the people that represent these 
organizations out there had too much good to say about the 
NDP budgets or some of the things that they were doing out 
there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure you will remember well from 
many of us going to these conventions when some of the 
ministers would come over to convention and tell the delegates 
what was happening. And there would be a lot of boos right 
across the floor of the halls, whether it was SUMA or SARM, 
Mr. Speaker. In fact it got to the point where I almost felt sorry 
for the ministers to have to go over and actually defend some of 
the things that the NDP were doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we’re living in a province that the 
population . . . It’s hard to keep track of the numbers where 
we’re at today, but a few days ago here our population was at 
1,117,503. And I know that number’s not accurate now, Mr. 
Speaker, because it grows every day and it’s grown since then. 
So it’s just another positive for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a number of different quotes I could read 
you here, and I’ll just read some of them. But here’s another 
one where it says, “We commend the province for not taking 
the easy way out, but instead controlling their spending by 
making tough decisions.” Marilyn Braun-Pollon. Mr. Speaker, 
another one from Marilyn Braun-Pollon: it says, “It’s 
encouraging to see Saskatchewan deliver another balanced 
budget with a forecast surplus of $71 million.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Janet Foord, and I know some of my colleagues 
have read this one in but this one is really important, with some 
of the criticisms we hear from the member from Rosemont and 
some of the other members opposite. And this quote goes on to 
say, “There’s always been a growing concern about 
infrastructure backlog that we have with our schools, our older 
schools that are in rural areas as well as our cities.” So on top of 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4959 

P3 announcements last year . . . And I think she was talking 
about the 18 joints. There’s 18 joint schools, nine buildings out 
there that we’re building that were announced last year, Mr. 
Speaker. But she goes on to say, “We’re happy to see money 
coming to boards in the form of capital, new schools, 
renovation projects. I think it’s a positive for us.” And that was 
Janet Foord, SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association] 
president on CKRM radio, Mr. Speaker. So another positive 
and another, actually a compliment for the Finance minister and 
his staff. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I find it really interesting as this budget goes 
on. And I’ll get into the part of my speech where I have to make 
some comments on the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. As 
we’ve heard on many occasions in this legislature — not just 
this spring sitting, but I believe last fall — some of the members 
over there were asking for different things, Mr. Speaker. And 
the member for Elphinstone . . . And I could be wrong on some 
of these schools, but I think I’m right. Yes, I’m pretty sure I am. 
I think it was Sacred Heart, Mr. Speaker, that the member for 
Regina Elphinstone . . . And if I remember right, he had 
petitions and on many occasions had told us how dire straits 
that the Sacred Heart was needed, Mr. Speaker, in the city of 
Regina. Well, Mr. Speaker, when the budget come out, guess 
what? Sacred Heart is getting rebuilt. There we go, Mr. 
Speaker. The member for Elphinstone got what he wanted. I’m 
sure he will be supporting this budget. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s the member for Lakeview . . . It’s 
Connaught School that they were also asking for on that side of 
the House on many occasions, and certainly needed from their 
news reports we see. And guess what? The Finance minister in 
this budget announced a new building for Connaught School, 
which is in dire straits and certainly needs that. So I would think 
that the member for Lakeview will want to support this budget. 
I think he will reconsider the amendment, and I think when he 
sees the light will probably support this budget tomorrow. And 
we’ll be watching close to see that he does that. 
 
The MLA for Rosemont — and I wouldn’t want to miss out on 
that member, Mr. Speaker — numerous occasions did he ask 
for a summary financial statement. He forgot that the way we 
were doing the books in this province was exactly the way that 
the NDP had done them from 2004 on. That slipped his mind, 
Mr. Speaker. But he needed and wanted a summary financial 
statement. This year the Finance minister presents the budget, 
and he got what he wanted. And I’m sure the member for 
Rosemont will be supporting this budget, Mr. Speaker. I see 
him smile. I see thumbs-up. And I think we’ve got him, Mr. 
Speaker. I think he’s reconsidered that amendment and will 
support this. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I forgot about the member 
for Cumberland because on many occasions in this House that 
member has asked for a long-term care home in La Ronge. And, 
Mr. Speaker, he was sincere in his asking and he was consistent 
and, Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister got to his feet, 
announced the budget, and guess what? Long-term care home 
for La Ronge. Mr. Speaker, again I’m very certain that the 
member for Cumberland will be supporting this budget. He’ll 
reconsider the amendment. 

In fact, you know, from the number I’ve listed off here, I think 
we have a majority on that side. They may convince their 
colleagues to support this budget, make it unanimous tomorrow 
that this is the best budget in this country for any province to 
put forward, and they want to be on the record of supporting it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I certainly wouldn’t want to leave out the 
Leader of the Opposition because every day in question period 
we have the saviour of health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan getting to his feet. And I don’t know if he hasn’t 
a memory at all or he doesn’t have a conscience, but he doesn’t 
seem to remember what went on when the NDP were in power 
for 16 years. Well, Mr. Speaker, just in case he’s a little bit off 
the mark here with what he thinks actually happened for those 
16 years, I want to remind him and help him with that. And I 
know the member for Athabasca will agree with me on all these 
remarks because he sat with me, and actually for a few months 
as a Liberal. And then he sat . . . Well no he didn’t. He jumped 
across and sat with the government, the NDP. And look where 
that got him, Mr. Speaker. It got him back in opposition on the 
other side. That wasn’t a good decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, and just on one 
occasion that the Leader of the Opposition was telling the 
minister of Education at the time that they needed a new school 
at Hampton Village. And he went on and on about it. And he 
had good reason. He was representing his constituents. 
 
And I remember the Minister of Education telling me, and I 
think he was telling some of our colleagues, that the Leader of 
the Opposition was invited to the announcement for the new 
school. Now, Mr. Speaker, if that was me and it was 
Langenburg school, and it was an NDP government . . . which 
would never happen; they didn’t build any schools. In fact, I 
can’t even count how many they closed in my constituency. 
But, Mr. Speaker, should somebody from the NDP side ever 
decide to build a school in my constituency and invited me, I 
would have been there with bells on. And you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? Politics aside, I would have thanked him for it and 
commended them for it, and I would have been on the record 
saying that was the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition wouldn’t even come 
to the announcement. So it makes one wonder, does he get on 
his feet and say we want these things, and then when he actually 
gets them, he really didn’t want them in the first place, because 
then he can’t get to his feet and say we need these things? 
 
Mr. Speaker, hypocrisy kind of to a degree comes to the 
forefront when I hear these things. And, Mr. Speaker, day after 
day, this member, the Leader of the Opposition gets up and he 
tells us how bad our health care system is. Did it again today. 
He doesn’t like the lean project. He doesn’t like lean. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, maybe they . . . And actually they did, didn’t they? 
The member for Indian Head was telling me this. They were 
into the lean project, but again the Leader of the Opposition 
forgets this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve looked for efficiencies in every department, 
not just Health, every department that government runs in here 
and we’ve found many. We’ve found through attrition that we 
didn’t have to replace people that were retiring. And we 



4960 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

actually, I know in Agriculture when I was there, we have less 
staff than we had at that time and I know we’re providing the 
same service we were before. But maybe when the members 
opposite were in government they should have looked at some 
of these things, and they might have more than nine members in 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind you of some of the things 
that the NDP did in health care when they were government 
because I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s important. When you see the 
member for Riversdale again today gets on her feet, last night in 
her speech, this holier-than-thou attitude about what is all 
wrong with health care. Was she not born for those 16 years and 
living in the province of Saskatchewan to see what the members 
opposite did in health care? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in opposition and I heard one time from a 
very, very intelligent gentleman that when you’re in opposition, 
you can say anything you want. The member for Athabasca 
knows what I am talking about. Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite have taken heed to that because they’re saying 
anything they want, but in their case they have a track record, 
Mr. Speaker. They had 16 years where they dumped on rural 
Saskatchewan in this province day after day. 
 
I remember my mother was in a care home, and actually my dad 
was in there at the time but he covered his ears. And why he 
covered his ears is because the member for Lakeview was the 
Health minister. And I remember going home on the weekend, 
and I can’t repeat what my mother said. She was a pretty blunt 
lady. But the member for Lakeview as Health minister, they got 
in a bind and decided how they were going to solve that 
problem. They were raising long-term care fees to a minimum 
of 3,000 bucks a month. Now as I said, I can’t repeat what she 
said but I can tell you she wasn’t much in favour of it. And you 
know, at Lakeside Manor Care Home where they were staying 
— and the care was great; I know the member for Riversdale 
won’t believe this but the care was super, the staff was super — 
there was 28 members in that care home and if I’d have took a 
vote that day I’d have got them all because the NDP . . . Well I 
did in the end. No, I didn’t. That’s not quite right. I’d hate to be 
wrong. Mr. Speaker. When I first ran I think I got about half the 
residents of the care home voting for me and after the member 
for Lakeview was finished with it, I got about all but three. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same reason why there’s only nine 
members on that side of the House. The member for Riversdale 
last night said there’s a disconnect and she said it was on this 
side of the House. I think there is a disconnect and I think I 
know where it is because after the 2007 election, there was 20 
members in opposition under the NDP and we were 
government. Well guess what? Usually after you have one term, 
there’s a little falling off and then the opposition grows a bit 
and the government actually loses a few. Didn’t happen, 
because in 2011 they’re down to nine and we’re up to what — 
49? And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know this well. You’re one 
of them. Mr. Speaker, what’s going to happen in 2016 or ’15 
when the next election happens in this province? 
 
Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 
do not forget the NDP’s track record in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, on many occasions we’ve heard from this side of the 
House just a reminder to those members about how in health 

care they closed 52 hospitals. And then, Mr. Speaker, they 
didn’t quit there, because does anybody remember just out of 
the city here was the Plains hospital. And you know, I know it 
was a convenient hospital for people in the city of Regina but it 
was nothing as the convenience for people of southern and rural 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, many people don’t get to the city 
as often so they’re not sure where they’re going at times and 
now they come into the city and try and get to the General and 
it’s quite often confusing. The Plains hospital, you could see it 
for 20 or 30 miles out of the city and what did the NDP do in 
their 16 years? They saw fit to close the Plains hospital. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, now we’re at 53 hospitals and rising. And you 
know, Mr. Speaker, what do they think happened to the nurses 
and doctors at that time that worked in those facilities? You 
know, they get up on a daily basis here and say, oh there’s not 
enough care workers in this province. Remember what they did, 
Mr. Speaker, because in 52, 53 hospitals . . . and I can’t even 
imagine how many nurses there were working in the Plains 
hospital. They did great work there. But right across this 
province, they chased all those nurses, either through retirement 
or leaving the province, out of this province. 
 
And the member for Riversdale I know will want to stay and 
listen to the rest of this because there’s some more good stuff 
coming. Mr. Speaker, as I said, when we came to power we 
were short, I believe around 800 nurses, were we not? And 
unlike the member that used to represent North Battleford, Len 
Taylor, when he was Health minister, who would not set any 
targets, our Health minister of the day, the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone said, we need 800 nurses and we’re going to 
hire them. And that was part of our election platform. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We’ve exceeded that goal. 
So in the province today, certainly at times we probably need 
more nurses, but we have 800-plus more nurses than we did 
under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thought it would be worth just reminding for a 
few minutes, Mr. Speaker, some of the things that also 
happened under the NDP. Because you know, it’s frustrating 
when I hear the member, the Leader of the Opposition get up, 
you know, on his feet and look over at the Premier. And he’s 
going to tell us how to straighten health care up. Here’s some of 
the things also that they did between 2001 and 2006, and of 
course that was the NDP’s last full five years in office. This 
province lost 1,160 health care workers. That was in five years 
under the NDP, probably about their last five years, and 
probably why they’re sitting on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
At that same period, part of that loss was 455 RNs [registered 
nurse] and RPNs [registered psychiatric nurse]. Included in that 
number was 173 physicians. And isn’t that interesting? The 
same people that are getting up on that side of the House and 
saying we need more doctors for rural Saskatchewan were the 
same people that drove them out of this province in the first 
place. I think hypocrisy comes to the forefront once again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they drove 155 pharmacists out of this province 
and 95 physiotherapists on top of that. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
member for Riversdale, I hope she’s listening somewhere here 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4961 

today, and the Leader of the Opposition, because in that 16 
years they also saw fit to close 16 long-term care facilities. And 
we hear on a daily basis as if they were never in power, they 
didn’t have a track record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’ll tell you that every member on this side of the House 
— whether you’re an urban, whether you’re from the city, 
whether you’re from rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — we 
remember well the track record of that NDP party. And I’ll tell 
you something else, Mr. Speaker, that the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, it’s going to be a long, long time 
before they ever forget the record of the NDP and trust them to 
power in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you may have thought already and 
just got from my few remarks here, I certainly will be 
supporting the budget. And I certainly won’t be supporting the 
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In this 
Chamber there are a few people that you do not want to follow 
when you’re speaking, and my colleague from 
Melville-Saltcoats is definitely one of those. That was an 
amazing speech, and I’m a little nervous now going after that. 
But I will do my best. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to do what so many have done and thank 
those who have helped us out, helped us get here, and help us to 
stay here, Mr. Speaker. I had the opportunity a couple of weeks 
ago to have a member’s statement on my constituency assistant, 
Whitney, and his 20 years of service to the people of this 
province. And I want to once again recognize Whitney and all 
the work that he does. I want to thank my staff in this building 
too — Tara, Tennille, and Kirsten — for all of their support. 
We have a lot of fun in our office. And I want to thank them for 
all that they do. 
 
I want to thank my mom. I actually don’t know that I’ve done 
that in all my years here, which is a huge oversight on my part. 
My mom is currently house-sitting for a friend of hers in BC 
[British Columbia] so she escaped most of our winter, but she’s 
coming home tomorrow and she happened to get on a midnight 
flight. I have to go pick her up so it’s going to be a long day, 
but I’m going to be happy to see my mom come home. And I 
don’t think it matters how old we get; our moms are still pretty 
special people to us. So it’s going to be good to see her coming 
home. 
 
And I want to give a shout-out to my girls. And I call them my 
girls, and I think some people wonder once in a while where 
these girls came from because they’re not technically mine, but 
my nieces Jasmine and Sharmaine. Jas just turned 20 and 
Sharmaine turned 17. I don’t how that happened because I 
haven’t aged a day. And they’re getting to be the most amazing 
young women and I’m so very proud of them. They make my 
world a better place and they make me a better person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Finance minister and my 
colleagues on treasury board. We spend an awful lot of time 
together. This is no small thing, putting this budget together. 

We involve caucus as well. It’s a long process over mostly the 
winter months, and I want to thank them. We have some lively 
discussions. We don’t always agree on things but, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s respectful and we listen to other people’s opinions when 
we’re making these decisions. And I think it’s a really amazing 
process. 
 
I’ve heard from actually former cabinet ministers, from 
members opposite where that wasn’t necessarily the case when 
they were going through the process of making decisions. And I 
just want to thank the folks on this side for the respect that is 
shown to one another when we may disagree on issues trying to 
come to a conclusion or a decision. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other person I want to thank — I know I’ve 
done this privately, but I want to thank him personally — 
because I think it goes to what kind of caucus we actually have. 
I won in a by-election in March of 2007, and so I came into the 
Chamber not during a regular cycle. Your first opportunity to 
speak wasn’t necessarily a Throne Speech or a budget speech. 
And we all know that our maiden speeches are kind of a big 
deal, and it’s the one time you don’t get heckled, which is kind 
of nice. 
 
And so I was named Environment critic in the opposition when 
I was first elected. And so my first official speech in the House 
was actually supposed to be on I believe it was sewage and 
waste water regulations, which is not exactly what you want 
your very first speech to be.  
 
And so the now Minister of Education came over and grabbed 
all my papers off my desk and said, this cannot be your first 
speech in the House. That’s not how we do things. And he 
stood up and spoke to some kind of legislation or regulations on 
waste water and sewer to make sure that wasn’t my maiden 
speech, which I’m quite thankful for. I actually, I don’t think at 
the time I knew what I was talking about anyway. And so I 
want to thank him for that. And like I said, I think it is just an 
indicator of the kind of people on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to talk about the good things that are happening in my 
constituency of Martensville. There’s a new middle years 
school that’s opened in Warman. And I want to publicly thank 
the city of Warman, the partnership between the school 
division, the province, and the city of Warman, that they’re 
sharing rec space. And just recently the regional library has 
moved into the school library, and they’re sharing spaces as 
well. And I think this regional co-operation and joint-use 
facility approach is what we want to see happen in this 
province. I think Warman is a shining example of how that can 
work. 
 
Also have an expansion of a high school in Martensville that is 
going to be opened shortly. The new highway to Dalmeny 
opened last year, and the new highway connecting Warman and 
Martensville is scheduled to be opened this summer. And so I 
want to again thank my colleagues on this side of the House for 
recognizing the growth in my constituency and making sure that 
we’re meeting those needs. New businesses are coming in all 
the time, Mr. Speaker. There are good things happening in my 



4962 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

constituency. 
 
And I know that there’s good things happening in the 
constituencies of the members opposite as well. And I know 
this has been said before, we’ve seen . . . I want to congratulate 
them actually for their consistency and their tenacity. It’s not 
fun to stand up day after day and present petitions. It’s not the 
most exciting part of your day in this House. But, Mr. Speaker, 
they did, whether it was the member for Elphinstone, the 
member for Cumberland presenting petitions in this House 
asking for things for their constituencies. And we’ve seen those 
in this budget, Mr. Speaker: Sacred Heart in Elphinstone, 
Connaught School in Lakeview, and the long-term care facility 
that was announced in the constituency of Cumberland. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for all of their consistency in asking for 
these things, one after another they’re standing up in their 
speeches and saying that they’re going to vote against this 
budget. They’re going to be voting against the very thing that 
they have been asking for. They’re going to be voting against 
the very thing that their constituents sent them here to do on 
their behalf, Mr. Speaker. And I think that is an absolute 
abdication of their responsibility. 
 
I understand it’s the opposition’s job to oppose, but at some 
point you have to do more than just be negative and be 
opposing, Mr. Speaker. These are the right things for the right 
reasons, and the things that their constituents have sent them 
here to ask for. Mr. Speaker, we have delivered those in this 
budget, and it is sad that they’ll be voting against that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we shouldn’t be surprised. This stubbornness, 
this refusal to recognize when something good is coming their 
way . . . I guess we can’t blame them. It comes from the very 
top. It comes from their leader, Mr. Speaker. And we saw that 
last year in the announcement in Saskatoon for the joint-use 
facility, the joint-use schools all across this province, Mr. 
Speaker, including in the leader’s own backyard in Hampton 
Village. And he refused to even attend the event. There was no 
recognition at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, those who follow their leader are going to pick up 
the traits that he demonstrates, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen 
that time and time again when we’ve listened to these budget 
speeches where not one of the members opposite is willing to 
vote in favour of this budget to make sure that the things that 
they were sent here to do actually happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was interested last night, Mr. Speaker, listening to the member 
for Riversdale. It wasn’t . . . well I won’t give a critique of her 
actual speech. But I was interested. Close to the beginning . . . 
We keep asking for where their plan is. Their platform’s off 
their website. Their tree book, which I have a copy of, is no 
longer on their website. There’s actually not much there. And 
we’ve been asking where their plan is. So at the beginning of 
her comments she said that the plan was coming, which I 
thought was pretty interesting, Mr. Speaker. She had actually 
said, what would the NDP do differently? And then she said, 
and I quote, “I’ll get to that.” So I was quite interested. 
 
The member from Riversdale talked for an entire hour, and I 
was waiting with great anticipation for this NDP plan that she 
was going to be talking about, Mr. Speaker. And again, 

absolutely no plan. It was a long, windy speech. It was quite 
enthusiastic; I will give her that. But again, no plan. 
 
So this morning, knowing that I was going to be speaking 
today, I went back to their website to see if maybe overnight 
they put something there. No, no, it’s not there. There’s still 
nothing there. There is, I think, three links that you can go to if 
you can get past the bright, shiny pictures of their leader not 
holding a platform document, that’s for sure. There are three 
links. There’s one for senior care, one for education, and one for 
their smart growth plan, which sadly still talks about more eggs 
in more baskets. So that’s their only economic plan . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, it’s their agriculture policy as 
well, apparently. 
 
So I clicked on the one for schools, Mr. Speaker. Considering 
my constituency, the demographics in my constituency, the 
growth in my constituency, schools are really, I would say, one 
of the most important things to me in my role as MLA. And 
when I’m talking to folks at home, schools are one of their top 
priorities as well. So I clicked on the link for their schools and, 
Mr. Speaker, I have to say I was . . . Well I shouldn’t be 
surprised. 
 
We come to this House day after day. We listen to the members 
opposite in question period. And we spend a lot of time during 
and after question period doing fact checking on what they 
bring to this House because, Mr. Speaker, it is a very rare 
occasion when the information presented on the floor of this 
House by the members opposite is 100 per cent factual. It’s half 
a story. It’s an interpreted story. It’s a quote taken out of 
context. But, Mr. Speaker, I can’t really remember the last time 
it was 100 per cent accurate, the information they brought here. 
And I think it goes to their credibility. The more your hyperbole 
goes up, the farther down your credibility goes, Mr. Speaker. 
And I don’t think they’ve quite understood that. And it’s on 
their website as well, this lack of credibility. 
 
So I clicked on the education, the schools link. And on their 
website, it says, and I quote, “In growing communities, new 
schools are desperately needed but not being built.” Mr. 
Speaker, I would challenge any one of those nine members over 
there to present us with one growing community that is not 
getting a school, including their own, the ones that they’re 
voting against. 
 
I have a middle years school in Warman. I’ve got the fastest 
growing communities in the province, and Warman is the 
fastest growing community in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And 
these communities are getting schools. There are schools going 
up in Warman. There are schools going up in Martensville. 
There’s schools in White City. There’s schools in Saskatoon. 
There’s schools in Regina. Mr. Speaker, there’s schools being 
built across this province. 
 
So this is the thing that they have on their website is that we’re 
not building them. Well that is entirely not accurate, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not even a 50 per cent accuracy rate. It’s a zero per 
cent accuracy rate. And again, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to be 
voting against the very schools that they asked for. 
 
The other interesting thing on their very vacuous website — 
and I don’t know, maybe they could hire somebody to just put 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4963 

something on there because there isn’t much — but at the very 
bottom of this page under schools and education, it has the little 
Facebook icon, and it says click here to like this page. Guess 
how many people liked it? Three. Not even their entire caucus 
likes their own education page on their website, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s how bad it is. That’s how completely out of touch they 
are. 
 
And again the member from Melville-Saltcoats had mentioned 
this as well, referencing the speech of the member for 
Riversdale about being out of touch. Mr. Speaker, they’re 
absolutely out of touch. They have no idea what’s going on in 
this province. It’s evident by the number of people that they got 
elected in the last election. 
 
And then you look at their website. Three people like their 
education page. So I went to their seniors’ page which has, you 
know, some other grand ideas, I’m sure, and only six likes on 
that page, Mr. Speaker. Again their entire caucus doesn’t even 
like their seniors’ approach. 
 
So I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, but perhaps the member for 
Riversdale, who I think is in charge of seniors, can just log on 
to her laptop and start clicking that like button to get the 
numbers up a little bit higher so it at least appears that people 
like what they’re doing because in reality, Mr. Speaker, they 
actually are not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the absence of a plan, the only thing that we 
have to go on that the NDP may stand for is documents that we 
happened to be able to print off before they all got taken off 
their website. So we have their election platform from 2011, 
and we have their tree book. But, Mr. Speaker, the election 
platform from 2011 called for $5 billion in new funding. Where 
do you think the money’s going to come from for that? 
 
You know, we’ve seen the budget numbers this year. We’ve 
done a . . . We’ve made a concerted effort to make sure that our 
government spending is controlled so that we don’t have to 
raise taxes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote one of my favourite people, 
Margaret Thatcher. And I’m sure the NDP will be happy about 
this because I’m sure they love her too. And I quote: 
 

Let us never forget this fundamental truth: the State has no 
source of money other than money which people earn 
themselves. If the State wishes to spend more it can only 
do so only by borrowing your savings or by taxing you 
more. It is no good thinking that someone else will pay — 
that “someone else” is you. There is no such thing as 
public money; there is only taxpayers’ money. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we look at the only information that we have 
on file from the NDP, and their priorities and spending plans for 
this province, $5 billion. They’ve asked for at least $1 billion 
over the last year in this Chamber for additional spending. And, 
Mr. Speaker, where did they think that’s going to come from? 
The only way that they can pay for the things that they’re 
asking for is by raising our taxes or, Mr. Speaker, by cutting 
programs that already exist in this province. And I’d be curious 
to know, Mr. Speaker, what exactly would they be cutting? 
 

Would they be cutting the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income 
for disability] program for people with disabilities? Would they 
be cutting the graduate retention program that is benefiting 
thousands and thousands of students in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and is showing itself to be a great success? Would 
they cut spending to Highways? Probably. They’ve done that 
before. Would they raise the PST? Probably. They’ve done that 
before. Mr. Speaker, they won’t tell us where this money is 
coming from. 
 
And I referenced this in my Throne Speech last November. 
Their federal leader who we know that they take their orders 
from, their federal leader, Thomas Mulcair, had held up the 
NDP provincial government as the economic bright shining star 
of our country when it comes to economic policies in this 
country, Mr. Speaker. So I guess that’s where they’re headed. 
Spend more, tax more. That’s their plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if that’s not their plan, then just show us. Get 
together on a weekend sometime. The member from Lakeview 
can drive you down to a Tim Hortons someplace in his 
Suburban. You can all sit around and have a coffee and put a 
plan together. Put it on your website. Maybe more than three 
people will like it, Mr. Speaker. It’d be interesting to find out, 
but at least give us the option to try. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to end by talking about lean a little bit. 
Members opposite haven’t asked me any questions, but I’ve got 
some good information so I thought I would talk about a few 
things. And I don’t think that the members opposite quite 
understand what lean is. They have brought the book, lean for 
dummies, into the House, so we know they have that. Maybe 
they should crack it to find out exactly what it is. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, lean is more than just saving money. Lean is 
about better patient care and patient outcomes in the health care 
system. Lean is about making sure that the citizens of this 
province who are accessing government programming access it 
better, Mr. Speaker, that we deliver our programs better to the 
people who are expecting those programs. And you will save 
money, Mr. Speaker, but sometimes it’s just better customer 
service. And that makes a difference to you. Sometimes it’s cost 
avoidance. And I don’t think the members opposite understand 
these things. 
 
I will give an example and then I will probably wrap up my 
remarks because I’m sure there’s others who want to speak after 
me, Mr. Speaker. But in the Ministry of the Economy there is a 
backlog of applications for permits for horizontal well drilling. 
And so through the lean process they went through the ministry 
and looked at things where they thought they could make some 
improvements. And, Mr. Speaker, they reduced the time to 
conduct a technical review from 30 days down to one. That’s a 
97 per cent improvement rate, Mr. Speaker. And there was a 75 
per cent reduction in the number of days to notify a company of 
a decision. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it may just appear to members opposite that 
it’s just process time. But let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Bakken play alone, every well that is drilled is worth $3 million 
to the economy of this province. What is the cost of not doing 
these things, Mr. Speaker? 
 



4964 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

I have quote after quote after quote from the amazing public 
service in this province, Mr. Speaker, who have gone through 
the training process. We’ve trained I think over 3,000 people in 
the public service. We have trained hundreds of leaders to carry 
on the work within ministries so that we can continue to 
improve, Mr. Speaker. This is not something that you just do 
for a year and then stop. This is an ongoing improvement. 
 
And it was interesting. I think it was either yesterday or today 
one of the members opposite said, basically inferred that this 
was somehow going to be done. When are you going to be 
finished this? Well, Mr. Speaker, as soon as you stop trying to 
make improvements, you stop making improvements and you 
usually slide backwards. And then your programs aren’t as 
efficient and you start spending more money instead of less. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is an ongoing thing, and we’re working 
hard to train the people inside government so they can carry on 
this work. But I won’t go through all of those quotes today. 
 
[15:45] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do think it is a very important process. And 
I’m proud to be the Minister Responsible for Lean and so very 
proud of all the men and women in the public service who have 
signed up to participate in this and are incredibly enthusiastic 
about this approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that my colleague who spoke before me had gone 
through an entire history lesson for the NDP. And you know, 
great minds must think alike. You know, I was listening to the 
speech. I’m like, that’s my speech. And he did a much better 
job than I did, so I won’t go through all of that again. 
 
But I do find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that it seems for the 
members opposite, especially for the member for Riversdale 
who likes to sit in the House and shake her head no a lot, for 
them the only history in this province was some CCF 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] stuff from the 1940s. 
I’m not quite sure what the leader’s name was then. And then 
there was some PCs [Progressive Conservative] in the 1980s, 
and then there was us. And there’s just these massive gaps in 
the history of our province politically, according to the NDP, 
because apparently nothing happened between 1992 and 2007 
or at least we’re not allowed to talk about it. And I don’t know 
why. If they’re proud of their record, why can’t we talk about 
it? 
 
And I’m not surprised they don’t, Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot of 
things that they did that nobody should be proud of and things 
that we are working very hard to reverse, Mr. Speaker — taking 
care of our seniors, building schools instead of closing them, 
building hospitals instead of closing them. And perhaps the 
members opposite could just take a moment and review their 
own history instead of just shaking their heads when they’re 
presented with it, and work with us to make this province a 
better place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will not be voting for the amendment from the opposition, and 
I’m firmly behind the budget of this government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
quite pleased to enter the debate on the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
And before I enter the debate, I want to briefly tell my 
colleagues, and in particular the members opposite, the fact that 
I upset our leader, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I upset our leader. 
And the leader said, for your penance, you’re going to listen to 
not one, not two, not five, but eight of the government’s 
response to the Throne Speech. And as I sat here, Mr. Speaker, 
my penance was . . . from the budget. My penance was painful, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had to sit there and listen to how they glossed over pre-1991, 
Mr. Speaker, when they were in government, of how they 
almost broke this province and how this province was on the 
brink of bankruptcy primarily because, Mr. Speaker, we were 
fifteen and a half billion dollars in debt. And the members 
opposite seem to forget that. And this is all about the budget 
debate, but they seem to gloss over that fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to go backwards a bit and talk about what the 
member from Martensville quoted and spoke about, Mr. 
Speaker. She spoke about, Mr. Speaker, about quoting Margaret 
Thatcher. She was quoting Margaret Thatcher. And I want to 
send to her a copy of an article that was in today’s paper that 
talked about how Saskatchewan had the worst ranking of a 
government, that was overspending, a government that was not 
managing the finances properly, despite the largesse that they 
enjoyed. I want to show her that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to expose the hypocrisy, when they stand up and 
they talk about Margaret Thatcher and about taxpayers’ money, 
of how she has completely deviated from the course under that 
government. And how is it we sit here and we listen to how 
they speak about budgets and about money, about his 
taxpayers’ dollars when, Mr. Speaker, people are ranking them 
the worst in the country when it comes to that particular issue, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
So I want to do the headline here, Mr. Speaker. It shows quite 
frankly that, and this is the headline, “Saskatchewan worst in 
2013 fiscal accountability rankings.” And that was on CJWW. 
And we sit here in opposition, and we listen to a quote from 
Margaret Thatcher by the member from Martensville. And I say 
to the member from Martensville, it’s on today’s paper. Why 
doesn’t she read it? And she doesn’t talk about the challenges 
that this places on future generations, Mr. Speaker. It’s here in 
black and white, covered by CJWW, and it says, 
“Saskatchewan worst in 2013 fiscal accountability rankings.” 
Worst in the whole country, Mr. Speaker. And then we hear her 
talk about Margaret Thatcher. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you can’t say one thing in the Assembly, 
then all of a sudden the press shows that Saskatchewan is the 
worst in fiscal rankings, Mr. Speaker. When you talk about 
respecting the taxpayers’ money, you can’t say one thing in the 
Assembly and practice something totally different outside these 
chambers, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what the member from 
Martensville just finished doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s the hypocrisy that we see on this side of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, which is really the reason why many of 
us on this side of the Assembly sit here day after day, and we 
listen to some of the stuff that the Sask Party is putting forward. 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4965 

And we know, we know, Mr. Speaker, that their history doesn’t 
start when Saskatchewan was born. It didn’t start there. Their 
history began in 1991, and they’ll talk about 1991 and beyond. 
The Saskatchewan NDP were in power in 1991, but before that 
it was Grant Devine and the Conservatives. Those members 
across the way, they were in power prior to 1991. 
 
And when the NDP took over office, Mr. Speaker, we were 
fifteen and a half billion dollars in debt, Mr. Speaker. Our 
interest on the debt alone, our interest on the debt alone was 
almost $1 billion a year — $1 billion a year. 
 
So when I hear the member from Saltcoats rant and rave why 
we shut down 45 hospitals in rural Saskatchewan, why we shut 
down the Plains, Mr. Speaker, the fact is the cupboard was bare. 
The cupboard was absolutely bare. There was not a penny to be 
found. And thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, thank goodness that 
we had strong leadership under Romanow who had no choice, 
who had no choice but to take the tough decisions, the drastic 
measures. And the people of Saskatchewan understood that. 
They almost broke Saskatchewan prior to 1991. The 
Conservatives across the way almost broke Saskatchewan prior 
to 1991. 
 
We had to go cap in hand to the federal government to try and 
salvage Saskatchewan as a province. Otherwise we were broke. 
We were so broke we couldn’t even pay the workers that were 
working for our province. And it’s surprising how none of them 
remembered that, Mr. Speaker. Not one of them remembered 
that. Not one of them spoke about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why does their history start at 1991? Because they’re ashamed 
of pre-1991. That’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. They’re ashamed 
of the fact that we had to pay debt or interest, never mind debt, 
just the interest on the debt, of almost $1 billion a year. Almost 
$1 billion a year we paid on interest, on Tory interest, $1 billion 
a year just on interest. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, how do you begin to rebuild, paying $1 
billion a year, when your Education budget’s a third of the 
interest you pay each year, when your Health budget is just on 
par with the interest you pay each year. These guys almost 
broke the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So when 
they talk about the NDP being in government for 16 years, it 
took us 14 years to clean up their Tory mess, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the bottom line. Fourteen years of the 16 years to clean 
up their Tory mess. That is the history of Saskatchewan and 
they ought to know that. 
 
Now the member from Saltcoats spoke about my nomination, 
Mr. Speaker. And yes, Mr. Speaker, we did seek the nomination 
for the NDP and we were successful. I also know that he sought 
the nomination for the Saskatchewan Party and I think, if 
memory services me correct, Grant Schmidt won that 
nomination. Grant Schmidt won the nomination over the current 
member from Saltcoats. So what happened is they said, well we 
don’t want Grant Schmidt, is what they said. And we wondered, 
why wouldn’t you want Grant Schmidt? Well because he’s too 
closely tied to the Conservatives who put us in a hole and they 
might link us to the Conservatives. And yet they all hold a 
Conservative membership. So how does that work for Tory 
math? 
 

So the problem, I’m sitting here saying, well you lost the 
nomination to Schmidt. Then your party said, well we better 
have a do over. And that’s exactly what they done. They had a 
do over, Mr. Speaker. And lo and behold as the dust cleared, he 
became the nominated candidate for that area. Why? Because 
they wanted to distance themselves from the Conservatives who 
put us in that financial hole prior to 1991. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and every single 
member in opposition and everybody that pays attention to the 
history of Saskatchewan will know that these guys are full of 
beans when it comes to the history of Saskatchewan, when they 
try and gloss over pre-1991. Saskatchewan wasn’t born in 1991 
when the NDP took over. The debt was born in 1991 when the 
NDP came forward and said, this is exactly what we owe. This 
is exactly what we owe. 
 
When you have to pay 2 or $3 million a day on interest, how do 
you rebuild the economy? How do you rebuild rural schools 
and hospitals? How do you rebuild Saskatchewan overall when 
you’re paying $1 billion — $1 billion a year in interest alone? 
In interest alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again I want to share this highlight or this article with the 
member from Martensville, and it says, “Saskatchewan worst in 
2013 fiscal accountability rankings.” And I want the Page to 
take it over to her desk so, as she glosses over the history of 
Saskatchewan and she quotes Margaret Thatcher, here you go, 
evidence right there that you’re not following what you’re 
talking about. And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, they ought to get a 
reminder of their history, of how they have bungled 
Saskatchewan’s history and how they placed a huge debt on 
today’s generation, on today’s generation, Mr. Speaker. And 
they have the audacity to talk about hypocrisy over there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’m going to ask the Page to take this article and put it on the 
member from Martensville’s desk to show that she’s got a short 
recollection of how the debt in Saskatchewan continues to 
really, really hurt the province of Saskatchewan for years and 
years to come. So go ahead, quote your Margaret Thatcher. But 
the reality is right here, black and white, and I’d ask one of the 
Pages to share it with her so she knows exactly what she’s 
talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one other thing that’s really important is, why are we not 
supporting the budget, Mr. Speaker? Why is the opposition over 
here saying, we’re not supporting this budget? Let me tell you 
why we’re not supporting this budget, Mr. Speaker. Forty 
million dollars-plus for a so-called lean initiative, for lean 
consultants — $40 million-plus. And the tab keeps rising, Mr. 
Speaker. Why? Because they don’t want to admit they made a 
huge mistake and it’s a huge waste of taxpayers’ money . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . No, to the member from 
Martensville. A huge waste of taxpayers’ money — $40 
million-plus. And she turns red in her seat. I would turn red too, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you look at the whole notion, whole notion of these senseis 
being flown in from Japan. The taxpayers are paying for that, 
member from Martensville. You know that the flight, you 
know, the cost of $3,500 a day, the taxpayers are paying for 
that, member from Martensville. So don’t quote Margaret 



4966 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

Thatcher and give this persona that you know what you’re 
doing because the bottom line is this government has wasted 
40-plus and counting of taxpayers’ money on something called 
lean that isn’t working, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to do an analogy here of what I think that the 
government’s trying to tell the people of Saskatchewan. When 
my wife and I shop, you know, we come once in a while, we’ll 
go look at a new TV or something. And she’ll say, look there’s 
a TV on sale. And I’ll have maybe 400 bucks in my wallet here. 
And she’ll say, let’s buy it. And I’ll say, no. I like to keep my 
money. And she’ll say, well it’s on sale. So the salesman will 
come there and say, well, Mr. Belanger, it’s actually 500 
regular price but it’s on sale for 400, so you’re actually saving 
$100. That’s the logic that these folks are using on lean. 
 
But when I walk out of that store, I’m $400 lighter, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m going to tell people that I’m saving $100. So 
I’ll go around telling everybody, oh I saved 100 bucks. Well if 
you saved 100 bucks, how come you’re broke? You know the 
logic isn’t clarified here, Mr. Speaker. Yes, okay, we’ve got a 
TV. We’ve got a TV here, Mr. Speaker, but I’m still short 400 
bucks, and I’ve got to explain to everybody, oh I saved 100. So 
somebody says, well how do you save 100 when you’re down 
400 bucks? That’s our argument here with lean. 
 
How do you save money when you’re paying $40 million to a 
consultant? And you’re saying, well this how we’re saving the 
money. This is how we’re saving the money. Well who is 
telling them how they’re saving the money? It’s the consultant 
that’s telling them, this is how we’re saving the money but at 
the same time give us 40 million bucks. Like that’s absolutely 
ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. And the Minister of Parks is speaking 
up here in terms of what’s going on. 
 
And I was thinking one day here, when he made that mistake on 
the camp fees where he charged somebody — what was it? — 
5,000 bucks for a campsite, an unserviced campsite. Anyhow 
that was going to be the example. And I thought to myself, you 
know, they should make that guy the minister of Finance 
because if you can get five grand for an unserviced camping 
site, that guy must be a genius. So they should make him the 
minister of Finance, getting 5,000 bucks for an unserviced lot. 
But then a day later he found out it was charged wrongly and 
that there’s a whole bunch of mistakes with their lean initiative 
on parks as well. 
 
[16:00] 
 
So again I go back to my earlier point. You look at some of the 
. . . the whole notion of tax, a respect for taxpayers’ rights, Mr. 
Speaker. We sit here, and that’s one of the reasons why we 
laugh quite a bit on this side of the House because we see an 
inept government that’s seven years old making so many 
mistakes, and yet they still stick to their line, their right wing 
line that Margaret Thatcher taught them, how to run the 
economics of Saskatchewan, but they don’t even follow any of 
the principles about their own ideology. 
 
Now the other thing that really concerns us, Mr. Speaker, and I 
want to credit the member from Saskatoon Centre on this one. 
When we talk about Social Services overall, when we see, Mr. 
Speaker, that since 2010 we’ve had 81 children in care that have 

died, and that is an enormous, enormous responsibility to have 
to watch and be in charge of the number of kids in 
Saskatchewan. And as the Minister of Social Services, it is an 
enormous task. But after four years, you have 81 children that 
have died in care. There is something structurally wrong. 
 
There is something structurally wrong because no matter how 
you try and justify any increase in staff . . . And the point that 
she made was we have an increase in staff but we have less 
children in care, so you would assume more resources, less 
children means better results. Mr. Speaker, in the last four 
years, 81 children dying in care is not acceptable, and it’s not a 
better result. We need to explain how. And the minister made 
reference to having these children as an asset of Saskatchewan. 
Children are not assets, Mr. Speaker. They’re live human 
beings, and they come from a story that a lot of us ought to hear 
about and a lot of us ought to know. 
 
So we sit here. That’s why we’re not supporting this budget. 
That is why, one of the reasons why, we don’t support this 
budget: waste of taxpayers’ money, $40 million for lean. We 
have 81 children dying over a four-year period. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker there’s still persistent structural problems 
over there because the ministers and the Premier just don’t get 
it. You’re making a huge mistake in a number of areas, and you 
just don’t get it, and you won’t admit it. And that’s why, on this 
side of the Assembly, the NDP don’t support anything that the 
Sask Party do, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to budgets. 
 
Another one that often crosses my mind . . . The member from 
Humboldt is chirping from her seat. When we talk about the 
record of watching over our seniors, of watching over our 
seniors, everybody in the province has heard what happened at 
St. Mary’s Villa. And the worst part is that we see documents 
and reports in the media saying that the faulty furnace was 
reported to the health district but nobody done anything about 
it. As a result of that, we’ve lost seniors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that I think to me is not something that you 
should be chirping about in the Assembly, but you should have 
fixed a long time ago. When you have seniors in care, that 
we’ve been talking about as an opposition, of how your 
standards of care are simply something that we should not 
accept as an opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’re opposing this budget because 
they’re not doing enough to protect the rights of senior citizens 
across this province. They’re simply not doing enough. So 
you’re wasting taxpayers’ money on lean. You’re not 
responding to the crisis in child care when we talk about the 
number of deaths over the last four years. And you’re not 
looking after the senior citizens that you should be looking at. 
 
Now the other thing that is important, Mr. Speaker, as well, 
when we look at school capital, the priority of school capital, 
Mr. Speaker, this government done away with the top 10 
listings and rankings. And it really confused a lot of people 
involved in education. Why did they do that, Mr. Speaker? 
Because they want to politicize the whole process of 
determining which schools would need priority in terms of 
funding. 
 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4967 

And before this model was put in place, they had school board 
associations and many other organizations involved to 
determine based on need and based on a number of other 
principles such as safety. The list goes on as to why they had 
the criteria for the list, why they had multi partners that 
determined the list. And what this government done was they 
said no, we’re going to revamp that. We’re going to decide 
what schools are priority and that’s it. That’s another reason 
why we’re opposing this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you look at the notion of the American-based companies 
that are now issuing our hunting and fishing licence system 
thousands of kilometres away, thousands of kilometres away, 
the same way that the camp fees are now being administered, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s another reason why we think that we 
shouldn’t be supporting this budget because people in 
Saskatchewan can do that work. The people of Saskatchewan 
can do that work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let’s talk about housing in general, not just the seniors’ 
housing challenges and their health challenges that we spoke 
about. But one issue that really irks me, and I know it irks the 
member of Cumberland, is the fact that this Minister of 
Housing, the current member from Kelvington where she’s 
sitting here and she is actually evicting working families out of 
homes in northern Saskatchewan. And what is their crime? 
Their crime is because they earn too much money. That’s their 
crime, Mr. Speaker. And that’s coming from a supposed right 
wing party. 
 
And why are you evicting families, families that have worked 
many, many years to build themselves up through training so 
they can get those decent jobs? And they pay rent year after 
year, month after month of this rent, and they have the 
opportunity to buy this house. This government cancelled the 
rental purchase option for many of these working families. And 
I say shame on her and shame on this government for going to 
war with working families in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Why didn’t you give them the opportunity to own their own 
home? Simply because you’re vindictive against northern 
Saskatchewan for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker, which I’m 
not going to get into. But why are you going to war with the 
working people who want to have the decency of owning their 
own home, of being able to build that home, of being able to 
maintain that home, of being able to sink equity into that home? 
And that’s got to be the silliest decision that I’ve ever seen this 
government make when it comes to northern housing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what did they trot out? They trot out the Habitat program. 
They’ve announced it three or four times and I pray, Mr. 
Speaker, that they don’t announce it for every house they build, 
and for every phase as the house is being built. I hope that they 
have a broader vision to say Habitat for Humanity is a great 
program but we need to expand in other areas to make sure 
housing is affordable for many of our working men and women 
that are struggling to make ends meet on a day-by-day basis, 
never mind a month-by-month basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So from northern Saskatchewan, the people that work and that 
have rented these houses for a year, give them the chance to buy 
this house and let them seek independence from you and from 

that government, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s really, really 
important that that message get to the minister of housing. And 
if you don’t think, if you don’t think that the working families 
are upset, they’re very upset. They’re very upset because 
you’ve taken the one opportunity that they’ve had to own that 
home after years of renting. 
 
And basically this minister has said, from now on you’re 
renting off us forever. And guess what? We’re going to increase 
your rent as well. We’re going to increase your rent from a cap 
of 850. You’re going to be paying something like 16, 18, 
$2,200 a month for your rent. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what 
this government’s done and that’s what this minister’s done. 
And they refuse to go back and correct this injustice, and that’s 
why we’re voting against this budget because this government 
took actions that were contrary to the best interests of many 
working families in northern Saskatchewan by the silly notion 
of getting rid of the RPO. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is going on and on and on in terms of 
why, why we oppose this government and their spending 
patterns, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll go through the list if they want. 
There’s 49 of them, I’ve gotten through seven on the list, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the things that’s really important, I watch this and I kind 
of find this really odd. Being from northern Saskatchewan, I 
was privy to sitting with many people that were very strong 
rural leaders, Mr. Speaker, over the years. 
 
And you look at Maynard Sonntag, Clay Serby, these are some 
of the guys, Lorne Scott, and as you sat with these guys you 
learned a lot off these guys, if they spoke to you about how 
agriculture works, Mr. Speaker. And then so northern 
Saskatchewan, you wanted to hear what they had to say because 
we don’t have an agricultural community in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today now, I look at the agricultural 
community and they endorse the Saskatchewan Party. Quite a 
few of the rural areas supported the Saskatchewan Party. And 
now you hear their own Premier, their leader, getting up and 
talking about empty ships in the port of Vancouver, empty ships 
in the port of Vancouver. And if they don’t resolve this grain 
crisis, guess what? Other countries are going to look at other 
suppliers, which means if we lose a customer on international 
basis, Mr. Speaker, for our wheat and for our other crops, Mr. 
Speaker, guess what? Guess what? Those customers are not 
coming back. These guys, they have customers that won’t come 
back if Canada can’t deliver. And what does that do? That 
threatens the economy of Saskatchewan as a whole. It threatens 
the economy of Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
The rails weren’t moving the grain, Mr. Speaker. The province 
wasn’t doing anything to help rectify the situation. And when 
push came to shove, and when we in the opposition started 
questioning why they weren’t doing things, Mr. Speaker, why 
they weren’t moving the agenda forward, Mr. Speaker, what 
was their response? What was their response? Oh, we wrote a 
letter. You know, I’m sure I can hear a collective cheer from the 
agricultural community when all they heard that this 
government, this supposed rural-based government, all they’d 
done to fight back for the farmers and the producers was they 



4968 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

wrote a letter. 
 
And on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we shook our head 
and we said, shame, to them. Because the very people that 
helped them get here, they forgot about the agricultural 
producers, Mr. Speaker. And I say to the producers out there, 
the farm families, that this significant problem, this significant 
crisis is not being heard by the Saskatchewan Party 
government. And Ottawa is not going to do the necessary work 
that is going to help resolve that backlog of transporting some 
of the grain, Mr. Speaker. We know that. They won’t fight the 
railway companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the most significant threat to our provincial economy — and 
even I understand that from the North — the most significant 
threat to the economy of Saskatchewan is this backlog of our 
products when it comes from the farm community, the 
agricultural sector of our province, Mr. Speaker. And this 
government’s sitting on their hands. And all they did to react to 
this was write a letter, Mr. Speaker. And they had the 
opportunity when the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Ritz, showed 
up in Saskatchewan. And all Mr. Ritz done was simply got a pat 
on the back, and that was it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you have to provide the leadership 
necessary to get that grain moving because you’ve got empty 
ships. And I can visualize that. You have empty ships in the 
port of Vancouver and you’ve got bins full of grain back home 
and nothing is moving. So, Mr. Speaker, if that isn’t a crisis for 
the Saskatchewan Party, what is, Mr. Speaker? What is their 
crisis? So I say to them, they should be ashamed of how they 
have prepared Saskatchewan overall for this challenge. They 
should be embarrassed with the lack of action on that front. And 
they should do more than write a letter. 
 
Now I understand that coming from northern Saskatchewan 
and, despite my limited involvement in the agricultural sector, 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand, geez, the grain’s over here and 
the ships waiting for the grain are over here. Why aren’t they 
moving it there? It’s very simple, Mr. Speaker, and these guys 
sat on their hands and they didn’t say a word. Not a word. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they wrote a letter. They wrote a letter, they 
said. And we sit back and say, that’s it. That’s all rural 
Saskatchewan and the producers who are really important for 
our economy, that’s all they deserve as a response from our 
Sask Party government is you write a letter? I think there should 
be more leadership, more resources, and more action should 
have happened three months ago, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 
I’m opposing this budget because they have made a huge mess 
of this bumper crop that we enjoyed, Mr. Speaker. And they 
still can’t get it figured out. 
 
Every day producers lose money. And every day Saskatchewan 
loses money. And every day many families lose hope that our 
base in the agricultural sector . . . because this government can’t 
figure out the very basics. And you know, what really upsets me 
as well, Mr. Speaker, on this budget, is they had all the 
opportunity. They inherited a booming economy, a growing 
population, money in the bank. And now this year, they have a 
record crop. The economy’s coming along really well. We want 
to see that continue. And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve one mistake 
after another mistake, after another mistake. That’s why we’re 

opposing this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we look at some of the other points. When it comes to 
education, Mr. Speaker, not enough educational assistants. They 
let go over 200, I believe was the number. And there’s no cap 
on the classroom sizes. They cut the educational capital budget 
by close to 24 million this year. So, Mr. Speaker, you look at 
the cuts and the decisions that they’ve made around education, 
and what did they do in exchange for that, Mr. Speaker? They 
put more money around standardized testing. Now how does 
that work, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective? How does that 
work? You ought to put resources in the classroom to ensure 
that you’re teaching the kids, that you are not teaching just a 
test to the kids, but you are teaching the kids in many, many 
ways. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, look at the P3s, the rent-a-school 
scheme. That goes back to our argument on this side of the 
Assembly, that when you do the P3s, you’re punting debt down 
the road. You’re punting debt down the road. You’re not 
assuming that debt for that year. So what I always maintain, on 
this side of the Assembly, the reason they’re doing that is they 
want to get the credit for the announcement this year. But 
somebody else 6, 7, 8 years from now will pay that bill or 
maybe 10, 12 years from now, they’ll continue paying for that 
bill. And the fundamental argument that we have from the 
financial perspective is you shouldn’t be punting debt down the 
road because it doesn’t portray to the people of Saskatchewan 
exactly what our financial challenge is. 
 
[16:15] 
 
The other point I think is also important, Mr. Speaker, is how 
about accessibility? How about control of that privately owned 
school? Those are some of the issues that are just as important 
as the financial capacity we have as a province and the 
responsibility that we should assume when we’re talking about 
P3. And what are we asking for in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker? 
Accountability and transparency. That’s what we’re asking for 
when it comes to P3s — another reason why we’re not 
supporting this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you look at the increases for SaskPower, 15.5 per cent over 
the last three years, Mr. Speaker; increase in monthly bills for 
SaskTel Internet, Mr. Speaker; increase in campsite fees; 
SaskEnergy increases; SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance] increases, Mr. Speaker, these are all reasons why 
we’re not supporting this budget, Mr. Speaker. And the list goes 
on, Mr. Speaker. The list goes on. 
 
Highway 39 to Estevan, no commitment, just a lot of planning 
talk. The highway to Wollaston Lake, the highway to Wollaston 
Lake, great fanfare they announced the highway to Wollaston 
Lake. What happens three years later? They cancelled it, Mr. 
Speaker. They cancelled it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thirty-five hundred dollars for sensei training, as I mentioned 
before. And what’s the worst part about that, Mr. Speaker, is 
it’s a total waste of money, a total waste of money. And they 
continue pumping that money into an American-based 
consultant, Mr. Speaker, simply because they refuse to admit 
that they’re wrong. They’re stubbornly dismissive of some of 
the concerns that the people of Saskatchewan have. And quote 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4969 

Margaret Thatcher on your argument, the member from 
Martensville, when people ask you why you’re wasting $45 
million. And see if that’ll appease the anger of taxpayers that 
just can’t stand a waste of taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we go back, Mr. Speaker. There’s a number of issues. 
West Meadows horse racing are now suing the government 
because they made a decision to arbitrarily exclude one 
organization over another, Mr. Speaker. Fifty-one million 
dollars cut in health care. Flip-flopping on the heritage fund, 
Mr. Speaker, no money saved. That’s another three reasons why 
we are not supporting this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No minimum care standards for seniors — another reason. 
Wasting money, as I mentioned, on standardized testing. Not 
enough support, Mr. Speaker, overall for our many front-line 
workers in health care that are telling them we need to do more 
to be able to work this province efficiently when it comes to 
health care delivery overall. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other reasons why we’re 
voting against this budget and this government. The film tax 
credit. Who killed the film tax credit? It was a burgeoning, 
exciting industry for Saskatchewan. The Sask Party. Another 
reason why we’re opposing your budget. 
 
Environmental codes. Still waiting to have anyone introduce 
any environmental code. Is the environment not important to 
the people of Saskatchewan? You bet it is, Mr. Speaker. You 
bet it is. They’ve talked about it, haven’t shown any leadership 
on that front. 
 
Greenhouse gas emissions, still growing. Nothing to reduce 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The carbon capture project. Over $150 million over budget . . . 
$115 million over budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The U of R residence. There’s no support to finally build on the 
campus, Mr. Speaker. We need to get greater leadership on that. 
 
Community pastures, Mr. Speaker, that’s another issue that our 
critic has brought up. No support, no leadership, and no really 
strong will from the Saskatchewan Party government to work 
and to really work with the patrons to help manage these 
community pastures. 
 
The Go Green Fund. They have eliminated that funding, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s almost like they think they’ve cleaned up the 
environment because the only thing that was really working 
well was the Go Green project. And they cancelled that, Mr. 
Speaker, to engage the public of Saskatchewan to the extent that 
they should. 
 
Now I look at some of the places like Prince Albert. Laundry 
services were privatized, Mr. Speaker. The bridge wasn’t built. 
And yet the members from Prince Albert and the members from 
that region are yet off on another promise to spend $2 million 
on the planning of a new health facility. Well perhaps maybe 
they should resolve their first promises first before they go off 
on another jaunt and another opportunity to make more 
promises that they can’t keep. 
 

That’s a simple message, you know, simple message. Maybe 
you should deliver on your promises that got you to office first 
before you embark on another promise of yours. You know, the 
people of Prince Albert are pretty sharp voters, and they’ll 
figure you out once they know that they have not delivered, 
despite the support that was afforded to both members from 
Prince Albert and the surrounding areas as well, and the 
surrounding areas as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s no support from this government on the expansion of 
CPP [Canada Pension Plan], on CPP, to help everybody with 
pensions, Mr. Speaker. None. Very, very quiet. 
 
Wolseley hospital is still not up and running, again a 
rural-based hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The rapid response team. This is a good one. The rapid response 
team for potash workers. Not helping, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
many more job losses, Mr. Speaker. There’s 120-plus jobs 
locally. There’s 51 good-paying jobs in Esterhazy and other 
communities. And, Mr. Speaker, when the potash companies 
downsize all these employees, the only thing that the Premier 
spoke about and the Saskatchewan Party government spoke 
about was this rapid response team. 
 
So the rapid response team, in my mind, I thought maybe it 
would be about four or five vans driving down there with 
people that could help with resumés, people that could help 
with counselling, people that could work with these families, 
and a bunch of other employees that would pick up these 
families. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the rapid response team probably consisted 
of one vehicle showing up a week late, and that was it. So why 
say things like rapid response team and nobody shows up at the 
work site? And the workers know that, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
another reason why we’re not supporting this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And again I go back to the Ministry of Social Services, $5.5 
million cut in salaries. And that was expressed today by our 
member from Saskatoon Centre who’s been championing the 
whole argument that we’ve got to do more for our children in 
care, that we’ve got to be serious about the home care, that 
we’ve got to be serious about homeownership and a host of 
other issues that he’s been bringing to this Assembly. But once 
again across the way all they want to do is gloss over the 
challenges and not really respond to the issues, and try and 
manage the people that are complaining as opposed to 
addressing the issues that really, really challenge our people of 
Saskatchewan. Another reason why we’re not supporting the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let’s look at the tuition costs going up because they’re not 
funding the universities enough, Mr. Speaker. They’re not 
funding the universities enough so now the tuition is going up, 
and they’ve also authorized their debt to go up. They can go 
deeper in debt now and, Mr. Speaker, that’s compliments of the 
Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker, despite having a 
booming economy, record revenues, and a growing population. 
This is what they’ve done to our universities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there’s very simple things that also help like the minimum 



4970 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

wage. We’ve asked them to index the minimum wage so people 
can actually try and make some decent money working on a lot 
of these minimum wage jobs. People are still waiting. 
 
And you look at the Saskatoon bridges that people have been 
talking about. It’s important for P.A. It’s important for St. 
Louis. It’s also important for Saskatoon. There’s been no 
funding allocated to continue building on the success of 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. Another reason why we’re not 
supporting this budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at North Battleford, another fine 
community, Mr. Speaker. They have been asking for money to 
help with their highways and their urban interconnection 
program, their urban connector program. Nothing in this budget 
to help The Battlefords area. You look at the Saskatchewan 
Hospital, the replacement of that. They’re slow-walking that 
particular project. They’re trying to look at a P3. People are 
asking all kinds of questions, what’s going on there, Mr. 
Speaker. You look at the challenges that the community, a 
strong community like North Battleford is struggling with some 
of the crime rate. Nothing from this government to help address 
that. 
 
So the list goes on as to what plagues many of our cities, and 
there’s no responses from this government. That’s another 
reason why we are not supporting this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
And the list goes on. I have listed 49 reasons why this 
Saskatchewan Party government budget is not to be supported 
by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to say a couple more things before I wrap up, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, on the Premier’s announcement at SARM 
— I think it was SARM or SUMA — when he was musing 
about increasing education property tax, and then the budget 
came along, there was no increase. So my argument on this side 
of the Assembly in the opposition saying, why would he muse 
about it openly and not be doing it? Did he get a raft of letters 
from people saying, don’t do it? Or was he just playing the 
people of Saskatchewan? Or was he just playing the people of 
Saskatchewan by saying that? Then the budget comes along and 
everybody expects the tax increase to be there and then with 
great fanfare they say, oh there’s no tax increases. And they 
want the people of Saskatchewan to applaud that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well of course the NDP want to make sure that we manage our 
money well, Mr. Speaker. We want to make sure we manage 
our money well and not have any tax increases. That’s one of 
the fundamental points of building a good, solid economy, Mr. 
Speaker, but what you shouldn’t do is play on people like that. 
You shouldn’t be announcing a tax increase and then turning 
around and saying, okay we’re not going to do it. That is my 
point about managing the people, managing the message, and 
manipulating the whole process to make yourself try and look 
good through this budget. Another reason why we are not 
supporting this budget. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s tons of reasons why. There are tons of 
reasons why we’re not going to be supporting this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. And one of the biggest, most fundamental points that I 
would make as the reason why we’re not supporting this budget 
is debt is going up by $1.5 billion as a result of this budget — 
$1.5 billion. Now I don’t know how much more we’ve got to do 

to get it through the Sask Party thinkers over there — if there’s 
such a thing as a Sask Party thinker — that you have record 
revenue. Okay? You’ve inherited a booming economy. Thank 
goodness the economy is still doing good despite some of your 
best efforts to destroy it. Thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, we 
have record population growth. 
 
Thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, we had lesser debt and money in 
the bank when you assumed government because everybody in 
Saskatchewan knows that’s what you inherited. That’s what you 
inherited, and we all know that on this side of the House. And 
that’s why when you start crowing about how you’ve saved 
Saskatchewan, we all start to laugh over here because it’s still 
pretty funny to us of how you’re trying to claim something that 
you had nothing to do with. That’s the fundamental argument 
that I make on the doorstep. And we start laughing at that. 
 
And the worst thing I think Saskatchewan people don’t like is 
somebody claiming credit for something they didn’t do. And 
the right wing, no matter what they say, no matter what they 
say, no matter how much they try to rewrite the history of 
Saskatchewan, they didn’t build this economy, Mr. Speaker. 
They simply inherited this economy. I’ve said that to the 
Minister of Finance. Now I’ll say it to the Premier. I’ll say it to 
all the front bench. You just simply inherited the economy and 
the largesse that we enjoy as a province. We know in 
Saskatchewan’s view, from our perspective, we have a great 
opportunity. We have a great opportunity to build on the 
richness that the province has. 
 
And the Minister of Health chirps from his seat, and he talks 
about the hotels going up in his home community. And I think 
that’s great, Mr. Speaker, but he gives the impression that he’s 
out there with the hammer and nails and he’s helping build 
those things. Mr. Speaker, it is the companies that were 
attracted here that are helping build the economy in Weyburn 
and throughout all the province of Saskatchewan, not the Sask 
Party government. So stop trying to connect yourselves with 
actually having the economy built because you simply inherited 
the economy and the largesse attached to that economy, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the bottom line. So the right wingers, no matter 
how much you complain, no matter how much you try and 
rewrite history, you simply had nothing to do with the booming 
economy that Saskatchewan has. You have simply inherited it. 
We understand that. 
 
Now all we ask, all we ask in this whole argument that we have 
made time and time again is, don’t mess it up. That’s all we’ve 
said. What you do — and I like that, Mr. Speaker — what they 
ought to do is like all the backbenchers do when we have an 
issue or a bill coming forward. They’re getting a bunch of pages 
delivered to them saying, you will read these documents. And 
just read those. Don’t deviate. 
 
So I’ll ask the Saskatchewan Party government, don’t deviate 
from the NDP plan on the economy. Just keep that in front of 
you, guys. Don’t change the royalties. Don’t try and mess with 
any of the alliances we had with the industry that develops a lot 
of the resources in our province. Continue working with . . . 
That’s one of the areas that they’re severely lacking, Mr. 
Speaker, is working with the organized labour force of our 
province. But please don’t deviate. Don’t try and put your right 
wing spin to it because you’ll mess it up. You’ll mess it up as 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4971 

sure as I’m standing here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why we sit here in opposition. We 
sit here and we kind of enjoy when they get up and they claim 
they’ve done all this. They claim they’ve done all that. They 
claim that they’re the greatest things invented. Oh, but the 
world didn’t start since 1991. Well, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 we 
assumed fifteen and a half billion dollars in debt as a province. 
In 1991 we paid $1 billion in interest each and every single year 
that we were in office, Mr. Speaker. In 1991 our Education 
budget was less than a half of what our interest payments were. 
And I can go on and on and on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the greatest tragedy in Saskatchewan politics 
in my view, the greatest opportunity that we had in my view — 
and this is really important for me to express — is that imagine 
for a moment when our premier who I served under, Romanow, 
who was our premier, imagine what Romanow could have done 
with a billion dollars that he could have used for 
Saskatchewan’s growth, Mr. Speaker. We could have been 
much further ahead today, much, much further ahead. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And now what really irks me is the right wing put us in that 
debt to begin with. And it took us 14 of the 16 years to rebuild. 
And they come back, when everything’s going great, and all 
they do is be critical of the NDP, the people that done the hard 
work alongside of the rest of the people in Saskatchewan to 
rebuild this province, to rebuild our credibility, to rebuild our 
finances, and to rebuild our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now we see they’re making mistake after mistake after 
mistake. And simply we can’t sit here allowing that process to 
continue. That’s the reason why I’m voting against their budget 
and supporting our amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in on the 
debate on the budget. And to give some opening comments, I’d 
like to start out with actually saying thank you very much to my 
CA [constituency assistant] who works in the office back in La 
Ronge, who cares about the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
who’s a First Nations community member, Lac La Ronge 
Indian Band, and works hard trying to deal with the issues that 
are facing his community members, but also many others that 
have issues. 
 
So I want to thank him for his dedication, his hard work, for the 
years he put in, and he is, he’s a very dedicated individual. He 
cares about people and the man has a heart of gold. He cares 
about children, he cares about community members, our 
seniors, our elders. And he does a great job doing casework, 
trying to work with ministries to deal with some of the 
situations — the cost of living, whether it’s housing — there’s 
many issues facing northern residents. And the people that I 
represent in the Cumberland constituency, there’s many 
challenges that they’re facing when it comes to the cost of 
living to provide rents. And we see what this government has 
done. So I just want to thank him for his dedication. 
 
I’d also like to thank my family, my wife, and my 17 

grandchildren, and all my kids. I just want to say thank you for 
your dedication and support. And you know, sometimes it’s not 
easy dealing with the challenges we deal with in life, and I just 
want to thank them for their support that they give me. And you 
know it wouldn’t be easy for us without a supportive spouse 
and everything else. So I want to acknowledge my wife, Sandra, 
and my family. 
 
You know, I want to start out talking about the community. The 
communities came together to fight for long-term care beds in 
the North, in the health region, the health region that I happen 
to represent as the MLA for the Cumberland constituency. I’d 
like to thank those who came together to fight for our seniors, 
for our parents, and for our grandparents so that they can stay in 
the North where their culture, their language, and their families 
are. That’s so important. And many people came together. And 
I’m going to thank individuals and acknowledge them for the 
great work they did to raise the concern of long-term care. 
 
And it’s, you know, it was sad to see. And I know the Croft 
report identified clearly, from the 2009 Croft report that the 
health region, you know, went away, and the undertaking of 
doing that report to look at seniors’ care, and it came out 
critical, code red, as they said, short. We needed 48 beds. So 
having said that, and the concerns that we were hearing . . . 
 
And I want to, I want to now at this time . . . Since 2008 many 
of the community members have brought this concern to me as 
the MLA. I heard that on the doorsteps. I heard that from 
individuals. But I want to acknowledge a few of those 
individuals, and I think it’s only right and important to 
acknowledge the good work that our community members did, 
that our region came together to support our seniors. And that’s 
the right thing to do and they did that, and I want to thank them. 
 
I want to start off by thanking Lorne Klassen, you know, Lorne 
Klassen. Lorne Klassen, clearly, clearly an individual who 
raised concerns, who was shocked to see seniors leaving, 
seniors leaving northern Saskatchewan. And as he told me, 
Doyle, he said, these seniors go down there. They’re not used to 
the culture. They’re not used to the language. They don’t speak 
the language. People don’t understand the sensitivity of these 
individuals. They’re away from their family, their loved ones. 
Doyle, it’s sad, he told me. They die down there. We bring 
them back and we bury them in the North. That is wrong. That 
is wrong. 
 
And I want to thank Lorne Klassen for his dedication with the 
petitions, with circulating, doing all he could, raising those 
concerns not only with the opposition, not only with the 
member, but he also raised them with the government. I know 
he did a great job trying to do what he could do. It was about 
taking care of seniors, and it wasn’t about politics. So I want to 
thank him. 
 
Barbara Blyth, she’s a senior in La Ronge. She’s got terminal 
cancer. I want to thank her so much for her strong, strong 
words, her wisdom, and the way she conducts herself and the 
way she carries herself, a very proud woman. She just wants 
seniors in northern Saskatchewan to be treated right. She wants 
an opportunity to stay in the North. She said, Doyle, I want this 
facility; I want to be able to stay in the North. 
 



4972 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

And it’s unfortunate, you know, Mr. Speaker. She wanted to 
stay in northern Saskatchewan. She wanted long-term care. So 
having said that, I want to thank her for that, the challenges, and 
her dedication. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at the communities within the health 
region. There are many, many within the health region that have 
done great work raising the issues, raising the concerns. And 
they have volunteered, whether it’s on a committee, signing the 
petitions, whether they’re just seeing me on the street, in a 
restaurant, in a grocery store, saying, you know, this is wrong. 
We need to do better for our seniors. They deserve better. And I 
want to acknowledge those communities that have done this. 
And there’s many leaders, but we talk about the volunteers too. 
There’s so many people who volunteered to do whatever they 
needed to do to help out. 
 
Then we have the leaders of our communities, of the health 
region. There was leaders that are within the Cumberland 
constituency that came together, raised their concerns and will 
continue to raise, and supported the petitions, supported the 
cause, and saying clearly, clearly said, this is wrong. This is 
wrong to have our seniors leave their homes. So far away, 
whether . . . You look at the health region, it’s huge. To see our 
community members taken away, that is wrong. 
 
Now I also want to acknowledge individuals within the health 
region that were very supportive and did their part to do all they 
could. So I acknowledge the health region and their staff. I want 
to do that. 
 
But I don’t want to forget the many families who were dealing 
with their parents, their grandparents, whether their mushom or 
their kohkom, to have a place for them. And many of them 
didn’t realize until they went and applied because they tried to 
keep their loved ones with them as long as they could. But 
when they did need to put them in long-term care, to get told 
and found out the waiting list was 40-some, or the waiting list 
was this long — 38, 42, whatever it was — that you’ll have to 
take your loved one south to find a bed for them, take them 
away from the culture. And like I’ve said, and to those family 
members who never gave up, who never gave up, who 
constantly fight the battle, and some of them lost their loved 
ones, my heart goes out to them. They should’ve been in the 
North with their families and their loved ones. But having said 
that, I want to acknowledge them. 
 
Some wondered, Mr. Speaker, if we could get the job done, if 
opposition could get the job done, if it could make a difference. 
Some wondered about that. If the petition would be effective, 
some wondered about that. And they questioned that. Was this 
the right thing to do? If a community and the communities in 
the health region could make a difference, some wondered 
about that. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, yes. Yes we did. 
Yes we can make a difference when we work together. 
 
Now because of this pressure that the people of the region have 
put onto this government and because the public embarrassment 
has caused this government inaction on building long-term care 
spaces in northern Saskatchewan in the health region that I rent 
. . . clearly the government, the government because they were 
embarrassed to do it. A lot of pressure. And I give credit. 
 

I stood here on behalf of the people, presenting their petitions to 
this government to get action. And the government, at the end 
of the day, the government did the right thing with some 
planning dollars to start a long-term facility in the planning 
stage for the health region, in the health region. Was that the 
right thing to do? Yes it was. It was the right thing to do. It’s 
not enough, and we still have a lot of work to do. The planning 
will get started. 
 
But many people were hoping they would get a facility. They 
wanted a facility. Well they got 500 for planning. We’ll see 
how this goes. I’m hoping. I’m hoping. And we’ll see where 
this goes. We’ll see. The people will judge. That’s fine. People 
will judge. It’s a start, and I’ve said that. And it’s on the right 
track to getting the planning. 
 
But we don’t want this to be a little snail pace that it takes 
forever to get a facility that we know and the government knew 
. . . And people have said this, Mr. Speaker. People have made 
it very clear. Since the 2009 report, critical code red, they know. 
The government knows. It’s been explained through petitions, 
through letters, through everything, so they know. So we need 
the facility now. So there you go. I share that. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, there was many people to thank for the great work 
they did to get this in the budget. 
 
Now having said that, let me tell you where this government did 
not do the right things with this budget. And I want to share 
them. What we didn’t see in this budget, Mr. Speaker, what we 
didn’t see in this budget, Mr. Speaker, for the people of the 
Cumberland constituency that I represent and am honoured to 
come here to represent. 
 
We look at roads. We look at the roads in northern 
Saskatchewan, and I’m going to talk about some of the roads in 
northern Saskatchewan. You look . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . And I want to talk too. And I’ve shared. And I’ve heard 
from leaders, community members who, in the North, clearly 
say, we didn’t get the response we want in this budget to help 
us with our roads. And I’ll talk about individual roads and say 
why the commitment from this government, they were, you 
know . . . And at the end of the day, they deserve better. They 
do. But here, we’ll talk about this. 
 
You know, Highway 123 to Cumberland House voted the worst 
road in Saskatchewan. It’s going to be coming up. CAA 
[Canadian Automobile Association] will be voting again. Let’s 
hope. Let’s hope, you know, you can do a little work. We could 
wish that road would have the commitment of government to 
get the job done and especially on a road that was voted the 
worst road, Highway 123 to the Cumberland House, that 
represents a large community and, in my constituency, 
Cumberland House First Nations and the community of 
Cumberland House. The leadership, the community, we have 
served petitions on Highway 123 to take to government. The 
government could have done better. So that’s one area. 
 
We look at the paving promised for Pelican Narrows, Highway 
135. And we look at leaders. First Nations, Métis community 
members expect better. They want their members, their 
community members, to travel on safe roads. And that, in this 
budget, failed that community. And they will judge, and I know 
that. They will. We’ll have discussions and maybe more 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4973 

petitions. They’re talking, and they’re doing what they need to 
do to bring this government to account. And we’ll keep 
working. 
 
Other members say, what good are petitions? Well let me 
remind you. They got La Ronge, La Ronge got themselves 
500,000 for planning, and hopefully we’ll get a facility, a 
facility, Mr. Speaker. So don’t put the hard work that people put 
into signing petitions . . . When those members, Mr. Speaker, 
when those members, when those members put down 
individuals who put a lot of work into petitions because they 
care about a cause and they care about people . . . And they 
mock and say, what good does it make? I’ve said that already. 
Now I find it very shocking that members would even have the 
nerve to say that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I think about the all-weather road to 
Wollaston Lake that was promised by this government in 2008. 
I was hoping in this budget, with record revenue, with the 
government always bragging about the growth plan, the 
economics that would bring into Wollaston Lake, this 
government would announce this road, the all-weather road to 
Wollaston Lake. And sadly this government turned their back 
on Wollaston Lake community. That is wrong. On First Nations 
community, that is wrong. On the municipality in Wollaston 
Lake, that is wrong. You turned your back. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Highway 102, La Ronge to Sucker River. 
Yes, there’s pavement, falling apart, terrible shape. I was 
hoping. We petitioned this government another way, and we 
will continue. And those individuals tell me, Doyle, we’re 
going to continue to fight to make this government do the right 
thing for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The road to Southend. I was there to visit. And I was there for 
the opening ceremony. They have a skating rink now, a dome. 
What an awesome skating rink that they have done for their 
community in Southend. The road to Southend is terrible. It’s in 
terrible shape. You know, there’s no gravel. The maintenance is 
very, you know, minimum maintenance that’s done. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And I give credit to the workers. They only have so much that 
they can do with the resources that this government gives them 
to do, so I want to say that on that. Clearly the road needs to be 
taken care of. And the more commitment from this government 
to the leaders and communities of northern Saskatchewan and 
the community of Cumberland House, Southend, many of them, 
Pelican, this government . . . Wollaston Lake. This government 
has failed the people in the Cumberland constituency. 
 
Now I also think about Far Reserve Road. There’s also dusting. 
There’s such a dust problem. There’s traffic going to the 
regional dump, and the community has asked this government 
to help them. It’s not just about dust control and spraying a little 
bit of calcium. It’s about paving this road so that the dust that is 
affecting respiratory or these problems would be dealt with. 
And we’ll continue, for those individuals, fighting. And we’re 
going to continue asking for that to be done. And I know the 
leaders will continue to fight for that. 
 
Now I think about the municipalities and the leaders, and we 

look about infrastructure, infrastructure for municipalities, 
much needed infrastructure in northern Saskatchewan and the 
communities I represent but not only in the Cumberland but in 
Athabasca as well. We see the infrastructure, water and sewer. 
They need water and sewer. They don’t have the resources to do 
the water and sewer. They don’t have what it takes. They need 
help from the government. And they thought, they thought — 
many — and we thought and we were hoping they would have 
committed to helping out northern municipalities. 
 
Now having said that, they can sit and say what they want, Mr. 
Speaker. At the end of the day, there’s also roads in those 
municipalities and road maintenance within those communities 
that need to be taken care of on a regular basis. And when they 
don’t have the resources and the government doesn’t supply the 
resources that those municipalities need to supply the good 
work to those community members and the work that needs to 
. . . And it’s about safety, Mr. Speaker. It’s about safety. They 
need those dollars. They need the commitment of a government. 
And the government talks about a growth plan or, you know, 
the growth, steady growth, whatever. Don’t forget about the 
municipalities in northern Saskatchewan and all over the 
province that have roads. So when I think about Cumberland 
constituency and the communities I represent, I talk about that 
clearly. 
 
And we look, you know, at some of the landfills and the 
infrastructure that’s needed in the landfills. We talk about the 
situations in many northern communities but rural 
Saskatchewan everywhere. I was looking at regional landfills or 
landfills in general. There is so much more resources needed, 
money by government, and did they get that money? I don’t 
think so in this budget. They did not get what they need to deal 
with landfills, and that’s terrible. That’s unfortunate. And this 
government, this government has to do better for northern 
Saskatchewan and for municipalities to deal with rural or North 
or Cumberland. So I want to share that. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about education. You know, 
safety is a big issue when it comes to the boards of education. 
And I was fortunate to sit on the board of education and I know 
that the boards of education are committed to safety, making 
sure our children have the best quality of education, have a safe 
environment. They do their best. But right now you have 
hand-tied them. They cannot generate their own mill rates so 
they have to go on what the government gives them or what the 
government cuts from them. And that is sad what this 
government has done with the capital budgets when we look at 
that. 
 
When you look at roofs, and they’re talking about the numbers, 
and I’ve heard different numbers, Mr. Speaker, 75 per cent of 
school roofs will fail in the next five years . . . The members 
can scream all they want. These are the facts. You’ve cut 23 
million out of the capital budget for school divisions in this 
province when it comes to doing safety and taking care of our 
kids. And you should be ashamed of yourselves for that. 
 
You talk about steady growth. How is that? How is that? How 
is that? You know we look at, Mr. Speaker, we look at EAs 
[educational assistants], the EAs. They could have put a 
commitment to making sure the resources were in the 
classroom, and they did not. They could have looked at smaller 



4974 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2014 

class sizes. They ignored that. Goes to show you, goes to show 
you, they can talk. They could have put resources and supports 
in the classroom with the teachers to help our students, but they 
ignored that. That’s clear in this budget. 
 
Now they have millions for standardized testing. This 
government should put the money back into classrooms and 
back into resources of our children’s education. That’s what’s 
needed by this government. And they haven’t heard the 
individuals who have asked them. This is what needs to be 
done. This is the priority. You have made your choices. You 
have told the education . . . You don’t consult them. You don’t 
talk to them. You don’t consult them. You don’t talk. And 
that’s sad. 
 
You know I look at in this budget, Mr. Speaker, I look at clearly 
our northern trappers, our fishermen. They got nothing. The 
member from Athabasca talked about the housing, the shortage. 
And we’ve seen the RPO program, you know, the purchase, you 
know, the rental purchase option program that was out there to 
many northern families, not only in Cumberland but in the 
Athabasca and other communities where a program like this 
would be very useful to families to own their own home and to 
be proud homeowners. And I have served that petition in here 
for a reason, and we’re going to continue, and I know 
individuals back home are going to continue to say sign it and 
advocate. And we’ll do all we can. That’s clear, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s clear. We’ll do that. 
 
Now we’re going to talk a little bit about the housing issues. 
And we know many are seniors. The cost of rents have gone up 
for seniors, and that’s wrong. And we’re going to have to work 
that out with the minister and in estimates and we’ll talk about 
those areas. That’ll be clear. 
 
One other area I want to talk about, you know, and it’s sad 
when families lose their children, their loved ones. And we’ve 
had a number of them. I think four in a recent . . . just in a short 
period of time that have lost their life to house fires on our First 
Nations communities. 
 
Education and training on-reserve is not just a federal 
responsibility, it’s a provincial responsibility. And there was no 
money in this budget to deal with that, and it should. So this 
government has failed those First Nations communities that 
need those. And this government could do that. They could give 
training and they can give education to help on-reserve. Yes, 
they can. They can. If they wanted to make that decision out of 
this large amount of budget, they could. But we’ll see what 
happens. It’s up to them. The choice is there. But they could do 
that, Mr. Speaker. They could invest in that money to save lives 
of our children and our communities, and I challenge the 
government to do that. Do the right thing. 
 
Now we talk about mental health. We talk about mental health 
and we see so many challenges. Front-line workers are doing a 
great job. They are out there. They’re trying their best. And I’ve 
talked about that — addictions, the suicide rates in northern 
Saskatchewan — it’s appalling, and this government should be 
ashamed of themselves, ashamed of themselves. You know, you 
look at the families and the grieving and the hardship that they 
go through because if the resources aren’t there, the front-line 
workers are exhausted. They’ve done their part. They’re doing 

their part. There’s not enough resources by this government. 
But this government picks and chooses what it wants to do. And 
that is sad, you know. 
 
But I’ve talked a lot about the different things that have not and, 
in this budget, will not be addressed by this government’s lack 
of commitment to dealing with the issues that face many in our 
province. And the government needs to do better for our 
communities in northern Saskatchewan, in the Cumberland 
constituency that I represent, but throughout our province. 
 
I’ve talked about many things that were not in the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. I talked about many things that were not in the budget. 
What wasn’t in the budget and what was? 
 
What was there is millions more for lean consultants, for lean 
consultants. I want to be very clear. For lean consultants, we’ve 
got millions of dollars — millions and millions of dollars for 
lean. But we don’t have money for a long-term care facility. 
We’ll put the plan in, but we could have built it. We could have 
announced that the . . . [inaudible] . . . We could have done so 
much more, Mr. Speaker. But no, we chose to spend money, 
millions on the lean initiative. And there’s a minister 
responsible for that. Let that minister deal with that and answer 
to those questions at the end of the day. Good. Let it, let it . . .  
 
Now clearly, at the end of the day, I have said why, on behalf of 
the Cumberland constituency that I represent, the people that I 
come here . . . There is no way, no way, that this budget took 
care of their needs and their concerns. And they would be upset 
if I was to support this budget. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I will 
be supporting the amendment and not supporting this budget, 
because it fails northern Saskatchewan, the people in 
Cumberland. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I have quite 
a bit to say today, but the members across never left me a whole 
bunch of time so I’ll try to be as concise as I can. 
 
First off, I want to thank my family, like many members have. 
My wife Leone, very supportive. Without her I definitely 
couldn’t do this job. My oldest Katelin, in her third year of 
nursing in Regina here. Very proud of her. My younger 
daughter Rayanne, now Krahenbil, moving back from Ottawa 
to Saskatchewan in May, likely to pursue her business interests. 
In fact when she posted that she was coming home on 
Facebook, she had job offers right away. With her, my new 
son-in-law Austin Krahenbil will be back to pursue his career in 
geology largely, Mr. Speaker, due to the opportunities now 
available to our children back here in our new Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m very thankful to my constituency staff, the legislature staff 
that helps us, the people in this room and that support this room, 
plus in our caucus office. Without them we couldn’t do our job. 
 
My seatmate, the member from Regina Dewdney, as the Deputy 
Whip does a great job. Working with him is a pleasure. He 
makes both of our jobs a whole lot easier. His sense of humour, 
his leadership qualities, his work ethic and dedication that he 
displayed on the football field, Mr. Speaker, we now benefit 
from our government and the people of Regina Dewdney 



March 26, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 4975 

benefit from as well. 
 
The people of Yorkton I’m very thankful to as well, to have put 
their trust, their confidence in me for allowing this privilege to 
serve them in this amazing building. I’m very pleased with the 
job done on this current budget. It means my children have an 
opportunity back here to build their lives and to move back to 
and build their lives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our caucus, our cabinet, the hard work of treasury board, the 
Finance minister, his staff, all of them for their timeless work in 
delivering the seventh balanced budget. This budget, titled 
Steady Growth, dovetails with our Throne Speech and fits very 
well with our Saskatchewan Plan for Growth: Vision 2020 and 
Beyond. 
 
A balanced summary budget of 14 billion with a $71 million 
surplus, and $105 million surplus in our government core 
operating account. That, Mr. Speaker, a budget with no tax 
increases, including no increase to the credit unions, and in fact 
through the indexing, the personal income tax is actually 
reduced this year. An overall spending decrease, a near record 
investment in infrastructure of 2.9 billion outside the Crowns, 5 
billion in health care alone — keeping in mind the provincial 
income is expected to remain static this year. 
 
Members across will criticize spending, but it begs the question, 
where would they cut? The members across ask for additional 
dollars for certain wants or initiatives. Where would they 
acquire it? Their last election has been pointed out. They had a 
$5 billion spending promise with nothing to back it up. They 
haven’t changed their tune, Mr. Speaker. Same old same old. 
 
This is the only way that can happen: additional taxes, which 
would harm our family incomes, cost our jobs in our economy. 
We’re growing. Our government intends to continue with the 
steady growth that we now enjoy. Independent sources expect 
growth in our province at over our 2.2 per cent forecast. 
However, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been calculating on the 
conservative side. 
 
Some question, how can the government income be static with a 
growing economy? Well, Mr. Speaker, in this case one is the 
result of another. Lower taxes, investment — long-neglected 
areas by the NDP — and setting a competitive environment for 
people in business to do well reduces government income, 
however it sets the environment for the province to do well 
overall. 
 
As is indicated by so many of Saskatchewan’s indicators 
including job growth, average weekly earnings, manufacturing 
sales, retail sales, investments in new housing starts, valued 
building permits — the list goes on. We continue to remind 
ourselves, Mr. Speaker, however that a strong economy is not 
an end unto itself, but a way to provide better quality of life for 
all Saskatchewan people. 
 
A huge amount of examples how my community be doing 
better, Mr. Speaker, but again time just won’t allow me to do 
that. But there’s investments in the college, in revenue sharing 
with our city, investments back in infrastructure, investment in 
the Crowns, investment into seniors, investment into people 
with disabilities, investments in education, investments in 

health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I just want to touch on a couple quotes really quickly, Mr. 
Speaker. Before I do I know the member from Athabasca’s a 
very honest man. I know that because of this quote I have from 
the Northern Pride in Meadow Lake, September 17th, 2013, 
where he said, “The Athabasca NDP MLA said he’s pleased 
with how things have been shaping up for the province 
financially under the reign of the current Saskatchewan Party 
government.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I only have 30 seconds left. I can’t get through all 
of these quotes. There’s a bucket of them from independent 
sources outside of this building. Three people I want to refer to 
in my constituency: John Denysek, the regional director for 
Yorkton branch, Saskatchewan Abilities Council, sent me a 
personal message how happy he was with this budget. The end, 
Mr. Speaker: a big capitalized thank you. 
 
Don Rae, president of Crusader Drilling and the chamber of 
commerce, very thankful. Mayor Maloney: the best revenue 
sharing deal. Other jurisdictions are jealous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you for entering this debate. I support this 
budget. I will not support the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after 5 p.m., this House stands 
adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4943 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4943 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4944 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4944 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4944 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4945 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4945 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4945 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Purple Day for Epilepsy 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4945 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4946 
 Theatre Company’s New Office and Rehearsal Space 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4946 
 Inter-school Winter Games 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4946 
 Company Named One of Best Diversity Employers 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4946 
 Innovation and Opportunity Scholarship Award Ceremony 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4947 
 Services to Children and Families 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4947 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Supply of Pediatric Neurologists 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4947 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4947 
 Costs and Benefits of Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4948 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4948 
 Provision of Home Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4950 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4950 
 Student Testing 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4951 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4951 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Streamlining Timber Dues System 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4952 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4952 
 Transportation of Commodities on Rural Roads 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4953 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4953 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4954 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4954 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4955 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4957 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4961 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4964 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4971 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4974 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


