
























































Hansard: November 25, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 18B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6065 
 November 25, 2014 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 146 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 146 — The Fee 
Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 
portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll keep my 
comments very brief as it relates to Bill No. 146, the 
consequential amendments for The Fee Waiver Act. 
 
I’ve spoken to Bill No. 145, and certainly we’ll be following up 
with direct consultation with stakeholders in the legal 
community and stakeholders in the community at large as it 
relates to those that are impacted with the barriers to the justice 
system. Certainly we definitely urge and support actions to 
make our justice system accessible to all. Any impediments and 
barriers to access that system can be a direct barrier to 
individuals having the rights and dignities that they deserve. So 
this is important for us to have meaningful action. 
 
The question is as to whether or not the actions taken in this bill 
itself are as meaningful as they can be, as significant as they can 
be. But I’ve put all those comments on the record for Bill No. 
145, and recognized the meaningful efforts of so many in our 
community who work to extend the justice system to all 
Saskatchewan people. And this is important from a democratic 
perspective, from a perspective of being a healthy, civil society, 
and making sure that all Saskatchewan people have, as I say, 
the rights and protections that they deserve. 
 
The Bill No. 146 is simply the consequential amendments. 
We’ll be following up directly with the minister for some 
specificity on the regulations that are mentioned in 145 and 
making sure that he makes clear some of the broad terms that 
he’s described. 
 
And as we know with this government, when this government 
brings forward legislation, we know that you have to go 
forward and that we as the official opposition have to connect 
with stakeholders, because far too often that government rams 
forward with their own agenda, not consulting with those that 
are impacted, not understanding the logical consequences, the 
unintended consequences, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see that today with the Minister of Education who has . . . 
you know, having to change what was an election promise and 
their failure at the time to consult with the education sector 
when they ram forward with reckless legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

As I say, on the changes that were brought forward to The 
Education Act today, it’s disappointing that they also didn’t 
clean up the mess they’ve created in monkeying around with 
the school day and the disparities they’ve created in teacher 
time and the unilateral actions they push forward without any 
respect to the collective bargaining process and labour rights of 
those fine educators, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as it relates to Bill No. 146, the consequential amendments 
to support Bill No. 145, we’ll be following up in due course. 
And I adjourn debate at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 146, The Fee Waiver Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 150 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 150 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 150, The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014. Before we get in 
on some of these legislation, I realize it’s up to the government 
to bring in legislation that affect our residents, the changes, 
amend them, new legislation. I was hoping in this amendment 
that they’re bringing forward, this Act they’re introducing and 
the changes they’re making, they would introduce some of the 
changes that have affected many renters. 
 
And I think about some of our seniors, our people who are 
living in low-income housing. If you look at those tenants 
whose rents have been raised to 30 per cent from 25, you look 
at the challenges many of them are facing. I was hoping this 
would be some of the legislation that the government would 
want to introduce, bring in. But obviously so far, I mean 
obviously we can make some amendments and I guess we can 
make some suggestions to this bill. 
 
But having said that, we see the challenges back home. And 
whether, I guess, it would be in housing issues and the cost of 
living, affordability, and just people trying to make ends meet, 
whether someone’s living in poverty — and we see that, like we 
see the challenges that many, many working families are facing 
in this province. 
 
Yes, you know, some will say some are doing very well. And 
we’re happy for them. Some of the entrepreneurs are doing 
great. Some of the different, the bigger companies are doing 
great. Some of the small, you know, let’s say the small-business 
people are doing well. They’re working hard. They’re trying to 
. . . You know, so there’s opportunities for I guess small 
companies, as they would say, the mom and pop teams that are 



6066 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

out there doing some great work, entrepreneurs hiring people. 
That’s all great, and we’re happy for those that are doing well.  
 
But for the people that are struggling with affordability — and 
whether it’s seniors, whether it’s low-income people just trying 
to make ends meet with the cost of food, the cost of utilities — 
we have a government that continues, continues to take 
taxpayers’ dollars, do certain things with those dollars, and then 
expect the residents of this province, the hard-working seniors 
. . . Seniors working hard — working hard, trying to make ends 
meet. 
 
And the members can say all they want. This is more about 
serious stuff. And I’ll tell you, it’s interesting to watch how 
some of them like to heckle when it’s easy, you know, heckle 
about this type of thing when you talk about affordability, when 
we talk about people trying to make ends meet. They’re trying 
to make ends meet. Families out there struggling, they’re trying 
to make ends meet and they’re trying to pay their rent. And they 
raised their rents on them up to 30 per cent. Do they consult 
them? No, they don’t. Do they ask our seniors? Do they ask the 
families? Do they? No, they don’t ask them. They just go ahead 
and they attack working men and women, working families. 
This government should be ashamed of themselves, the way 
they act. But having said that, you know, Mr. Speaker, let’s get 
back to the bill and let’s talk about this. 
 
Now here’s what we want to talk about. Here’s what we want to 
talk about. We’ll get a chance — I know my colleagues will — 
and there’s going to be some exciting times, right? Because 
they’re going to take some of the changes that need to happen 
to help and make it more affordable. Maybe they’re going to 
rescind some of the prices that they’re charging people for 
social housing, when people are struggling, the most vulnerable. 
Instead of raising it to 30 per cent, why don’t you put it down to 
25 per cent? And you know what? At the end of the day they 
may say, well the minister can do that. That’s good. That’s 
good. Why don’t you guys do that then? That’s a good 
suggestion. 
 
There, some of those backbenchers that aren’t doing what they 
should be doing — fighting for working family and for people 
— maybe it’s time you stand up and do do some talking instead 
of sitting there reading your members’ statements all the time. 
It’s great that you do that, but fight for some of the community 
members back home. I will continue, Mr. Speaker, to fight for 
those individuals, not like members opposite over there, you 
know. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are so many . . . Like I’m talking about 
the changes that are being proposed and amendments, where 
it’s going to give powers, certain powers. But I think it was 
important to talk about the affordability, and I was hoping this 
government would change things when they bring in legislation, 
when they make changes, when they would consult with people 
that are being affected. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? I went and talked to a lot of 
people back home who phoned my office. You go and meet 
with them, and they’re frustrated. They can’t make ends meet. 
But they’re being evicted from their homes because they can’t 
pay the utilities. They can’t pay the utilities. Why? Because this 
government decides — you know what? — rents are going to 

go up. Utilities are going to go up. So it’s about affordability. 
It’s about affordability. 
 
And the members can yell all they want. This is about the 
people back home that I represent that are struggling. It’s about 
rural Saskatchewan as well. There’s many people in social 
housing that gives them an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to live 
and provide for their family. They’re trying their best. They are. 
 
But when we see taxpayers’ dollars . . . And you know, if we 
want to get into it, we’ve seen the lean. We’ve got millions for 
lean. It’s amazing what this government will do, what they’re 
willing to do with hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
hard-earned. 

 
And we see what they’re doing. And we see the condition that 
seniors are being treated in. And how many families have been 
to this, and continue to come, letting us know their concerns? 
So when you’re taking our taxpayers’ dollars . . . And you can 
introduce legislation, and that’s the role. And you know, my 
colleagues have talked about some of the legislation, and I think 
they’ve talked about one-pagers. And they were hoping, they 
were hoping that there’d be more. 
 
So I’m hoping at the end of the day when we get through this 
bill that government on both sides are willing to say, you know 
what, we didn’t do everything right, and we’re going to correct 
this for the people who are in social housing, for seniors who 
are struggling. We’re going to correct some of this bill. And 
here, you know, we introduce some legislation, maybe we can 
look at some of these things. Maybe we’ll consult the 
homeowners, the people that felt in their mind — and felt 
strongly, strongly — that they were not consulted. They didn’t 
notice about the changes. The government just comes in and say 
rents are going up, cost of living is going up, everything else. 
 
This government has had record revenue, billions and billions 
more than any government per year to spend. And what do they 
do? What’s their record? Well, we see the frustration with 
people. We see people being kicked out of their homes because 
they can’t afford to pay the utilities, buy their groceries. So 
having said that, Mr. Speaker, that’s the frustration we’re 
seeing. And a government with so many members — 49 
members on that side of the House, you know, sitting — some 
of them want to heckle. That’s good. Let them heckle. That’s 
okay. This is about serious stuff that’s going on. Serious things 
that are happening to people back home, struggling to make 
ends meet, whether it’s a grandma, grandpa, a mushom, a 
kohkom, whether it’s 10 people living in a house, whether it’s 
four or five families struggling to make ends meet. 
 
But you know, here’s the provisions. This government has 
provisions. You know, they’re trying to put this in, and we’re 
going to have to go through, I know, go through the process, 
find out exactly how this will impact people back home. 
Landlords are going to get some provisions in there, and they’re 
talking about it. And we’ll go through those as we talk about the 
budget. I wanted to just let the members know, and for those 
listening in, here’s a government that I talked about, has record 
revenue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear. 
 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6067 

Mr. Vermette: — More money. Yes, hear, hear, but look at the 
way, look at the way they’re handling it. Look at our seniors, 
how our seniors in long-term care are being treated. They can 
spend $40 million on lean. How is it that they can spend all this 
money on lean but not on front-line workers who are working 
hard, doing an excellent job, trying their best? And how 
frustrated they are. But this government says no, put the 
blinders on. They’re being told what to say. Don’t say anything 
back there. Just do what we tell you. You stick to the script that 
we’re giving you and you’ll be okay. Don’t go veer off. So 
that’s fine. 
 
So they can heckle all they want, Mr. Speaker. At the end of the 
day, Mr. Speaker, it’s about people back home in this province 
who are very hard-working men and women, families, seniors 
struggling. So when we look at the issues facing many in 
Saskatchewan . . . And you know, we talk about this: where 
credit is due, you want to give credit to the industry, to 
business, where people are doing well. We want them to do 
well. 
 
And I think about some of the challenges. And I’ve talked about 
this, you know, I think about some of the communities that 
can’t even . . . They’re struggling to provide fuel for their 
community. They’re struggling to have groceries, nutritious 
food for their children. And government says, well you know 
what? Whose fault is that? Well you know what? The reason 
why those individuals can’t, it’s exactly, it’s bills like this that 
are going to give more powers to landlords. To what? Evict 
more of these social programs? 
 
And they talk about housing and, you know, the social, and they 
want to remove that wording from here, social housing. Well 
why is that? They want to give certain powers to who? So you 
can evict people more. You don’t want to call it social. I don’t 
know what’s wrong with social housing and the wording, and 
they want to take it out. So they can sit here and, you know, 
they can heckle all they want, Mr. Speaker. At the end of the 
day it is about what programs work for Saskatchewan families. 
 
And we think about the RPO program, the rental purchase 
option program. We have served petition after petition. People 
have said, would you please . . . The government in 2012 
cancelled that program. That program helped many people buy, 
purchase their homes. So they rented for many years and, you 
know, there was an opportunity for them to look at that. Why 
would you turn your back? But you know, with this government 
they give other . . . And entrepreneurs are great. Where there’s a 
market, that’s great. And you have industry and you have the 
private sector. Okay, it works great. But in some of the isolated 
communities where you have no developer who wants to 
develop for whatever reason, there is no market there so they 
don’t choose. They go where there’s opportunity. I understand 
that; from a business sense that makes sense. 
 
But you know, from a social program, you have some 
communities that the only opportunity and, to be honest, the 
only opportunity for them to rent a house is from social 
housing, the housing authorities, whether it’s La Ronge. There’s 
many of them. You know, we have how many housing 
authorities in the province? Whether it’s Creighton Housing 
Authority, La Ronge, they look after a large area. 
 

And those individuals, you know, they have workers. And you 
know, you watch them. They do a great job. They try their best. 
Even their budgets, you look at their budgets. They used to do 
maintenance. Their budgets have been cut. Why would you cut 
at a time where you should be making sure that the houses are 
in good shape? 
 
If they’re requesting . . . Think about it. Somebody who’s a 
senior and they’re in a wheelchair or somebody who’s a family 
member and that’s the only property that they have is to rent, 
they need a, you know, we’ll say a . . . not in the sense of a step. 
They’re in a wheelchair, and they have to have the ramp into 
the home, so they need a ramp built. Do they have to go to a 
special fund to get that? Well they’ve taken away any ability for 
the housing to do that. Now they have to apply. They used to 
give them money. And I think it’s a good thing to look at. 
 
[19:15] 
 
So social housing, the way we know it, has been attacked by 
this government, the RPO program where the renter could own 
that home after so many years of renting. And I know I helped 
individuals who went ahead and did that. They applied and they 
went ahead, forward, and they applied, and they’re homeowners 
today. They’re very proud homeowners. And we have a lot of 
them in La Ronge. And I know individuals in La Ronge on that 
same program who actually purchased their home, and it’s their 
home now. They’re very proud homeowners. They just like the 
neighbourhood. They fit in. They’re good. They take care of 
their property. They do the maintenance and they’re very 
happy. People are happy. 
 
So here you have a government who has no problem with 
attacking, like I said, working families, expecting them to pay 
more — utilities, groceries. When you go to a government and 
you hear about how great this province is doing, how great the 
province is doing, we’re happy for that. And you hear people 
say that. But so many of them are saying, we’re not feeling it, 
Doyle. We’re struggling. We’re struggling to put food on the 
table. We’re struggling to clothe our children. We’re struggling 
to pay the rent. 
 
Seniors deciding . . . And I’ve met with many seniors. They’re 
struggling. Which way is it? Do I buy my medication? Do I pay 
for my medication? Do I buy groceries? My utilities? Pay my 
rent? And then the government wants more from them. And 
they’re saying their medical transportation, they can’t afford it. 
 
And you know, when they send letters to government and to the 
minister, what do they get told? Well you choose to live there. 
It was your choice, your decision to stay there. Well this is their 
home. This is where many of them have children, 
grandchildren, and they want to stay there. 
 
So here’s a housing situation where they want to introduce 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, and they want to make changes. I’m 
hoping that the government will make some of these changes, 
that they’ll say, you know what? We made some mistakes, but 
we’re going to take ownership of it. We’re going to lower the 
rents. The 30 per cent is too much. The cost of living is too 
high. We’re going to change that. We’re going to reverse that. 
We’re going to not give so much power to landlords. We’re 
going to make sure we consult with tenants. We’re going to talk 



6068 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

with individuals before we introduce legislation like this that 
will impact. 
 
And then this Bill 150, before we bring in legislation and we 
make too big of changes, we’re going to consult with tenants. 
We’re going to go out to those living in social housing and 
actually see, how are they doing and how will this impact them? 
And you can also go to residents in Regina. Saskatoon’s a 
bigger centre. You can also go to a rural area. You could find 
out. If the government wanted to do this, the government could 
go out and they could actually see how this will impact renters. 
And will this give the strength more to landlords for evictions? 
 
And they talk about going into some of the homes. If they want 
to show an apartment, you know, the landlord can just show up. 
Before, my understanding . . . And we’ll clarify this. More of 
my colleagues have more to say, but we’ll clarify this. We’ll 
clarify. We’ll clarify this, Mr. Speaker. You know, do they have 
to give a 24-hour notice or can they just . . . They’re going to 
walk into an apartment that someone’s renting without giving 
24-hour notice or whatever it is, and just go in and show the 
apartment or the home without the renters knowing this. 
 
Now who’s asked for this? You know, was it the tenants? Was 
it the landlord? Why is the government moving on it? Shouldn’t 
you give notice to somebody if they are renting it? And the 
provision if, you know . . . And they talk about some of the 
other things that are in here. 
 
And we’ll get into that, but for now I wanted to talk about that 
one area where somebody who pays their rent, they pay their 
rent, and maybe they’ve given notice that they’re leaving. And 
that’s fine. I understand that. This provision in here . . . And the 
government’s going to go down their list, and they’re going to 
say, well give more . . . To me it looks like more power to the 
landlord. 
 
Now if you look at this legislation also — and I know we’re 
going to talk about it; we’re going to have lots of time to 
discuss this in committee, and my colleagues will share more 
discussion — but there used to be a 30-day clause for eviction 
because you’re renovating or I guess you’re deciding to do 
something different with the property. Now they’re going to 
give them a number of more days. Is the notice more days to get 
out or is it going to be less? Which is it? And we’re going to 
work through that, and we’ll ask the minister how’s it going to 
be, and in committee. Will it be less days? More days? Are they 
willing to have an amendment in here? And maybe there’s a 
provision in here where they’ll say, well we could make it 90 
days, 120 days. 
 
And then, you know, they talk about if you have issues with the 
idea of this, there is going to be a provision in here that they’re 
talking about, going to the officer of the rentals tenancy agency 
who will, if you’re unhappy with I guess a ruling or with what 
the landlord’s doing and you’re not happy, then, from my 
understanding of this bill, you will go and you will have an 
opportunity to have a hearing before the tenants relations 
officer. Now, is that binding? Does that mean . . . And they talk 
about if a landlord has been . . . breached something or has not 
followed, then they can actually give a punishment. We don’t 
know what that punishment is. 
 

I know in committee and I know we’re going to have lots of 
questions, but there’s a lot of issues facing right now with 
affordability, the cost of living, that some are wondering, who’s 
asked for this legislation? Who’s asked for these changes? Is it 
the landlord? And who all did they consult? We’ve talked about 
that. And is there an opportunity for this government with their 
terrible track record when it comes to residents in this province? 
 
They didn’t want to support a number of different initiatives. 
And I know the member and our critic, you know, has been 
asking for, when it comes to housing, has been asking for the 
government to bring in. And they do not want to support or 
work with them. And we said, we’ll work with you. We’ll 
work. The opposition will work with government to make sure 
residents and tenants are protected, whether it’s rent controls, 
whether you’re going to have some type of mechanism that 
gives some protection. And I know, you know, government 
didn’t want to do certain things. They want to go in other areas. 
Well while they’re doing that and they’re talking about it, 
people are being impacted greatly and struggling. And I’ve 
listened to some of the seniors and some of the . . . [inaudible]. 
 
So when we look at some of the changes that they’re bringing 
in and the changes they want to make, it’s impacting many 
people. And I hope they’ve done the work that they need to do, 
that they’re consulting with not only landlords. And let’s make 
sure. There are some good landlords out there. For sure there is. 
We know that. But there’s also residents saying and tenants 
saying they’re not happy with the way landlords have treated 
them and have dealt with them. So there, you know, the 
argument goes both ways, and I understand that. 
 
But we have to make sure as a government that those legislation 
regulations protecting tenants, protecting landlords, we realize it 
has to be a balance. And you hope that is and you want to be 
fair. But you have to make sure you’re consulting with them, 
and you have to make sure you’re going out and actually going 
out and trying to reach out to as many tenants as you can that 
are impacted by legislation. Try to do what you can. 
 
And I mean a government has this, their record on many issues, 
on many fronts. This government doesn’t like to consult. It likes 
to ram legislation that it wants, and it doesn’t matter who it’ll 
affect. Even if somebody does voice their concern, you know, 
they bully them. They don’t follow letters. And I’ve seen some 
of the letters that have been sent to them on different issues 
when it comes to government to say, truly, that are you going to 
consult? 
 
So having said that, we’ve seen this government doesn’t like to 
consult. They don’t like to spend the time and do their due 
diligence to make sure that both sides of the argument and those 
issues are being heard. This government’s track record is very 
poor when it comes to consulting First Nations, Métis, and 
other people when legislation is being passed. They just ram 
everything they want. If it’s their idea, it’s what they want. 
They go ahead and they push it. 
 
Well our job is to make sure, at the end of the day, we hold this 
government . . . And you have the process that’s here today, but 
you also have the opportunity in committee to ask questions. 
We have the opportunity to talk to many people and ask them to 
bring their concerns forward and to let the members opposite 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6069 

know as well. If there’s issues, legislation coming in that affects 
them, by all means talk to both sides so we can work together 
because sometimes it means working together on legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know I could go on about some of the other 
challenges many families are facing when it comes to 
affordability, paying utilities, paying groceries. We’ve talked 
about a lot, seniors struggling with rents, and then this 
government taking the wording out of your social housing and 
stuff, and we’re not sure where they’re going to go. And I know 
my colleagues, and we will have lots of questions. We’re going 
to get information and we’ll bring that to committee. And we 
can ask, we can ask many of those questions of what’s going on 
and exactly why these changes are being introduced and who 
will benefit from them. So we see some of the challenges that 
are facing Saskatchewan residents. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments on Bill 
150. I know in committee we will go ahead and we will ask 
some tough questions. My colleagues will continue to be in 
debate, and we will ask some questions in committee and get 
the clarification for those out there that need that clarification 
and want to know why this bill is coming into effect. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate on Bill 150, 
The Residential Tenancies Act, 2014. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 
Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 151 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 151 — The 
Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to rise tonight and enter into the 
debate on Bill No. 151, An Act to amend The Pharmacy Act, 
1996 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts. 
And I think this is an important piece of legislation. Whenever 
we talk about professional regulations and this type of thing, it’s 
a key thing that we talk about what those professionals can and 
cannot do and how they conduct their businesses in terms of 
dealing with complaints and how they discipline themselves, all 
of that kind of thing. 
 
And so we see an expansion here of this profession to include 
pharmacist technicians and that type of thing, and they’re now 
allowed to prescribe and administer vaccines. And I don’t know 
how many of the folks here got their flu vaccine. I went to get 
mine, and it was at Prairieland exhibition, and it was quite the 
thing. Actually it was interesting how many people are taking 
that so much more seriously now. 
 

I know when we talk about different diseases and how they can 
wreak havoc in public health, we only have to watch the news 
and we can see when we’re not prepared or we don’t have the 
proper resources. And it can happen here in Canada. We saw it 
in Toronto with SARS [severe acute respiratory syndrome], but 
we also saw it, and we’re seeing it as we speak in Africa with 
Ebola. Clearly our medical professions are very, very important, 
and pharmacists clearly are. 
 
And I can speak . . . You know, as we all age, we tend to get to 
know our pharmacists a little bit better for a whole host of 
different reasons, and I can tell you that I feel really good about 
the people who help me out on a regular basis. They know who 
I am and they give me great advice, and I feel that they really 
take their work very seriously. It’s an honourable profession, 
and it’s one that goes way back in history, and it has a whole lot 
of roots. I know that we think of . . . And particularly in this 
kind of legislation, we’re not talking about necessarily 
herbalists or those types of folks, even though they have an 
awful lot to offer too. But these are more the university trained, 
the ones who are dealing with the prescriptions from doctors. 
 
But you know, I have to say that it was interesting. When we 
were in Cuba on the last winter holiday, we stopped in at a 
museum of a pharmacist and very . . . You know, the history of 
pharmaceuticals and the important role that they play in our 
communities is quite something else. Clearly someone who can 
stop the pain has a huge place in our society. We respect them 
dearly, and we want them to be treated well, but when things go 
wrong, we are also pretty snarly about the whole thing because 
we’re in pretty bad moods about our particular health. 
 
And so when we have this kind of thing happening, we are very 
interested. And we see, you know, an expansion of this whole 
issue of the professions and how they are mandated to look after 
themselves. And I know as we look across the whole realm, I 
think of, in social services, the whole issue around social 
workers and the use of their name. They need a little work 
there. We think this is something that the government should be 
paying attention to, but here they’re much more, much more 
protective, and that’s a good thing. 
 
I’m just going to take a minute to review the minister’s 
remarks. He talks about how he recognizes the important role 
pharmacists play within the whole issue of health and delivering 
good health services to the public and how they play an 
important part, working on their full scope of practice within a 
collaborative team, and that’s huge. And now we’re expanding 
that to talk about pharmaceutical pharmacist technicians, and 
that’s important. Talk about the full skill and making sure that 
they’re using their training to its full limit, particularly in rural 
areas where pharmacies may be open longer hours than medical 
clinics or more easily accessed. And that’s true. 
 
[19:30] 
 
And we see that because quite often, you know, in the past you 
would have a drugstore and that would be where the pharmacist 
would work out of. It was their own store. But quite often now 
we see them partnered up with a bit of a convenience store. Or 
you even see to the extent of London Drugs, which is a full on, 
almost equivalent to a department store what I would be 
familiar with in the old days of the department store. I mean 



6070 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

you can buy almost anything at London Drugs, but it started out 
as a drugstore. 
 
So this is important that we take a look at how do we modernize 
the language. So this talks about allowing pharmacists to 
administer vaccines and drugs such as flu shot and vitamin B12, 
and order, access, and use lab tests, working in collaboration 
with a physician. And that makes a lot of sense in a province 
such as ours that has issues of access to medical services, 
whether they be in the Far North, whether they be in rural 
Saskatchewan, and I think this is an important thing. 
 
And so the whole issue though really is to make sure that they 
are done well and that they’re safe, and there’s a process of 
moving it forward. So they’re changing the name of the 
legislation to The Pharmacy and Pharmacy Disciplines Act. 
Thinking that it’s a better clarification for regulating two 
separate pharmacy professions — the pharmacist and the 
pharmacy technicians — and clarifying the terminology around 
the pharmacy ownership. 
 
And as well, our goal is to provide leadership. It talks about that 
kind of thing, another example about how they’re putting the 
patient first. That may be what they think they do, but clearly, 
you know, we see other evidence. And that evidence is brought 
forward every day during question period about how we don’t 
think they’re really doing that, and so they put that plug in. I’m 
not sure if it fits in there, because clearly that is something that 
we have some questions about. We will question them every 
day on that. 
 
I do want to say as I was reading the Act, that there was a whole 
issue of fines. And fines now will go from 5,000 to 100,000, 
and as well from 15,000 to 100,000. And I’m just wondering 
how that fits into the Canadian landscape with other 
pharmacists and penalties. What is the landscape across Canada 
in terms of fines for pharmacists who break their regulations, 
whether they be public law or I assume an offence within their 
own profession? So we need to understand that more fully. 
 
But we do think that it’s important that professionals take their 
work seriously, and if there’s a breach of conduct, that they’re 
not doing their work appropriately. And we all know that 
particularly when it comes to pharmacists and the kind of things 
that are involved, that if there are errors made, if there are errors 
made, that there should be significant consequences. 
 
And you know what I’m thinking of this stuff that we’re seeing 
in Ottawa today and yesterday around thalidomide babies that 
were born 54 years ago, the impact that’s having of 94 people 
who were born without limbs, and how when pharmacists or the 
pharmacy industry can go so wrong, can go so wrong, and yet 
we have not taken full responsibility. 
 
I don’t know if folks are following this discussion in Ottawa, 
but it’s one that we should pay attention to in Saskatchewan 
here because we have a situation where there’s 94 people who 
have survived to this stage of 54 years, and I think this is really, 
really an important thing. And we need to see the Canadian 
government step up. I don’t know if the provincial government 
has a role in this, but we think that there’s clearly a situation 
where regulations, if they go wrong, have dire consequences. 
 

And ironically, Mr. Speaker, in the United States, they had no 
babies born because of that serious situation because it was a 
Canadian who was working at the federal drug agency in 
Washington who stopped that process of approving the drug in 
question. And therefore Americans have no experience with 
what we have in Canada or Europe. And so I would hope that in 
Ottawa they take this very seriously and they address this issue 
quickly, because there’s less than 94 people, or there’s 94 folks 
who are still alive with the condition. They are 54 years old 
now. And because it all happened very, very quickly in one 
period of time and the fact that many of their parents have 
passed away, and the question is, who will protect these folks or 
help them when they grow older into their senior years? 
 
It’s a miracle and it’s a wonderful thing that they’ve been able 
to live, and particularly full lives, but the fact for many of them, 
but the fact is that when we need to . . . We need to take 
pharmaceuticals very seriously. And so we are appreciative. 
And so we’ll have more questions around the fines and that type 
of thing. 
 
I did want to say, and I just wanted to draw attention to, again, 
around the whole thing about protection of title and how that’s 
very, very important. But I do have questions because, as I said 
in Social Services where the protection of the title, social 
worker, is not so adhered to, and that has extreme consequences 
or dire consequences as well. So we’ll be having questions 
about that, because the government right across the board, 
whether you’re a social worker or a pharmacist or a pharmacy 
technician, there should be a seriousness towards the title, the 
title of work. And it seems to be applied unevenly across the 
professions here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that others will want to get 
into this discussion around the pharmacy Act and the 
implications of that. It’s one that has a lot of interest, and 
particularly, what are the unintended consequences? As I said, 
and when I’m just thinking now that when the fines, potential 
for fines go from 5,000 to 100,000, I hope that we’re not seeing 
an increase in fees for prescriptions that cover for any problems 
in that area. We hope that’s not an unintended consequence for 
us here in our province. 
 
So it’ll be interesting to see how that plays out. It’ll be 
interesting to know how many fines are or have been applied 
across the province. I know I did read of several drugstores that 
were charged, I think a year ago, around some infractions. And 
so it’s not unheard of, but it is one that we should be taking very 
seriously for sure. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that others 
will want to get into debate on other bills as well, and we have a 
list before us for tonight. So I would like to move adjournment 
of Bill No. 151, An Act to amend The Pharmacy Act, 1996 and 
to make consequential amendments to other Acts. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6071 

Bill No. 143 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 143 — The 
Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014. I 
know the great work that our universities in the province does, 
and government is bringing forward some changes. And I know 
there was already . . . in 2012 they introduced legislation 
authorizing some of the institutes would have to go through a 
process if they wanted to offer the program and offer degree 
programs. And some of them obviously went ahead with that. 
Some of them have a provision in here that they go through a 
process. 
 
But I want to give credit to the University of Regina and 
Saskatoon. I know they work hard in northern Saskatchewan as 
well. In many ways they partnership with NORTEP [northern 
teacher education program] program, also Northlands College. 
So there is opportunity, and I know they have that partnership 
and a working relationship, and it works very well for both 
institutes. And I know they come to the North and when they 
offer programs and they work together, you see many of the 
professors and the profs coming into La Ronge. And they do the 
classes that they need to do and make sure that they share the 
information. 
 
But also I think sometimes it gives them an opportunity to see 
some of the culture. That’s very important for them to see and 
experience some of the way of life, and I think some of the 
challenges that some of our far North . . . our rural, our isolated 
communities, some of those challenges that students face. And 
they get a chance to see that right there and I think it gives them 
a good working relationship with not only the institutes that 
they’re . . . NORTEP, Northlands, but also with the students, 
with the faculty. 
 
So there is a lot of work with the board. Even in itself, I know 
the board’s always working co-operatively. So there are some 
good things going on in both the University of Regina and 
Saskatchewan and they do some great partnerships in northern 
Saskatchewan. But I think also that they reach out where they 
can partnership in the other universities and the other institutes. 
The University of Saskatchewan, Regina, I think work together. 
 
But having said that, in this bill, this is giving institutes the 
opportunity to have the degree program and to offer a degree so 
that they are competitive I guess in the international markets. 
And they refer to some of that. And students that come here, 
they have an opportunity to offer . . . And I guess many of the 
institutes that are out there can at least apply. 
 
There is a provision for them. They have to go through a review 
process. They have to make sure they meet the criteria, because 
they want to set a very high standard to making sure that those 
students that come from out of Canada, whether they’re in 
Saskatchewan, out of province, that those programs that they’re 
offering have a certain standard and, you know, that they know 

the quality of the program that they’re putting out, and the 
degree that one gets, you know, really is out there and is 
respected. And I think Saskatchewan does an excellent job of 
that. 
 
But there is opportunity for other institutes to take part in this 
partnership and to take part in this process, and that’s what this 
bill is introducing. And I know that the minister in his 
comments talked about some of that areas and where they’re 
going to continue to work. 
 
And there was about four of them that had that opportunity in 
2000 to work on that. And if the government was happy, from 
my understanding, looking at what was going on, if they meet, 
they would encourage that in a grandfathering provision. And I 
guess if they meet the criteria and the ministry is happy with 
them, then I’d just have to assume — and I guess we can even 
ask some of these questions in committee — but I’m assuming 
those ones that were grandfathered in are fine. There’s about 
four of them I think they mentioned. 
 
But the other institutes that are out there that can apply. And 
there’s many institutes that we have in our province doing great 
work, helping in the post-secondary education of many. Not 
only is it important to give a good K to 12 [kindergarten to 
grade 12] education. But if you, you know, have I guess the 
finances, the supports, if you have what it takes to further on, 
and if this is a desire you want and you want to do better for 
your family, you can do that. And this provides that opportunity 
for some post-secondary students to do that. 
 
So really I think overall I don’t have a lot more to say on this. I 
know in committee . . . And I know moving this forward gives 
some institutes an opportunity if they want to apply, if they 
want to go through the review process, if they meet all the 
criteria that’s asked of them, then they can go ahead. They can 
be approved and they can have that degree authorization to do 
that. 
 
I think some of them will take advantage of it. I hope many of 
them do because we have many good institutes doing great 
work for many students in our province. We see champions and 
role models coming out of these programs of post-secondary. 
And we’re very proud of many of those students, and they 
continue. They pay great dividends back into the government 
coffers because those individuals get jobs and they pay taxes 
and they allow that. 
 
[19:45] 
 
But remember this, when they pay those taxes and they give 
them into the government coffers, they want the government to 
take good care of those taxes because it’s their hard-earned tax 
dollars that they give to the government. And government some 
days doesn’t always show that they’re doing the best with those. 
Many of us from this side of the House remind the government 
when we’re hearing it, people share that with us, that 
government needs to make sure they’re taking good care of tax 
dollars that people earn with a program like this, that people go 
to post-secondary. They want to make sure this government’s 
held to a high standard to take care of the dollars, hard-earned 
dollars that people earn, they want to be taken care of. 
 



6072 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

So at that time, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any more comments. 
I know we will have more questions in committee and I know 
my colleagues will have more opportunities to debate this bill. 
So at this time I’m prepared to adjourn debate on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment 
Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 148 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 148 — The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise tonight to enter into this debate on Bill No. 148, 
An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 2009. 
 
And this is a very significant piece of legislation. It’s one that, 
you know, has really . . . It’s interesting when you become a 
politician, some things you don’t think an awful lot of before, 
but all of a sudden they become very, very important. And this 
is one: vital statistics. It becomes obvious when you use the 
word vital. These are our vital numbers and how do we keep 
track of our people in our province, our country. 
 
And it’s one that, on a personal note, as a new grandfather of 
two grandchildren, clearly birth certificates and births are very, 
very important. And we’ve been talking a lot about this in our 
family, having one child born in Quebec under the civil code 
and one born in Ontario under laws very similar to 
Saskatchewan, but not quite. And I’ll talk more about that later 
on, because we have our own unique anomalies here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I understand the intent of this bill is to modernize and to 
recognize the unique challenges we have in Saskatchewan. And 
that’s fair enough; that’s always a good reason for amending 
our legislation. But there are other challenges we have that I 
think The Vital Statistics Amendment Act neglects and could 
address. And at some point we’re going to have to have the 
discussion about these issues, and I will get to that in a moment. 
But I do want to say that it is an interesting issue that I think, 
well I know we all have experienced because we all have birth 
certificates. And this is something that we experience, whether 
it’s how we name our children . . . 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I think I’ve told this story 
in this House before, our oldest daughter who is now 34 years 
old, born in 1980, was named after my Uncle Cameron. In 1980 
it was not common to name a female with a male name. For 
some reason, this upset a bureaucrat in the Department of 
Health, and refused to acknowledge that she could possibly be 

female. We had the birth certificate, the registration, rejected 
two or three times, and finally the bureaucrat said, you must 
have that child examined by a doctor to prove that she is in fact 
female. What female would have a name Cameron? So we did 
actually go, I think she was three or four years old. This debate 
was going on many years because they could not accept the fact 
that a child had a male name. 
 
And I think of today, where we see the whole wide range of 
names of children, the whole wide range of names. And nobody 
would think to question a parent about, well that’s a boy’s 
name; you must use that for a boy. Or that’s a girl’s name and 
that’s only for girls. That is just so inappropriate now, but back 
in 1980, it was this bureaucrat . . . And I don’t know who it 
was, but clearly, in the Health department, felt they had the 
power to say that name — now I can’t use my name because 
we’re in the House — is inappropriate and you must do 
something about it. 
 
So that was our experience. That was our first experience with 
vital statistics. Interestingly now, what’s happening with my 
daughter, the same daughter who caused that kerfuffle in 1980, 
here we are, fast-forward to 2014. She wants to name her 
daughter Felix Rose Martin, which is not my last name but my 
wife’s last name, but not my daughter’s last name. So in 
Quebec, you have to establish that . . . The child’s name can 
only be the name of the mother or father, and that’s it. Or if 
there’s a hyphenated name it can be one of the hyphenated 
names. Now interestingly all our children are named 
Martin-Forbes so she’s trying to make a case. 
 
And we have just recently found out from Saskatchewan that 
it’s inconclusive to what my daughter’s last name really is, 
because is it Martin-Forbes or is it Forbes? They won’t say. 
And so that does actually leave my daughter an opening to say, 
well her last name is Martin-Forbes, which is fine with me 
because our other two children have the same scenario. But this 
goes to show and illustrate how important it is to have clarity on 
the legislation and on the regulations and what this could 
possibly mean. 
 
Now I have to tell you, as a grandfather, Mr. Speaker, I am a 
little concerned because, as you know, around the world 
children go missing all the time. And one of the quick ways of 
finding out who the child is, if you have a last name that makes 
sense with the two adults who are travelling with that child, that 
clears up a lot of confusion if everybody has at least one of the 
last names. When you have three last names, you’re creating a 
bit of a problem. But this is the world we live in, and these are 
the challenges we have. And so we try to simplify things. 
 
But my point is that we need clarity and we need to be able to 
make things work. But we need to have rules that work and 
work quickly. And so if this is one of the things that this bill 
does talk about, using electronic signatures and documents and 
transactions, so things can move a lot quicker so there can be 
that clarity. So it’s very, very important that we can make sure 
that these important events are tracked properly — birth 
certificates and that type of thing. And so we have a lot of 
interest in this. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say though, and I’m just 
going to take a minute to review the minister’s comments here. 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6073 

So when he talks about The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, he 
talks about modernizing the vital statistics but maintain the 
original principles of the original legislation. 
 
Now it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the library take a 
look at some of the original documents going back to 1909 
about our legislation and what that means because there’s a 
couple of points that I want to make about the changes that are 
coming up in human rights. And we need to have a 
conversation about those kind of challenges. And he talks about 
recognizing today’s world as different from 2009 when the first 
statistics Act was first introduced. 
 
Now it’s interesting, the world has changed and there will be 
challenges, and I will talk a little about that in a while here. And 
he talks about making it easier for people to receive timely 
access to vital event documents. And he’s talking about a few 
that they have and these came through with the consultations 
with the College of Physicians and Surgeons, nurse 
practitioners, and the SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association]. 
 
Now interestingly, if it was limited to that, there’s a few groups 
out there that have things to say about vital statistics. And that’s 
really, really important that we allow the public to have some 
input into these bills because, you know, it is the public, as I 
was talking about my own daughter. We all have experience 
with vital statistics, and we need to be able to have input into 
what needs to be part of those vital statistics. 
 
Now he talks about using . . . a physician can only sign a 
medical certificate for death. But now because it poses a 
challenge for rural and northern communities where there may 
not be a local physician, that in fact they may want to use a 
nurse or a nurse practitioner that may in fact speed things up, 
and this is very, very important how they can work with that. So 
talking about unique circumstances. 
 
He talked about for example, the missing children’s project and 
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada requested 
the death information of Aboriginal children who attended 
residential schools, but we couldn’t provide that information 
after the year of 1945 which is really, really unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about two particular circumstances 
where I think that we will have questions and what can we do to 
make things better in terms of vital statistics and using this 
legislation as a vehicle to help out people who need better 
access to services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the first is around just proper ID [identification]. And we 
know that we see challenges and that can be a whole range of 
services, whether that’s banking or whether that’s voting. And 
we know that continues to become an issue that we need to 
have appropriate mechanisms to make sure that there’s no voter 
fraud, but at the same time that it’s not a limitation because 
there’s not ID available. So here when we talk about the costs 
of birth certificates and the implication that has for people to 
access ID, that it may in fact be a limitation. 
 
And I know that that’s a limitation for many folks in my riding 
that in fact they’ve raised this concern, both federally and 
provincially, because of the rise of the issue around voter ID. 

And this is something that’s come, and we know for example 
the American Legislative Exchange Council, and this is often 
known as ALEC, talked about things that can help conservative 
legislatures impose model legislation. 
 
One of the things that they did do is they talked about how can 
we have harsher voter ID laws and related voter suppression 
initiatives, and in fact we could see that happening in America. 
And I hope in many ways — and we have and we’ve passed 
legislation — but we hope that the interpretive of that 
legislation will go a long way to in fact reverse that so we have 
voter engagement and not voter suppression. And vital statistics 
can help out with that by making ID more accessible to people 
who have traditionally not had ID or if they don’t have ID or if 
it’s that cost is a barrier, that we can work with that to make 
sure people can have or can receive their ID. 
 
So it all starts with vital statistics and making sure that it’s 
appropriate and easily accessible. And if we’re talking about 
electronic documents, then how can we make sure that happens 
in terms of allowing people to vote. 
 
The other issue that I want to talk about — and this is the 
reason that I did start this research, and I started it back last 
March — was around the whole issue of gender markers. And 
actually it’s interesting because quite often on your birth 
certificate it will say what sex you have, and probably the more 
appropriate term would be what gender you identify with. And I 
know that, and as recently as yesterday I raised this in a 
member’s statement around transgender rights, both in terms of 
identity and expression. And we’re seeing a move across 
Canada where both in Ontario, BC [British Columbia], and 
Alberta, and interestingly as conservative as Alberta is, that 
they’ve modified their approach to vital statistics and the idea 
of gender markers. And how do we approach that when we are 
thinking of human rights? 
 
[20:00] 
 
But I just thought this might be interesting for the folks here or 
maybe at home, about when I asked the folks in our library . . . 
And I just want to give a hats off and a very deep thank you to 
the folks in the reference unit at the Legislative Library because 
I asked them about, how have birth certificates evolved over the 
last 100 years in Canada? Because we often think that they’re 
all the same now as they were 100 years ago, and that’s not the 
case at all. Not the case at all. 
 
And in fact I wanted to know because somebody said to me, 
well you know in some provinces in Canada, you still have to 
identify what race. They ask what race you are or you belong to. 
And if anybody’s interested in that, I will get to that. But the 
folks were very good at going through all 13 provinces and 
territories, finding out what are the requirements on the birth 
certificate and when was race removed from the birth 
certificate. 
 
So Alberta did ask for race, but it was removed after 1942. 
British Columbia had asked for it, but it was removed in the 
1950s. Manitoba was 1968 that it was removed. Newfoundland 
we had not heard back from, and of course it became part of 
Canada in 1949, I believe it was. 
 



6074 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

Nova Scotia, this is the one that’s interesting. The current 
regulation, 1973, still lists race for the registration form. So 
whether they use it or not, I’m not sure, but it’s in the 
regulations that they do. Nunavut, race was never included. 
Prince Edward Island, never included. Ontario was 1960. 
 
Quebec, race was never included. But the interesting thing with 
Quebec, because the church was so involved . . . In fact actually 
they, for many years up to just recent times, had looked after, 
the church had looked after, the Catholic church looked after 
the vital statistics. In Saskatchewan race was removed from 
birth certificates in 1974. 
 
So very interesting in terms of when race was actually removed. 
And so I want to thank the folks in the research area for their 
very good work on that because we wanted to know when 
things were removed from the birth certificate. 
 
And you can find that it’s actually surprising that in 
Saskatchewan, when I was born, we were still identifying what 
race. In fact many of the people here, when they were born, one 
of the questions on your birth certificate would have been, what 
race do you identify with or do your parents identify with? 
 
Now interestingly — and I do have a copy of the 1909 birth 
certificate with me, Mr. Speaker — some of the questions that 
they asked are very interesting. And of course they do the 
nearest thing. They do the obvious questions: place of birth; 
nearest post office; Christian name, if any, and surname; native 
country of father; native country of mother. They don’t ask for 
nationality at that point, so just a very simple, straightforward 
birth certificate at the time. 
 
Of course and I can remember, many of the seniors when I was 
growing up in Mortlach, actually they were very proud of their 
birth certificate because for them, they were born in the 
North-West Territories. And so anybody who is over 65 back in 
the ’60s could have said that they were born in the territories, 
and they were very proud of that. 
 
So in 1954 we changed our birth certificates and, interestingly, 
here are the questions. For the father: the name, the residence, 
citizenship — but that was all about whether you were a 
Canadian or not — but racial origin. And the notes that went 
with it say, racial origin is defined in terms of the people or race 
to which the person traced through the father belongs, whether 
English, Irish, Scottish, French, German, Russian, Ukrainian, 
etc. The terms Canadian or American should not be used as a 
race origin as they express citizenship. And they go through the 
same thing with mother and talking about the citizenship, racial 
origin, and then talking about occupation and that type of thing. 
And so it was very interesting to see what were the questions 
that people were looking for. 
 
And then here, and I apologize if I offend anyone here, but this 
is the questions in 1954 when the registration for an Aboriginal 
person was registration of a live birth of an Indian. And this is 
the whole question for that, and of course band or tribe to which 
the mother belongs, and that was in 1954. So we’ve come a 
long way from that time. And that lasted until 1966 where the 
changes came into play, but still they had racial origin. But 
from what I could tell, they had done away with the registration 
for an Aboriginal person. That was not separate as it was in the 

’50s. And so it’s very interesting when you take a look at what 
people felt was important information. 
 
And then again in 1974, this is where we get into . . . We don’t 
have race anymore on the birth certificate. But there were other 
interesting questions about in terms of, you know, for some 
reason in 1974 they were very curious about the medical history 
of the mom and the duration of pregnancy, which had not been 
asked earlier, the number of children ever born to this mother, 
number of live born and number of stillborn. Are the parents 
married to each other? Yes or no? Are the parents not married 
to each other? State whether the mother is married, widowed, or 
divorced, but doesn’t reference the father as any kind of 
responsibility for that. And so that’s interesting of what our 
world was thinking about in the 1970s and that wasn’t the 
issues prior to that. 
 
So this is interesting in terms of how we evolve, but the reason I 
bring this up, Mr. Speaker, is to make the case, as the minister 
made, that things change. He was reflecting back to only 2009. 
I went back a little further than that. But I think that as we know 
and we’ve raised this issue, and it’s one that has been raised on 
the legislative steps . . . It’s been one. And I know the minister 
has been written to and we heard questions about this in the 
media last spring. When we talk about transgender folks and 
gender variant children, how do we deal with that in terms of 
vital statistics? 
 
Because there’s two issues that we’re really dealing with when 
we come to trans issues. We’re talking about human rights and 
the right for gender identity and gender expression and how 
important that is, but that’s a human rights . . . That’s within the 
domain of the Human Rights Commission, and we are hopeful 
that this government will make the necessary changes in due 
course. We hope that’s sooner than later. But we know that the 
point has been made very clear that there’s not clarity in the 
Act. There’s not clarity in the Act about that. 
 
But the other one that’s really started to emerge last spring was 
the whole issue about transgender people and their ability to 
change birth certificates and because, when they went through 
surgery, going from male to female or female to male, the 
necessary proof was for a doctor to say that in fact the surgery 
had occurred, that in fact the person who wanted to change the 
birth certificate was in fact biologically now the gender they 
identify with. 
 
But there were issues that came up, both in terms of whether a 
person could go through the surgery, whether they were healthy 
enough to undergo the necessary surgery, or whether they could 
afford the surgery because of their own personal means. In fact 
we see Ontario now has changed the requirements where, if 
they have the support of a psychologist and support of the 
necessary medical people to say that in fact this person 
identifies as one gender that biologically they are not, that in 
fact they will do the necessary change on the birth certificate. 
 
And this is a big discussion that I think we need to have here in 
Saskatchewan. We see them having that in Ontario, changing it. 
We see they’re having that discussion in BC. We see in Alberta. 
Actually we’ve seen several occasions where this has happened. 
And on one hand it may seem to be one that is not 
straightforward. We understand that. We get that. That’s why 



November 25, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6075 

we need to have that conversation and one that asks us to really 
be thinking forward and be acknowledging that people do have 
rights and that people have unique circumstances, but one that I 
think that we need to have that conversation. And we need to 
acknowledge the folks who identify as trans and have these 
kind of challenges. 
 
And so I raise this tonight just because when we talk about vital 
statistics and we see the evolution from 1909 to 2014, the world 
has changed and the world is changing, and I think changing in 
many ways for better. And as we see that in terms of our own 
birth certificates where there’s been changes, where we see it’s 
no longer appropriate to ask about race of parents or the race of 
the child — that was an out-of-date, antiquated idea — so we 
need to have this conversation. And I hope we can have this 
conversation in the legislature. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I know that others will want to be able to 
speak to different topics tonight, but I did want to raise this. 
And I think that it’s an important, important issue that we have 
before us, that folks will want to participate. It’s one that 
challenges us. I know that. I recognize that. But that’s our job, 
is to look at society and say, how can we make this a healthier 
place for all? And The Vital Statistics Act enables us to do that. 
 
We know that this is not a simple thing. We can think of vital 
statistics in the plural when we think of one million-plus people 
in this province and they’re dealing with all that data. But when 
you think of people from the other end of the line where they’re 
looking at their own birth certificate, their own, and what that 
means to them and how that helps them live a full and 
productive life, whether they can get the vital statistics, whether 
they can get a birth certificate, they can afford to get it paid and 
whether you get the ID to vote and participate in society or 
whether they get an ID that reflects who they really are. That’s 
an important issue too. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, we know we will have a lot of 
questions in the committee, and I look forward to a full and 
frank and rigorous discussion with the minister about this. And 
I want to put some of those comments on record because I 
know people have come to this House raising those questions, 
and they have raised them with the Minister of Justice, and it’s 
an important discussion to have. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of 
Bill No. 148, An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act, 2009. 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 141 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 141 — The 
Archives and Public Records Management Act be now read a 
second time.] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join on Bill 141, 
The Archives and Public Records Management Act. Just 
looking at it I don’t have a lot, but I just want to . . . They’re 
looking at some changes and I think making some of the rules 
around providing archives that are protected, whether they’re 
political records or ministerial records, they’re going to look at 
them differently. And someone will determine to, I guess, when 
they go through the process to determine who will say they are 
ministerial and which are political records. And some will be 
kept in different ways. 
 
[20:15] 
 
But going at it, right now you can request from the Archives 
certain documents but it takes somebody from Archives going 
through it and making sure there’s no personal information 
when you’re requesting these documents to make sure they’re 
kept, I guess, intact, but also you’re not revealing someone’s, 
whether it be health records, whatever personal information that 
might be in Archives, that is not violating someone’s privacy by 
them providing that. So it takes quite a bit of work, from my 
understanding. I’ve asked a few people about that and they’re 
saying it takes quite a bit of work to go through that process and 
it takes time if you’re requesting that to go through. 
 
It sounds like some of the changes that are being proposed in 
here would be that there might be . . . I don’t know if it’s the 
agency, and we’ll have to clarify that, or the group or if there’ll 
be someone hired by . . . a researcher or something that will go 
through that and will sign something that says, from my 
understanding, that they will make sure they don’t release any 
information. So if it’s clear, the rules are here. You can have 
this as long as you go through that process. You make sure that 
no private information is shared to the public if somebody’s 
requesting it. And that’s my understanding is kind of where 
they’re going at it. And I know that in committee we’ll have 
more questions; my colleagues will. 
 
When I was looking at it, basically I guess it gives some stricter 
rules. It shows whether, like I said, it’s either political reports or 
it’s the ministerial records. They’ll do some clarification on it 
and making sure. Because they’ll be ones will be kept and you 
want to ensure for the records that are there. And if it’s political 
ones, it’s a different way they’re going to deal with them. And I 
know we’ll have more questions in committee and my 
colleagues will have more to talk about. 
 
So at this point I don’t have any further discussion other than 
when it goes to committee — clarification we can do some 
research, see who requested this, as I said before. So at this 
point I have no further comments on it, so I adjourn debate on 
this. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 141, The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 



6076 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2014 

Bill No. 142 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 142 — The 
Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records 
Management Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
142. This is the consequential amendments Act to the bill that I 
just talked about and in here, I guess, The Evidence Act and The 
Education Act will be . . . They have to make some of the 
changes so when Act 143 comes into enforcement, it will 
trigger consequential amendments to The Education Act and 
also The Evidence Act so that they’re in compliance with the 
Act. So that’s what this change, consequential amendment has, 
the Act. I think it’s basic for schools to give their records and 
the material to archives, and that’s what this outlines. 
 
So at this time, I have no further questions on the consequential 
amendments Act to this bill, Mr. Speaker, and I adjourn debate 
on it. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 142, The Archives and Public Records 
Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 147 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 147 — The Class 
Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to weigh in briefly here tonight on Bill No. 147, the amendment 
to The Class Actions Act. And certainly any time we’re looking 
through any of the changes that affect our justice system, we 
need to be looking through a lens of making sure that the 
changes are fair to all, that they are ensuring access to the legal 
system, that they’re effective in what’s being brought forward. 
 
I know some of the changes that are brought forward here today 
relate directly to the ability for judges to award costs for court 
proceedings. And I know there’s a criteria laid out by the 
minister in doing so, and that would be whether it’s in the 
public interest, whether the action is a novel point of law, 
whether the case is a test case, and related also around access to 
justice. So certainly those seem like important criteria. It’ll be 
our job, our work as the opposition, to consult directly with the 
legal community, with the bar association, and with the 
community at large to make sure that these criteria are 

appropriate. 
 
One important piece is this subsection (4), which is retroactive 
or brings retroactivity to this legislation. I’d be interested in 
what the scope of that is and if there’s any specific case or 
something that government’s facing right now that has caused 
that clause to be put in, that retroactivity. 
 
These are some of the questions that certainly we’ll have for the 
minister moving forward, but right now, at this point in time, I 
think we’re going to be working directly with stakeholders. We 
know that far too often that government just doesn’t care to 
listen to those directly on the front lines, the stakeholders, when 
they derive legislation. And as a result of that, in not listening 
and not working with stakeholders and not consulting, they 
build legislation far too often that’s flawed and doesn’t reflect 
some of the unintended consequences that may be in place. So 
certainly this bill at first glance seems reasonable. We certainly 
want to have a better understanding of the retroactivity and 
what’s motivating that change for government, and then just 
making sure that the criteria that’s laid out is as inclusive as it 
should be. And then looking at it through a lens, any changes to 
our justice system, making sure that it’s accessible, that it’s 
effective, that it’s fair for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
But at this point in time I adjourn debate on Bill No. 147, the 
amendment to The Class Actions Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government Deputy 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I make the motion to 
adjourn the House this evening. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Deputy House Leader has 
moved that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 20:22.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6065 
 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6065 
 Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6069 
 Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6071 
 Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6072 
 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6075 
 Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records Management Act  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6076 
 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6076 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	EVENING SITTING
	EVENING SITTING

