




















































Hansard: April 08, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 47A  TUESDAY, APRIL 8, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5101 

 April 8, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

going to ask for leave of members of the House to make a very 

special introduction today. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to make an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have some 

very special guests that are seated in the west gallery today that 

it is my unqualified honour and privilege to introduce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we live in a wonderful province. On that we all 

agree. And our provincial motto, “from many peoples, strength” 

is on exhibit every day in the people we meet. And then even 

though the entire population could claim credit, and should, for 

the provincial motto, there is a small and select group among us 

who are quite literally heroes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce some Saskatchewan heroes to 

you today and then to members of the House. We are going to 

recognize these heroes a little bit later on in a special ceremony 

for the Premier’s Commendation Awards. Mr. Speaker, the idea 

for this award comes from the member for Wood River, and I 

want to thank him for his suggestion — someone who knows a 

little bit of what he speaks when it comes to these matters, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so let’s get right to the introductions. I should note, by the 

way, that there will be a special ceremony where the awards 

will be presented later this day with MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] and with the member for Wood River 

who has really spawned this idea. And obviously I’m going to 

be honoured to participate in those awards as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to read the names of those who’ve 

joined us, and I’m going to ask them to just give us a quick 

wave so we know that they’re here. In the west gallery we have 

Mark Anderson and Nancy Ostime. They’re representing the 

students, faculty, and staff at Luther High School in Regina. 

There they are. They are being recognized for the actions that 

they took when an armed student entered the school in 

September of 2008. 

 

Constable Steve Enns of the Estevan Police Service is in the 

front row, Mr. Speaker. He rescued four people from a house 

fire in Estevan in May of 2012. 

 

Joshua Lasas from Flying Dust First Nation is here who, along 

with Devin Knot and Brett Opikokew of Meadow Lake, rescued 

a family of four from a car sinking in a ditch full of water in 

April of 2009. 

 

And Duane McKay is here, Mr. Speaker. Members will 

recognize Mr. McKay, Saskatchewan’s fire commissioner and 

the executive director of emergency management. He has 

shown and his team has shown amazing leadership, outstanding 

leadership during the floods of 2010 and 2011. And we know 

the province is in a good state today if Mr. McKay has joined us 

in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally Dwight Siman from Regina is here. There’s Dwight. 

Dwight rescued a man from a burning vehicle in January of 

2013, and we’ve had a chance to talk a little bit about Dwight’s 

efforts in the past. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, there is somebody who is absent who will 

be receiving the commendation, and her name is Shelley 

Baldwin and she’s from Oxbow, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Shelley was some time ago diagnosed with MS [multiple 

sclerosis] and then more recently with cancer. But she felt that 

given the amount of fabric in her home and given the amount of 

energy she still had, she should be doing something for people 

who needed clothing. And so she’s sewn 4,700 dresses with the 

fabric to give to people who need it, Mr. Speaker, 

notwithstanding the diagnosis she’s received. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are the quality of people that live among 

us every day, and we should do whatever we can as a province 

to recognize them. And this particular award is just a very, very 

small thing, a bauble really, compared to what they contribute, 

what they were willing to do. Mr. Speaker, we look forward to 

recognizing them later this day in the official presentation. Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with 

me in welcoming these guests to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the Premier in welcoming Mark, Nancy, Steve, Joshua, 

Duane, Dwight, and thinking of Shelley who’s not with us 

today, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, to offer 

our thanks and our appreciation for the service that you have 

provided and for the acts of bravery that you performed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that when all of these 

individuals saw an immediate need, an emergency situation, 

they jumped into action and didn’t think about what recognition 

might be there, did not think about the harm that they may 

experience individually, but they did it, Mr. Speaker, because 

they saw a fellow human in distress and they knew it was the 

right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m so pleased that these individuals can be recognized 

today and, on behalf of the official opposition, I want to say 

thank you and job well done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to 

join briefly with the Premier and with the Leader of the 



5102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2014 

Opposition to welcome a constituency high school that’s here 

today or the leadership of that high school, and they’ve already 

been introduced. That’s Principal Mark Anderson that’s here 

today, Vice-principal Nancy Ostime, and as well, the Chair of 

the board of regents, Stacey Cattell. 

 

And certainly they’re an exceptional high school; there’s no 

doubt about that. But you know, the word, when they were 

dealing with the crisis that they were and the response of the 

individuals that have joined us here today, were nimble, were 

smart, were selfless, were strong. And certainly they deserve 

our admiration and certainly they deserve as well the 

commendation they’re receiving here today. So I’m proud to 

welcome this constituency high school to their Assembly. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Joining us today from 

the Kahkewistahaw School, Community School, are 16 grade 6 

and 7 students. And I’d like to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly where they are joined by their teacher, 

Johnathan Kaiswatum, and a couple of chaperones, Myron Bob 

and Maria Sparvier. And Maria Sparvier certainly doesn’t need 

much of an introduction. She’s been involved with the Social 

Science Teachers’ Institute program. 

 

And so I’d like to invite my colleagues to help me join these 

students. We’re glad that you’ve taken the time to come and 

visit your Legislative Assembly. I look forward to meeting with 

them after question period. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for greater support for education in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that education is one of the most 

vital services that government provides to citizens. And we 

know that this government has failed to deliver a long-term plan 

and vision and the necessary resources to prioritize the delivery 

of educational excellence. And we also know that this 

government has failed to develop a real plan to close the 

Aboriginal education gap, to support English as an additional 

language students, support community schools and their 

communities and students. And we know that we must build the 

best education system for today and for Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 

long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 

provide the best quality of education for Saskatchewan, 

that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 

changes, that is based on proven educational best 

practices, that is developed through consultation with the 

education sector, and that builds strong educational 

infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 

the future. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents and 

community as it relates to the safety issues on Dewdney 

Avenue and the need to reroute heavy-haul truck traffic from 

Dewdney Avenue. It’s noted by residents that Dewdney Avenue 

is a residential artery that connects families to school, to work, 

and certainly impacts those living there as well. And they note 

that any further delays from that government is entirely 

unacceptable in responding to an issue created by that 

government. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 

Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 

well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 

and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 

the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 

and be developed through consultation with the city of 

Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 

ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 

the RPO. That means the dream of home ownership is 

destroyed for many families in the North. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many good people of this province. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition in reference to our 

northern highways. And, Mr. Speaker, the petition that I’m 

about to present is primarily involving the upgrading that is 

required for the main highway in northern Saskatchewan, one 

of the main highways, which is Highway 155, which serves 

northwestern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 



April 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5103 

And these petitions have been presented in the Assembly day 

after day. And we have petitions from all throughout 

Saskatchewan, as well as northern Saskatchewan. And in this 

particular petition, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 

provincial government to commit to repairing and 

upgrading Highway 155. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

residents on this petition from the province of Saskatchewan, 

I’d like to bring to attention the following for the Legislative 

Assembly: that Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse 

gas emissions per capita in all of Canada; that Saskatchewan’s 

emissions have continued to grow to 74 million megatonnes as 

reported by Environment Canada in October 2013 and show no 

sign of decreasing; and that since 2009, the Government of 

Saskatchewan has reduced climate change funding by 83 per 

cent, including another 35 per cent cut in the 2014-15 budget. 

I’d like to read the prayer, and it reads: 

 

That the undersigned respectfully request that the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a real plan 

and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial budget 

to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse gas 

emissions, helping families transition to energy-efficient 

homes, and encouraging everyone in the province to take 

real action to protect the environment. 

 

And this is signed by people from Saskatoon, Regina, and La 

Ronge. And I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Students Promote Environmental Sustainability 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, environmental 

sustainability is important to Saskatchewan people. Regina 

teachers and students are doing their part to raise awareness and 

take action. The oil recycling project was implemented in the 

Regina Catholic School Division in the fall of 2009. 

 

Since then, a total of 12 schools have been involved, and over 

2000 litres of used oil have been recycled. Students are at the 

forefront of this program as they develop enduring capacities to 

take action and lead by example, ultimately contributing to the 

health and well-being of local and global communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this initiative is made possible by the passionate 

and dedicated educators and Catholic community leaders like 

Vice-principal Lee Garinger from St. Josaphat, inclusive 

education teacher Arkin Kauf from St. Matthew, and learning 

resource teacher Jennifer Untereiner from St. Marguerite as 

well as strong support from the director of education, Rob 

Currie. These teachers continually go above and beyond their 

professional duties to inspire students and provide them with 

opportunities to create change. 

 

The oil recycling project is part of a larger initiative that 

promotes education for sustainable development. The 

Saskatchewan Regional Centre for Expertise website developed 

by Mr. Garinger and Mr. Kauf serves as a platform to bring 

together members of similar local, national, and international 

projects for collaboration and information sharing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating and thanking the teachers and students of Regina 

Catholic School Division for taking on this initiative and 

making our province a better place to live. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Prince Albert Firefighter Retires After 32 Years 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am very 

pleased to rise in the House to recognize former fire chief and 

good friend of mine for many years, Les Karpluk, for his 

dedication to the Prince Albert Fire Department and to the 

residents of Prince Albert and surrounding area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Les Karpluk recently retired as Prince Albert’s 

fire chief after 32 years of dedicated service to the department, 

which includes eight years as chief. After starting his career in 

1982, Chief Karpluk moved through the ranks with the 

promotion to battalion chief, then deputy chief, then fire chief 

after former Fire Chief Brian Shand announced his retirement in 

2005. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Chief Karpluk brought many great initiatives to 

the department during his time as chief. He focused on 

leadership programming, emergency preparedness and 

planning, and effective relationships with various levels of 

government. Chief Karpluk was very dedicated to his work, the 

safety of his firefighters, and the residents of Prince Albert. 

 

Former Deputy Chief Jason Everitt recently took over as acting 

chief for the department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 

congratulating Chief Karpluk on his retirement and thank him 

for his dedication to his job and for keeping the people and 

property of Prince Albert safe. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Woman Recognized as Francophone Leader 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Monsieur le Président, je voudrais prendre une 

minute pour reconnaître une femme importante de notre 

communauté fransaskoise. 

 

[Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a minute to 



5104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2014 

recognize an important woman from our Fransaskois 

community.] 

 

Françoise Sigur-Cloutier from Saskatoon has been highlighted 

as one of Canada’s leading francophone women by the 

Women’s Alliance of the Canadian Francophonie. 

 

To celebrate the organization’s 100th year, they recently 

announced their intention to create a centenary publication 

honouring francophone women in Canada. The book aims to 

recognize the important contributions of 100 female 

francophone leaders from across Canada, and Françoise has 

been named as one of these women. The AFFC [Alliance des 

femmes francophones du Canada] helps unify women of 

Canada’s francophone communities who have been involved in 

women’s rights since 1914. It brings together, supports, and is 

the spokesperson for its members to the growth and 

development of their communities. 

 

Françoise has contributed to the Fransaskois community 

through a number of initiatives, as president of the Assemblée 

communautaire fransaskoise, and in her extensive work in 

developing foundations for women and working groups. 

 

Françoise describes her passion for her work, saying she 

remains involved in the women’s movement for two reasons: 

because she has seen first-hand the value of making changes in 

society by lending support to those in need, and to remain a 

good example to her two daughters and her son. 

 

I call on members to join me in congratulating Madame 

Sigur-Cloutier for being among the 100 women recognized for 

their important work in their communities. Merci, monsieur le 

Président. 

 

[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Housing Development in Maidstone 

 

Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House and 

inform members about a new housing development under way 

in Maidstone under the Headstart on a Home program. This 

development, a first for Maidstone, will help four individuals or 

families purchase an entry-level home that fits within their 

budget. Under the program, I’m proud that our government is 

providing 920,000 to help Alderwood Ventures Ltd. bring this 

project forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we first announced Headstart in 2011, we 

anticipated a minimum of 1,000 new entry-level homes would 

be constructed throughout Saskatchewan over five years. I’m 

pleased that as of February 2014, Headstart has already 

financed 1,086 new homes, either completed or under 

construction, in three years. An additional 265 units have been 

approved for financing but are not yet under construction. 

Clearly there is a need for the program. Most importantly, there 

is a need to help provide more renters with an opportunity to 

buy a home. 

 

As our province continues to grow and prosper, finding an 

entry-level home that is affordable in today’s market can be 

challenging. Private and public partnerships such as this 

initiative are helping to address this issue. These partnerships 

are part of Saskatchewan’s growth plan where everyone works 

together to make our province the best place to live, work, and 

raise a family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Davidson Residents Join Charity Mission 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take the 

time today to speak about the generosity of Davidson residents 

Larry and Judi Packet, people I’m privileged to represent in the 

Arm River-Watrous constituency. 

 

Because of the kind efforts of Mr. and Mrs. Packet as well as 

several charity organizations, a number of handicapped people 

in Central America have a new lease on life. In February this 

year, the Packets, along with others, travelled to Costa Rica to 

distribute over 30 free wheelchairs to needy people in the area. 

 

This project was a collaborative effort of the Canadian 

Wheelchair Foundation and also the Knights of Columbus, of 

which Larry’s a territorial district deputy. Individuals could 

donate 150 to the Wheelchair Foundation of Canada who then 

matched each donation to make up the total cost of $300 a 

chair. The Active 20-30 International Club in San José helped 

assess those who needed the wheelchairs and assisted in 

distribution of the chairs in Costa Rica. These two charities 

were able to raise enough money to purchase 130 wheelchairs. 

Many people benefited from this generosity, including a young 

boy who will now be able to attend school as well as another 

young woman who will be able to attend business college 

without the complications she encountered with her old 

wheelchair. 

 

Although this is the first time the Packets have been involved in 

this charity mission, they indicated that it definitely would not 

be their last. Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me 

in thanking Larry and Judi for their efforts to help the less 

fortunate people in Costa Rica. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Spring Fling Supports Programs for People 

With Intellectual Disabilities 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

weekend I had the opportunity of attending Spring Fling, the 

annual fundraising event for the Regina and District 

Association for Community Living. 

 

The Regina and District Association for Community Living is 

an organization committed to inclusion, acceptance, and 

participation for people with intellectual disabilities. It was 

founded by parents with a vision of inclusion for their children 

with disabilities and based on the philosophy that every person 

is a valuable member of society. 



April 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5105 

The Spring Fling was a wonderful event with a fantastic dinner 

followed by live entertainment, including an auction. But more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, it was an opportunity for members of 

the community to support the Regina and District Association 

for Community Living, making it possible for individuals with 

disabilities to have a significant, better life, and a richer, more 

rewarding and welcoming community for everyone. The money 

raised from this event will go directly into the various programs 

offered by the association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to speak with many parents 

and their family members at this event, and I can say I was truly 

empowered and inspired by their stories. In closing, I ask all 

members to join me in congratulating the Regina and District 

Association for Community Living on a great Spring Fling 

event and thank them for all they do to make our community a 

better place. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Doctors’ Night Out 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday I 

had the great opportunity to speak on behalf of the Government 

of Saskatchewan at the ninth annual Doctors’ Night Out 

black-tie gala. This event was the opportunity to recognize the 

hard work and dedication of Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region’s physicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this event highlighted the exceptional work of 

RQHR’s [Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] retiring 

physicians. I’d like to recognize them here today and say a 

special thank you to Dr. Singh, Dr. Graham-Rowe, Dr. Adam, 

Dr. Danielson, and I’d like to thank Dr. Lombard’s wife and 

daughter for accepting an award on his behalf. Their dedication 

to providing patient-centred care for the people of 

Saskatchewan is deeply appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is dedicated to working with the 

physicians of Saskatchewan to ensure that we have the best 

possible patient care across our province. Through the physician 

recruitment and retention plan, we have seen an increase of 300 

licensed physicians from ’07 to 2013. 

 

To ensure the education of future physicians in this province, 

our government has added 40 medical training seats to the 

College of Medicine and doubled the number of residency 

positions to 120. Our provincial recruitment agency, Saskdocs, 

has been instrumental in recruiting physicians worldwide. 

 

We are excited to continue our work along with the physicians 

of Saskatchewan to ensure the best quality of health care for our 

people. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say thank you to all the 

physicians in our province for the amazing work they do for our 

citizens across Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members 

to join me in thanking Dr. Karunakaran for making this event 

possible, and the Regina health region for hosting. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Travel Expenses 

 

Mr. Broten: — Yesterday we learned a bit more of what the 

Minister of Social Services meant when she said she was just 

doing what everybody did. Five minutes before the legislative 

proceedings began, we learned the taxpayers also paid for a 

completely unnecessary limo service for the Deputy Premier 

while he was in London, England shortly after the Minister of 

Social Services was also there. 

 

The Premier and the Deputy Premier both said the cabinet 

secretary claimed this expense. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 

true. My question to the Premier: why did he say that, and 

what’s the truth? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The cabinet 

secretary booked the car service without the knowledge of 

either minister. The money’s been repaid. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier argued that the main 

problem in this whole fiasco is that there was not proper 

ministerial oversight by his cabinet ministers. I disagree, Mr. 

Speaker. I think the main problem is a growing sense of 

entitlement in this government. But what the Premier has 

identified as the problem is that the appropriate ministries were 

not approving expense claims. But that’s exactly what happened 

in the Deputy Premier’s luxury limo case. The expense was 

dealt with by the Deputy Premier’s own ministry. It was not 

dealt with by the cabinet secretary.  

 

So to the Premier: why is the cabinet secretary taking the fall 

for the Deputy Premier’s extravagance? Why isn’t he holding 

the Deputy Premier to account? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

says that this is not a matter of an official booking this 

particular trip; the problem isn’t that officials are booking these 

car services without the minister’s knowledge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in June of 2006 when Lorne Calvert and Eric 

Cline went on a government trip to Paris, they booked a car 

service. They didn’t, actually; the ministries booked a car 

service. The Government Relations ministry told the Industry 

ministry — that was Mr. Cline’s — that they should book a car 

service. The total cost: $1,900 for three days. One of those days 

was a personal day. One of those days on a Sunday was, the car 

service was used for a four-hour sightseeing tour — car, driver, 

and tour guide all paid for by the taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this practice has been going on for 

too long. I’m not even sure, to be fair, if Mr. Calvert or Mr. 

Cline knew that their officials had booked it. I don’t think it was 

a matter of entitlement even necessarily. However, the expense 

should not have been borne by the taxpayers. The expense on 

this side for these ministers involved has been paid back. Will 

that Leader of the Opposition contact his former leader and Mr. 

Cline and ask that these dollars be reimbursed? 



5106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier claims he wants 

transparency and accountability, and here he is, Mr. Speaker, 

rummaging through years-old trash bins, Mr. Speaker, trying to 

deflect from the situation that he has on his hands with his 

ministers. Saskatchewan people expect better, Mr. Speaker, and 

I will not be deterred from asking these questions of this 

government. 

 

It’s unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, to see the Premier defend the 

growing sense of entitlement among his front benches. And the 

front bench is hollering, Mr. Speaker, and even the 

backbenchers are getting in on it today, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

unbelievable to see him defend the sense of entitlement with his 

members. 

 

The Minister of Social Services went to Ghana, billed $19,000 

for a conference, Mr. Speaker, that she applied to go to, she 

applied to go to. She created this trip, Mr. Speaker. And until 

yesterday she completely withheld the fact that she had a friend 

and a family member along with her for the entire time. And, 

Mr. Speaker, taxpayers actually paid for the visas for her friend 

and for her family member. Yet this Premier thinks the Minister 

of Social Services is doing nothing wrong. 

 

My question to the Premier: how can he possibly justify a 

$19,000 expense for the minister to go on a vacation with her 

friend and family member? Mr. Speaker, why won’t he demand 

accountability from his minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I read from a memo dated the 

3rd of May 2006, 3:23 p.m., from the Department of 

Government Relations to the department of industrial relations. 

I think that’s what IR stood for, Mr. Speaker, or maybe it’s 

Industry and Resources. Mr. Speaker, Industry and Resources 

was the file under the responsibility of Mr. Cline that goes 

directly to the hon. member’s question. 

 

Here’s what the memo says, as discussed this morning, SIR 

[Saskatchewan Industry and Resources] will be responsible — 

that’s the ministry — for the following preparations and costs 

for the Premier’s mission to France, June 23 to 29, 2006. And it 

goes down the list and included on the list . . . By the way it 

talks about the arrangements and “the costs,” so it could be that 

Mr. Calvert and Mr. Cline have paid this back. I don’t know. 

That’s an important question, and one I would expect we would 

all be interested in. But the memo goes on to say that the 

taxpayers, the ministry will pay, officials will book and pay for 

options and arrangements for the Premier’s sightseeing 

activities on Sunday, June the 25th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite rightly members of the opposition have 

asked questions on the propriety of certain expenditures for car 

services. When that was known to the ministers responsible, 

their first inclination was to pay for those car services when 

they weren’t being used for the purposes of the mission, then 

the official stepped up, that booked them, and did it. 

 

The question for the Leader of the Opposition is, does his high 

standard apply to members on that side of the House? Do the 

standards he’s put in place for this side and for government 

officials apply to the NDP [New Democratic Party]? Will they 

ask Mr. Calvert and Mr. Cline if they’ve reimbursed the 

money? And if they’ve not — $1,900 — if they’ve not, will he 

ask them to pay the taxpayers back? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, their first inclination was not to 

pay it back. Their first inclination was to cover it up, Mr. 

Speaker. The Premier’s spin and the Premier’s rhetoric show 

just how out of touch this Premier is with what his government 

is doing. 

 

Here’s what the Premier’s trying to justify, Mr. Speaker: three 

continents; five days in a world-famous hotel; and 19 days on 

the road, all with a family friend, Mr. Speaker, and a family 

member, all in tow for the duration of the time; and just four 

days of actual conference, Mr. Speaker, with a handful of 

meetings sprinkled in there in order to justify the bill to the 

taxpayers. That is the sense of entitlement that the Premier is 

trying to justify here. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is he not holding the Minister 

of Social Services to account for her $19,000 trip with a friend 

and a family member all at taxpayers’ expense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, why the double standard from 

the member opposite? The member opposite has raised 

important questions on expenses. Mr. Speaker, the ministers 

were unaware that officials had booked the car service. He calls 

that entitlement, but it happened in 2006 in this instance. And I 

would expect, Mr. Speaker, it happened in a number of other 

instances under the NDP when officials of the ministry under 

direction of Government Relations said to officials in the 

ministry, pay for a sightseeing tour for Premier Calvert and then 

NDP minister Eric Cline. 

 

It’s a $1,900 bill for a car service, a three-day mission. It looked 

like about a meeting and a half, from the itinerary I’ve seen. 

Very similar, Mr. Speaker, and I would expect, to be fair, that 

Mr. Calvert and Mr. Cline would have been unaware of the fact 

that this was booked or the cost because officials claimed it. 

That’s the problem we are seeking to address with a brand new 

disclosure system on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question to the NDP, to that Leader of the 

Opposition: do the standards he has for members on this side of 

the House apply to the NDP? Will he get back the money from 

Mr. Calvert and Mr. Cline if in fact they have not paid it back 

already? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the Premier is 

saying, the minister’s stories don’t actually add up. The minister 

was aware, Mr. Speaker, I think, of the expenses related to the 

posh limousines. The Social Services minister said, Mr. 

Speaker, she had no idea how costly the chauffeured Mercedes 



April 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5107 

Viano was. But she says she originally paid about $800 for the 

limo service in order to cover just a little bit of personal use for 

the sightseeing and the shopping with her friend and with her 

family member. 

 

And I understand, Mr. Speaker, how you would need the 

Mercedes van when you have family in tow with luggage and 

travelling around and doing sightseeing and seeing the city. 

Well if the $800 was coverage for just a little bit of time, then 

surely she should have known that the posh service to taxpayers 

was very, very expensive. And she should have asked some 

questions, Mr. Speaker, but she did not. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is he going to such extensive 

lengths to justify this sense of entitlement? Why isn’t the 

Premier holding the Social Services minister to account for her 

actions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — This question, Mr. Speaker, from a party 

that out-spent our side of the House in the use of executive air 3 

to 1, Mr. Speaker. This from the NDP who out-spent ministerial 

travel on this side of the House in their last year in office by 

100 per cent, twice as high as what this side of the House has 

spent. 

 

This from a party that has to claim a memo that reads like this, 

from June 2nd, 2006. This is from an official about Mr. Calvert 

and Mr. Cline’s trip. Estimated cost for the van rental 

sightseeing tour on a Sunday afternoon, four hours. It’ll be 200 

euros. Then for transport during the week, he’s offered 300 

euros a day, approximately 900 euros. The driver, who was also 

the van’s owner, will make an invoice for the whole service, the 

tour guide on Sunday as well, 50 euros per hour for four hours. 

That’ll run another 200 euros. And then it says, I understand 

that Jay Fredericks, who worked for the government at the time, 

will be able to pay in cash, Mr. Speaker. There’s the sense of 

entitlement right there. 

 

The Speaker: — It seems we have members on both sides who 

are not on their feet who want to participate in the debate, 

including heckling their own members. Please, let’s hear the 

questions and the answers. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where the 

Minister of Social Services found a conference to go to in 

Ghana, went to it, and brought along her family and had a 

vacation with them in London for multiple days. The 

inconsistencies in the stories, Mr. Speaker, just keep piling up. 

And frankly I don’t know if we can trust the itinerary that was 

released by this government just yesterday. 

 

When the opposition made a request under the freedom of 

information legislation for all the details of the minister’s trip, 

the government provided no itinerary. It said there were no such 

documents. But yesterday, Mr. Speaker, they magically created 

and provided the itinerary and made it available. 

 

The only problem is, Mr. Speaker, the details in the itinerary 

don’t match up with the documents that are provided in the FOI 

[freedom of information]. June 15th is listed as a personal day 

in the itinerary — no meetings. But in the FOI package, there 

are notes from meetings supposedly held on June 15. So either, 

Mr. Speaker, the itinerary is wrong, the notes are wrong, or one 

or both were fabricated by someone. My question to the 

Premier: which one is it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if the accusation that the 

minister actually was doing work while she was claiming a 

personal day, then I guess if that’s the smoking gun the member 

wants to go with, he’s welcome to it. I do not know the specific 

reference he’s making. It’s something we can check into. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think anybody watching this debate is going 

to find it more than passing strange that the Leader of the 

Opposition can get up quite sanctimoniously, make accusations 

of entitlement, Mr. Speaker, use some other . . . Frankly, call 

into question not just the government, but officials who have 

prepared itineraries and presented it to members of the House 

and members of the media. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, 

he won’t even comment on this trip by Mr. Cline and Mr. 

Calvert where they spent $1,900 or so on a car service. 

Questionable use, I would say, given the itinerary. We’re happy 

to send it over. 

 

But where we say because it . . . Where we know, because it’s 

explicitly mentioned in the memos, that at least for a full day it 

was used for a multiple-hour tour of Paris in springtime, Mr. 

Speaker, in a limo service, I guess, to use the vernacular of the 

member opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes or no, does he think that’s an appropriate use 

of taxpayers’ dollars? We agree that it probably isn’t. Does he 

also agree that it is not? And if so, and if it’s never been paid 

back by Mr. Cline and Mr. Calvert, will he phone them? 

They’re in his party. It’s his former leader and a former 

minister. Will he call them and ask them to reimburse the 

taxpayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the FOI material and the itinerary 

provided by the government don’t match up. Either the itinerary 

is wrong, the FOI information is wrong, or both were made up 

by someone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: which one is it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It’s neither, Mr. Speaker. Let me just read 

from this memo again, June 2nd, 2006, from a government 

official. The current draft of the mission itinerary . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Oh, the members don’t want to hear it. But 

they are going to hear it. They will absolutely hear what their 

NDP government was telling officials to do on behalf of the 

premier, the NDP premier, and an NDP minister. They will hear 

this. 

 

Here’s what the memo says, estimated cost for the van rental, 

because it was a van, not a limo, let’s be fair. Sightseeing tour 

on Sunday afternoon for four hours, sightseeing, it’ll be 200 



5108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2014 

euros. Then for transport during the week he’s offered another 

300 euro-a-day charge. That’s 900 euros. But frankly not a lot 

of meetings that are happening and Areva was driving them 

around for Paris for part of it. 

 

The driver, who was also the van’s owner, will make an invoice 

for the whole service. The tour guide on Sunday as well will get 

paid by the taxpayers, 50 euros per hour for four hours — 200 

euros. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fredericks was instructed at that 

point, an official of the government — not his fault — 

instructed by the NDP government to pay this in cash, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And then there’s an expense later on. This whole thing’s been 

expensed to the taxpayers. Now maybe it’s been paid back by 

Mr. Calvert and Mr. Cline. Maybe they didn’t know about the 

booking. I think, to be fair, we should hear that explanation. 

 

But shouldn’t also the NDP leader, Mr. Speaker, be requiring of 

his own party the same conduct he would require of others? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are puzzled 

why this Premier is bending over backwards to defend his 

Minister of Social Services and his Deputy Premier for their 

expensive time in London. But they’re also baffled at the 

changing stories that we received from the Premier in the 

remarks that he’s made over the past days. 

 

It’s a very big deal to designate something as a work-related 

expense when it’s actually entirely a personal expense. That’s 

exactly what happened with the costly lunch in London. The 

Premier originally said it was just a clerical error and he said he 

didn’t know who was responsible. But yesterday, the Premier 

admitted that it was his right-hand adviser who had falsely 

labelled a 200 meal as an official debrief meeting, and the 

Premier claimed that he knew all along. My question to the 

Premier: why didn’t he say so last week? Why did he say he 

didn’t know who labelled it as a work meeting? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a great question. It 

applies to the case that we’re talking about with respect to 2006 

when the NDP premier and NDP minister Cline went to Paris to 

meet extensively with Areva and look at options for the nuclear 

industry here in the province. A worthwhile mission, I would 

say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when they recorded the fact that there was ground 

transportation provided, Mr. Speaker, when they recorded that 

fact, there is no mention of the tour in the line item spreadsheet. 

It’s just listed, Mr. Speaker, as a payment to Guy Beaubien for 

ground transportation in the amount of $1,933.72.  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there was any official that was 

trying to do anything but list this thing in a brief way. And 

perhaps the fact that the tour, the personal tour, and the tour 

guide for the NDP premier and the NDP minister, the fact that 

they’re not included in here, perhaps is the product of a clerical 

mistake, Mr. Speaker, or a mistake by those who’ve recorded 

this. 

But either way I think the important part is, in the case that 

we’re talking about here in Saskatchewan involving the 

Minister of Finance and the Minister of Social Services, the 

money’s been paid back, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve set about a 

system to avoid this in the future. And the question for the New 

Democratic leader again is, if this money hasn’t been paid back 

— clearly for personal use, sightseeing on the taxpayers’ dollars 

— if it’s not been paid back, will he ask Mr. Calvert, Mr. Cline 

to do so? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Last week, Mr. Speaker, the Premier claimed 

he did not know who . . . well he claimed, Mr. Speaker, that he 

did not know who signed off on the very personal lunch at the 

expense of taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. He said it was a clerical 

error. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier said, well actually it 

was the cabinet secretary. And the Premier claims that he knew 

that all along. 

 

My question to the Premier: why last week did he say that it 

was a clerical error and he didn’t know who did it, when 

yesterday he said that all along he knew it was the cabinet 

secretary? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the 

House the member quoted the member from Melfort. The 

member that was just on his feet completely misquoted the 

member from Melfort in terms of his speech on long-term care, 

Mr. Speaker. And so his recounting of events — what I said or 

frankly what anyone said, including himself in this House — 

frankly are suspect at best. And the answer is, Mr. Speaker, 

when it was realized that this payment was expensed and it 

shouldn’t have been, a repayment was made immediately. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have presented one example. I expect there to 

be more examples where officials in government have made 

arrangements on behalf of ministers, made arrangements on 

behalf of ministers, ministers didn’t know, forms were filled 

out, expenses were filed, Mr. Speaker. Now I’m not sure if 

that’s the fault of Mr. Calvert or Mr. Cline. I really am not sure 

that’s their fault.  

 

But, Mr. Speaker, now that we know, now that we know that 

member’s high moral ground that he’s on with respect to this 

issue — and fair enough, it’s an important issue — should 

apply to this side of the House, it should also apply to his. Why 

can’t he simply answer yes or no? These are the facts of the 

case, Mr. Speaker. Will he phone Mr. Calvert? Will he call Mr. 

Cline and say, if you haven’t paid this money back for your 

personal tour of Paris, will you do that now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that front bench can threaten all it 

wants, but we will not be deterred from asking these questions 

that Saskatchewan taxpayers expect. 

 

The Premier, Mr. Speaker, has provided two very different 

stories about the $200 lunch that was paid for by taxpayers and 

was strictly personal. Last week he said, Mr. Speaker, that he 



April 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5109 

didn’t know who it was; it was a clerical error. This week, Mr. 

Speaker, he says that it was the Provincial Secretary and he 

knew it all along. He can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. The 

story keeps changing. 

 

Originally the government said the receipt, Mr. Speaker, had 

been labelled personal and that a clerical error was made. But 

nowhere, nowhere on the receipt does it say personal. And, Mr. 

Speaker, all of the booze was removed from the receipt because 

it was the explicit intention to bill this to taxpayers, Mr. 

Speaker. To the Premier: who separated the booze from the 

food on the receipt? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to this particular 

receipt, when this issue was first raised, I had no idea of the 

providence of the receipt. I did not know who submitted it, did 

not know who signed it, did not know if it was part of the 

minister’s FOI, or part of the FOI response to the official that 

travelled with the minister. So, Mr. Speaker, at all times we 

have responded in a forthright manner. And when it was 

determined that by mistake, this bill was included for 

expensing, Mr. Speaker, it was repaid immediately by the 

official that included it. That’s the action we’ve taken. 

 

Moreover, both ministers involved, as soon as they found out 

about the nature of the car service booked and the cost of it, 

voluntarily . . . And I’ve got the Minister of Finance’s cheque 

here. I don’t think we have to hang onto it for a while, but I 

have it, Mr. Speaker. And it was offered immediately, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the different . . . Moreover, we spent the 

weekend going over actually past travel of ministers of this side 

of the House, and we looked at what the NDP used to do in 

office, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve been able to find . . . in fact the 

government officials will remember these kinds of trips, 

frankly. They will be able to report back when the NDP 

travelled to places and exactly what they did, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And now we have some questions for the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

The questions on this side have been asked and answered. The 

money’s been repaid. Here’s a trip back in 2006, taxpayers on 

the hook for a personal, private tour of Paris, France in June of 

2006 by Mr. Calvert, by Mr. Cline. Do his standards that he has 

for us apply to his own party? Will he ask them to repay 

taxpayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier is forgetting that he 

is in charge. This Premier is forgetting that he needs to answer 

the questions. This Premier, Mr. Speaker, is bending over 

backwards to defend his Deputy Premier, to defend his Minister 

of Social Services. This pathetic display, Mr. Speaker, to try to 

deflect from the issue is not what Saskatchewan taxpayers 

deserve, and he knows it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What the Premier is saying, Mr. Speaker, is that he knew, he 

knew his right-hand adviser had labelled the personal expense 

as a work expense and billed it to taxpayers. But the Premier 

claimed that it was just a clerical error. This was a $200 

personal meal which was designated as an official debrief 

meeting, official debrief meeting, and billed to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. And, Mr. Speaker, they only paid it back once they 

were caught. 

 

My question to the Premier: how does this not qualify as 

expense fraud, and why is he not taking this issue seriously? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier and this 

government have presided over a 53 per cent reduction in 

ministerial travel in our last year versus their last year. This side 

of the House has presided over a 63.5 per cent reduction in the 

use of executive air, Mr. Speaker, one-third of what members 

opposite used. This side of the House, this Premier has presided 

over a 24 per cent decrease in political staff costs in this 

Legislative Assembly. This side of the House, this Premier has 

presided over 18 per cent reduction in advertising spending, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve also, Mr. Speaker, ensured that when 

information comes to our attention as elected officials, action is 

taken immediately, Mr. Speaker, including the repayment of 

this particular car service. That’s the record of this side of the 

House. 

 

What will this new leader of the NDP do, Mr. Speaker? Is he 

now going to step up? Will he step up and say, if it happened 

now, it’s not correct in terms of officials booking without 

ministers knowing; and if it happened under the NDP’s watch, 

that’s not right either, and as the leader of the NDP, I am going 

to take steps to get the taxpayers’ money back one way or the 

other? That is a test for the Leader of the Opposition today. Will 

he meet that test? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier hopped into 

the limo service in London. He knew what he was getting into. 

The Minister of Social Services hunts down a conference in 

Ghana, arranges a family and a friend to go along, Mr. Speaker, 

and bills $19,000 to the taxpayer.  

 

This Premier, Mr. Speaker, would like the public to believe that 

this is simply one government official who’s lost his way and 

made a few mistakes, Mr. Speaker. He would want 

Saskatchewan people to believe that that’s the real common 

denominator. But that isn’t the real common denominator. What 

the real common denominator is, Mr. Speaker, is a government 

that is entitled and a government, Mr. Speaker, that takes the 

right actions only once they have been caught. 

 

We have a minister going to a trip on Ghana that is not needed. 

We have a Deputy Premier going to London, spending lots on 

limo service when it’s not needed, Mr. Speaker. And the 

Premier’s reaction, Mr. Speaker, is a half-hearted, 

quasi-punishment to his right-hand adviser, pretending like that 

is real action.  

 

My question to the Premier: when will he stop making excuses? 

When will he act like the Premier? When will he hold his 

Deputy Premier, his Minister of Social Services, his official to 

account? 

 



5110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen 

today is the clearest indication that the NDP have learned 

nothing, not from our party but from the voters of this province 

in 2007 and in 2011, Mr. Speaker, when the people of this 

province said, we reject not only the record of the New 

Democratic Party, we reject frankly the attitude of the New 

Democratic Party. And then because I think they noted after the 

’07 election there was absolutely no contrition, the minister, the 

current member for Lakeview said after that election, I’ll be 

around, we’ll be around to clean things up. Well he barely was 

around to clean things up. He only won his seat by about 100 

votes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But after that election, Mr. Speaker, the 2011 election, I waited 

to hear the NDP and I waited to hear this new leader and the 

deputy leader say, we’ve made mistakes in government. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, a double standard would be an indication, holding 

to a double standard would be an indication that they’ve learned 

nothing. 

 

Travel is down on this side of the House from the Saskatchewan 

Party government. Mr. Speaker, political assistant costs are 

down on this side of the House as a result of leadership from 

this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, overall advertising for 

government is down. Mr. Speaker, we have been responsible 

with the taxpayers’ money. And we’re asking now that the 

Leader of the Opposition would stand up, admit that they made 

a mistake in government, and get the taxpayers’ money back. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What’s your point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — During question period I believe I 

heard the Leader of the Opposition say fabrication or fabricated, 

which is of course unparliamentary. I’d point to debates from 

January 27th, 1959, page 385 for a Speaker’s ruling in that 

regard. And I would call on the Leader of the Opposition to 

stand in his place and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, again the questions were put in 

good faith. They were put in accordance with the rules. And I’d 

welcome a review of the tape in terms of what has or has not 

transpired before we take a further course of action on this, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I will take notice of the Government House 

Leader’s point of order and review Hansard and come back 

with a determination. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

122, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 

2013 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be heard in Committee of 

the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Crown Investments 

Corporation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2013 modifiant la 

Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation that Bill No. 122, The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 326 through 330. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 326 to 330. 

 



April 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5111 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). Mr. Speaker, this bill is being 

introduced along with The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 

2014 to establish a new program for counsel for children in the 

Ministry of Justice. 

 

The program which was announced in the budget is modelled 

on similar programs in other provinces and territories. Under 

the program, the Public Guardian and Trustee will establish a 

list of specially trained lawyers throughout the province who 

can act as lawyer for a child in child protection proceedings. 

This will occur when the Court of Queen’s Bench or the 

Provincial Court orders that child to be represented. 

 

The Public Guardian and Trustee also has the discretion to 

appoint a lawyer for a child without a court direction if there is 

a request from another individual. We expect that those requests 

could come from the Advocate for Children and Youth, a 

relative, or even the child him or herself. The bill sets out 

factors that the Public Guardian and Trustee is to consider when 

exercising that discretion. 

 

When the Public Guardian and Trustee is considering such a 

request and when a lawyer has been appointed, they will need 

access to information and to the child. The bill provides that 

they are entitled to disclosure and access to the child. These 

rights can be enforced by court order. They are also entitled to 

address the court, file written submissions, and call on 

examined witnesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Provincial Court Act, 

1998, which are consequential to the creation of this program, 

give that court the power to direct representation for a child in a 

protection matter where it is satisfied that the interests or views 

of the child would not otherwise be adequately represented. The 

court is required to consider the same factors as the Public 

Guardian and Trustee considers when exercising his or her 

discretion. In keeping with the provisions of The Child and 

Family Services Act, the child does not become a party to the 

protection proceedings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, until now the need for counsel for children has 

been fulfilled by a small group of dedicated lawyers to the pro 

bono law program of the Law Society of Saskatchewan. I want 

to take this opportunity to publicly acknowledge and thank 

them for their work over the past several years. We’ve 

consulted them in the development of this legislation and have 

received valuable input. Unfortunately there are simply not 

enough of them in all parts of the province to fulfill the need. I 

also wish to thank the Court of Queen’s Bench and the 

Provincial Court of Saskatchewan for their co-operation and the 

Advocate for Children and Youth for his input. 

Mr. Speaker, we estimate that there will be as many as 150 to 

200 cases in which a lawyer will be appointed in each year. It is 

our expectation based on past history that, with the assistance of 

a lawyer representing a child, most of these protection cases 

will be settled without the need for an actual hearing. This is the 

ideal situation, which is best for the child, for the family, and 

for society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Public 

Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 132, The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment 

Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

am very pleased to stand on behalf of the opposition today to 

give the first few comments on the particular bill, Bill 132, 

which speaks about amending The Public Guardian and 

Trustee Act and The Provincial Court Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve looked through the bill. Some of the 

comments that we have initially is that we understand that this 

bill harmonizes some of the language about children in the 

court setting with other bills. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, any 

time that you are able to strengthen the children’s hand in many 

of these court settings, it is always something that certainly 

from our perspective, we certainly applaud that effort. 

 

[14:30] 

 

We have to make it also easier to understand for all the players 

involved with this process because obviously protecting 

children is one of the most important things that government 

has to do. 

 

And we’ve seen a lot of tragic events over the last number of 

decades and certainly over time in which children have been 

exposed to a lot of challenges as they grow up. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there has been some very dismal times in the world’s 

history, and certainly our country and our province also needs 

to always be aware of some of the challenges involving 

children. 

 

So I think we want to make sure that we pay very close 

attention to this particular file. Children, as we all know, is 

something that we hold dear to our hearts. And when you see 

some of the tragic events, as I speak about earlier, when we 

have 100 children die while in care since 2010, we obviously 

have to make sure we do all we can to protect the children from 

being harmed and in this instance of course the tragic event of 

loss of life when it comes to these children. 

 

It’s very difficult from our perspective as we see the Ministry of 

Social Services cutting budget to child and family services by 

$5 million in this budget. And from our perspective, it’s a bit 

conflicting and confusing as we don’t look at that as any 

evidence of putting children and families first. 

 

So this bill talks about children and how they will be 

represented in courts. We need to make sure that this legislation 

is exactly what is being looked at from the perspective of the 



5112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2014 

child. And that’s why we’re looking, Mr. Speaker. It’s so very 

important to see what the Children’s Advocate has to say about 

this particular Act and about the legislation. I understand from 

initial comments that he’s pleased that they were moving in the 

right direction and that the money that’s being earmarked today 

will be used to train lawyers that are able to work with children. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is certainly something that we ought to be 

looking at. 

 

Now what’s also important, Mr. Speaker, is we need to talk 

about some of the other outlying agencies that are involved with 

child protection, that do get involved with children in courts. 

And the list goes on as to the different agencies and people of 

sufficient interest or personal interest. And we need to the see 

the families, the groups, the organizations, the leadership, all 

the different organizations and people that are involved with 

children in custody, Mr. Speaker. There is a network of groups 

out there. We’ve got community-based organizations that we 

have to talk to when it comes to this particular bill. We need 

their advice. We need their direction. We need a lot of their 

input as to whether they think this particular Act fits the bill so 

to speak in terms of providing care for that child. 

 

Now we also know that the Children’s Advocate, who is one of 

the champions of children’s care in the province, that he 

certainly from his perspective, when we speak about the loss of 

staff positions within the Ministry of Social Services that cut 

their budget, he indicates that the loss of 90 staff positions in 

the ministry was a blow to the case management of children in 

the system. Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be very interested in 

hearing how this particular law would alleviate some of the 

challenges that the children are and the CBOs [community 

based organization] are . . . when it comes to dealing with the 

stress of looking after children in care, of dealing with the 

challenge of having children that are in the court system, and 

how we’re able to take the perspective and safety of that child 

first and foremost in our mind and to see whether some of this 

Act and some of the cuts are counterproductive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s really, really important that we look at this particular bill 

and pay very, very close attention to it because obviously you 

can’t have a bill of this sort, Bill 132, when we talk about The 

Public Guardian and Trustee Act and The Provincial Court Act. 

And we can’t have the effort here to try and support the children 

in the court setting and yet you see cuts happening in the 

Ministry of Social Services. You see the CBO sector not being 

totally engaged to the extent that they have. You see the 

Children’s Advocate talking about the 90 positions that were 

cut from case management as being something that’s not 

productive towards children in care, the child’s care. We’re 

seeing that there’s 100 children since 2010 that have perished 

and, Mr. Speaker, there’s a wide variety of reasons for the 

children losing their lives. And the list can certainly be shared. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when you see these kind of cuts to the 

Department of Social Services, you see these kind of 100 deaths 

of children in care, and then you see this particular Act, we have 

to make sure that we intermix all these Acts and intermix all the 

actions of government to see that they’re all achieved and we’re 

trying to achieve the same plan and the same stated objectives, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there’s no question then from this particular bill, we need to 

see what direction it’s going. We need to see its impact. We 

need to see how it correlates with other actions of the 

government to see that obviously if there is some benefit and 

value of this particular bill, we want the CBO sector, the 

parents, and the children of course, and many key players like 

the Children’s Advocate to have an opportunity to study the bill 

and to share their information and share their concerns and 

share their network of challenges that they see when it comes to 

caring for the children within the provincial system overall. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we had a very quick look at the 

bill itself, and we understand what the bill is intending to do. 

And I’m sure that my colleagues and many other organizations 

out there will want to have their opportunity to have a say on 

this particular bill as well. So on that note, I move that we 

adjourn debate on Bill 132, amending The Public Guardian and 

Trustee Act and The Provincial Court Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 132, The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 133 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014/Loi 

de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 

2014. Mr. Speaker, this Act along with The Public Guardian 

and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) enable a new 

program for counsel of children in the Ministry of Justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Court of Queen’s Bench has inherent powers 

to appoint lawyers for children involved in child protection 

matters. In fact judges of that court have done so on a variety of 

occasions. This bill will set out the factors for the court to 

consider in making their discretion, that they are consistent with 

the factors to be considered by the Provincial Court or the 

Public Guardian and Trustee. 

 

It will also provide that when the court directs that a lawyer be 

appointed for a child, the Public Guardian and Trustee program 

will appoint the lawyer. Mr. Speaker, I’m now pleased to move 

second reading of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 133, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again, I’m pleased on behalf of the official opposition to give 

the initial first comments on Bill 133. I understand that the 

amendment here on this particular bill, The Queen’s Bench Act, 

is really again, as we had mentioned at the outset, it’s an 



April 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5113 

accompanying bill that allows the province to ensure that The 

Queen’s Bench Act is complementary to Bill 132, in which 

we’re going to obviously provide counsel for children when 

they’re involved in the court system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So obviously as the minister pointed out, I understood him to 

say just briefly here that The Queen’s Bench Act has the 

inherent powers to appoint counsel for a child and that they’re 

able to streamline this particular process to match the desire in 

Bill 132. So these two bills are actually complementary bills 

from what I can see. And Bill 132 and 133 are obviously going 

to be looked at very, very closely, again from the perspective of 

the many CBOs that are involved, the community-based 

organizations that are involved in child safety. 

 

And we need to again make sure that while on one hand the 

province is collaborating on their particular justice bills with 

their initiative to provide counsel for children, but on the other 

hand we see cuts to the Ministry of Social Services in the sense 

that there’s 90 key positions lost for the case management. 

You’re seeing $5 million cut overall in this year’s budget. And 

it really becomes confusing as to how these particular bills are 

going to help the process legally when there’s no financial basis 

and no financial support on another front. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of questions on the interaction, 

and obviously we want to be able to not just study Bill 133 but 

study all the other actions by the government to see if they truly 

are making an effort, not just from a legal perspective, from the 

resources perspective, to make a big difference to the children 

so we’re able to reduce the number of children dying while in 

care by 100 since 2010. These are not stats that we should be 

pleased with nor stats that we should accept, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s why it’s important we pay very, very close attention to 

any bills that are coming forward as it relates to children in 

care. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have much more work to do, 

much more networking to achieve, and gain and seek input and 

advice of many, many other stakeholders. So on that notion, I 

move that we adjourn debate on Bill 133. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 133, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 134 — The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 

134, An Act to amend The Financial Administration Act, 1993. 

This bill repeals section 15 and amends sections 17 and 18 of 

the Act to remove the requirement for the financial statements 

of the General Revenue Fund to be prepared and included in the 

public accounts and to remove the requirement for the 

Provincial Auditor to audit and issue a report on the General 

Revenue Fund financial statements. 

 

The amendments, Mr. Speaker, support the government’s 

decision to change the focus of the province’s budget and 

financial statements to a summary basis. Presenting the budget 

and financial statements on a summary basis captures the 

complete picture of the Government of Saskatchewan’s 

finances and the total cost of providing programs and services 

to the people of Saskatchewan. The amendments are consistent 

with the recommendations made in the Provincial Auditor’s 

April 30th, 2013 special report entitled The Need to Change — 

Modernizing Government Budgeting and Financial Reporting 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Acting Provincial Auditor, Judy Ferguson, said, and I 

quote, “Our office strongly supports these changes. They will 

eliminate confusion and help legislators and the public better 

understand the government’s finances.” The amendments will 

come into force on Royal Assent but are retroactive and are 

deemed to have been in force on and from April 1, 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Financial Administration Act, 1993. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 134, The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

am pleased on behalf of the official opposition to give our first 

response to Bill 134 in which we talk about The Financial 

Administration Act. And of course, Mr. Speaker, as we all know 

we’ve been pressuring and certainly calling on the provincial 

government to do what the bill intends to do today and that’s to 

have a summary financial system that’s put in place for the 

people of Saskatchewan to know exactly how we’re dealing 

with our finances as a province overall. And, Mr. Speaker, what 

we could basically frame this bill, Bill 134, is what we would 

call the bill, the no-more-two-sets-of-books bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what it says is the government must now report on 

one clear set of books. And, Mr. Speaker, why would this 

government be forced to follow this particular Act, Mr. 

Speaker? Because the auditor has called their books, and I 

quote, Mr. Speaker, not our quote but the Provincial Auditor 

calling their books “misleading and wrong.” 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, the auditor said in a very special report 

that the province had run many consecutive deficits, and in 

2011 at the end of the fiscal year the government had run a 

$622.7 million deficit. And yet, Mr. Speaker, they continued to 

call it a surplus. Let me repeat again, Mr. Speaker, the 

Provincial Auditor — and I know the members on the 

backbench wanted to cut her budget when she spoke the truth 

— said that the Sask Party government ran a $622.7 million 

deficit all in the while, Mr. Speaker, we’re in the middle of this 

fantastic boom and certainly the boost to our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the auditor went on and she said that they also ran 

a $409 million deficit in 2010 and a $105 million deficit in 

2012. So you have deficits in 2013, you have deficits in 2012, 

you have deficits in 2010, Mr. Speaker. All that certainly adds 



5114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2014 

to the overall strain on our financial picture as a province. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the auditor of course is totally neutral in terms of 

her particular job here in the Assembly. The auditor neither 

curries any favour with the current government nor does she 

curry any favour with the opposition. Her job is to be as 

independent and as pragmatic and practical as possible. Her job 

as the Provincial Auditor and as a paid Provincial Auditor is to 

look at the finances of Saskatchewan and to report them based 

on her principles and her integrity as an independent auditor on 

behalf of the Saskatchewan government and the Saskatchewan 

people. So this is a totally independent office, totally 

independent office that is not to be swayed and not to be 

persuaded in any way, shape, or form. And we certainly respect 

that process. 

 

[14:45] 

 

This auditor called the books from the last number of years 

“wrong and misleading,” Mr. Speaker. She has indicated time 

and time again that the surplus that the government opposite has 

been claiming were actually deficits. And I’ll go back again, 

Mr. Speaker. In 2010 they had a deficit of 409 million. $105 

million in 2012. And, Mr. Speaker, again, let me repeat again, 

the whole deficit of 2011 of $622.7 million. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you add that all, all that up, the deficit after 

deficit after deficit, and what happens now, Mr. Speaker? It all 

goes back onto our debt. And she said that the government has 

tried to minimize it. The auditor has said as of a week ago the 

debt now is scheduled to go to $19.1 billion, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s about 19,000 for every person, every man, woman, and 

child in this province. 

 

So obviously we applaud the effort to have one clear set of 

books. We applaud this particular bill as primarily being a bill 

that requires the government to follow an Act that doesn’t 

present two sets of books, books that they can share with the 

public and books, of course, that the auditors say are misleading 

and wrong. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have a lot more to 

say about this particular process. We think that summary 

financial statements are the best way to go because it gives you 

a true, clear picture of what’s going on. And we certainly want 

to continue paying very close attention to the manner in which 

the Finance people are preparing the budget, and of course the 

Saskatchewan Party government and the manner in which they 

present it to the public. 

 

These are some of the things that we have to pay very close 

attention to. So on that note, we have a lot more to say on this 

particular bill, but I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 134, 

The Financial Administration Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 134, The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 135 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to rise and move second reading of Bill 135 to 

amend The Income Tax Act, 2000 to implement the income tax 

initiatives that were announced in the government’s 2014-15 

budget on March 19th, 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal budget on March 21, 2013, was 

delivered the day after the 2013-14 Saskatchewan budget. That 

federal budget included two taxation initiatives that impacted 

Saskatchewan’s income tax. But those announcements were 

made with no prior consultation or notice being given to us. 

 

The first federal initiative, which I’m sure all members will be 

aware of, was the announcement that the special tax reduction 

for credit unions would be phased out over five years starting in 

2013. Mr. Speaker, this special tax reduction generally allows 

credit unions to pay income tax at the small business tax rate on 

all of their taxable income rather than on just the first $500,000 

of income. Mr. Speaker, the federal government has decided to 

eliminate the special reduction so that only the regular small 

business taxation rules will apply to credit unions for federal tax 

purposes. 

 

As members will know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan income tax 

legislation provides a parallel special tax reduction for 

provincial tax purposes. Our government made an interim 

decision which was announced on November 4th, 2013 that we 

would maintain the full special provincial income tax reduction 

for credit unions for the 2013 taxation year, and that we would 

announce a decision with respect to subsequent years in the 

2014-15 budget. 

 

As part of the development of the budget, Mr. Speaker, we were 

able to carefully assess the implications of the federal tax 

change on both the provincial tax system and on Saskatchewan 

credit unions. We were also able to consider the importance of 

Saskatchewan’s credit unions to the provincial economy 

through the dominant role they play in financing the growth of 

Saskatchewan’s small and medium sized businesses. 

 

In Saskatchewan, there are 55 credit unions operating 297 

branches in 264 communities. Credit unions are the only 

financial institution in 162 communities in Saskatchewan. 

Credit unions were very appreciative of our decision. Keith 

Nixon, CEO [chief executive officer] of SaskCentral said, “It is 

clear the Saskatchewan government recognizes the 

contributions credit unions have made to the communities of 

this province.” 

 

As a result of this assessment, I was pleased to announce in the 

2014-15 budget that our government will not follow the federal 

measure and will instead retain, for provincial tax purposes, the 

special income tax reduction for credit unions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second initiative that was announced in last 

year’s federal budget was a change to the taxation of dividend 

income. By way of explanation, Mr. Speaker, dividends are 

paid by a corporation to its individual shareholders from its 

business income after paying corporate income taxes. The 



April 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5115 

individual shareholder then includes that dividend as income 

when determining his or her personal income taxes. 

 

To avoid the double taxation of that dividend income, the tax 

system requires the dividend received by the individual to be 

grossed up in order to approximate the pre-tax business income. 

Personal income tax is then levied on this grossed up dividend 

amount, but a dividend tax credit is provided to the individual 

to effectively offset the tax paid at the corporate level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government is reducing the gross up 

factor that is applied to the dividends that are paid from 

corporate income that was taxed at the small business tax rates 

in order to arrive at a better approximation of the pre-tax 

corporate income. This federal change to the gross up factor 

will automatically apply for provincial tax purposes due to the 

linkages between the federal and provincial tax systems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to prevent an unintended increase in provincial tax 

on this type of dividend income and to maintain the current 

degree of integration between the provincial corporate and 

personal income tax systems, the 2014-15 budget announced 

that Saskatchewan’s dividend tax credit would be 

correspondingly adjusted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill also contains some technical amendments. 

Our government’s 2012-13 budget introduced an incentive to 

encourage the development of new multi-unit residential rental 

projects. This incentive provides a tax rebate equal to a 10 

percentage point reduction in the general . . . in the 

Saskatchewan general corporate income tax rate on rental 

income earned on new projects. This addresses this incentive of 

high income tax rates on investment income earned from the 

development and rental of multi-unit residential projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this incentive was introduced for projects 

completed within a specific time frame in order to encourage 

the rapid development of new housing projects. In December of 

last year our government announced a one-year extension to 

that time frame. This bill implements that extension, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This bill also includes legislative clarification of a measure 

announced in the 2006-2007 budget, Mr. Speaker. That budget 

announced the wind-down of the royalty tax rebate program 

because it was no longer necessary since the federal 

government had reinstated full deductibility of provincial 

resource royalties for income tax purposes. Mr. Speaker, the 

Canada Revenue Agency, which administered the rebate in 

accordance with that budget announcement, has noted that the 

wind-down period has now expired and has asked that the 

legislation be amended to reflect the policy announcement and 

the program’s end. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the remaining income tax amendment is a 

technical addition that has been requested by the Canada 

Revenue Agency to reference a federal rule that prevents the 

issuance of an income tax refund or benefit payment to a 

taxpayer who is delinquent in filing any type of tax return. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Act to 

amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 135, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

obviously has a lot of financial implications and certainly has a 

lot of changes that we obviously as an opposition have to pay 

very close attention to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I understand from the comments that the minister made that this 

obviously impacts the credit union taxation system, as we spoke 

about. He spoke about the dividends earnings being grossed up 

and certainly the challenges of how the federal and provincial 

government do collection on taxes with the dividend earnings. I 

understand that there’s some technical improvements in the 

manner in which rental property in the investment of a 

multi-unit housing complex is also going to be impacted; 

certification or clarification on winding down the royalty tax 

rebate program, Mr. Speaker; and also in terms of the 

delinquency, when folks do not file their income tax for a 

number of years, that some of the tax benefits may not be 

accrued to them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just basically from our perspective again as I 

mentioned, we certainly applaud the effort of not taxing the 

credit union. As I mentioned in the past, the whole notion that 

the credit union system in Saskatchewan has services and has 

support mechanisms in place where other traditional, larger 

banks do not . . . And we look at the examples of northern 

Saskatchewan, of rural Saskatchewan, and of course, many of 

the small communities that dot our great province. 

 

So I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to show that the credit 

union system itself, that we have to be always cognizant of the 

fact that these extra services within the sparse populated areas, 

these extra services far from the larger centres, these extra 

services that have a smaller population base — these are all 

challenges that the credit union system have to face. And we 

have to incorporate that particular challenge as a government 

when we talk about how we would support the credit union 

system. 

 

So certainly we don’t applaud the federal government’s effort to 

continue looking at taxing the credit union system. We look at 

this aspect of the bill as being a step in the right direction. 

 

The second component, Mr. Speaker, in terms of dividend 

earnings, as you know, as the minister spoke briefly about, 

when we look at the dividend earnings in terms of paying tax 

twice on earnings, Mr. Speaker, because obviously if you’re a 

dividend holder or a shareholder of a company and you earn a 

dividend, obviously your company pays taxes on the particular 

activity of the company. And then when you get your earnings 

in terms of a dividend, as a shareholder you obviously, 

sometimes the occasion occurs where you’re being taxed twice, 

you know, from what I understand. 

 

And there’s a lot of interplay and interaction with the federal 

government on how they administer this particular program, of 

how the small-business tax rate is also implemented. So there’s 

a bunch of moving parts, if you will, to how the taxation system 

really impacts dividend earnings. And we obviously need some 



5116 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2014 

greater clarification on that particular aspect of this bill and to 

ensure that there is some adequate time to understand exactly 

how the interaction is going to occur between the federal and 

provincial taxation systems to ensure people are not being 

unduly taxed. 

 

The other aspect, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about, is the 

technical improvements needed on the rental income of 

multi-unit housing projects. This is always something that we 

pay very close attention to because we want to see that the 

Saskatchewan boom in the economy stays strong and that we’re 

able to build for years and years and years. And it’s important 

that we put the proper venues of encouraging investment. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this is something that we need to pay close 

attention to, and we certainly intend to do that. 

 

And the other aspect I think is really important, Mr. Speaker, 

when we look at income tax overall, it is certainly a very, it’s an 

incredible challenge of trying to make sure that you have the 

right system in place of taxation. We look at some of the earlier 

work. I can remember in the earlier years where people were 

within the NDP government that we looked at eliminating the 

debt surcharge. And that was something that was really 

important because in the early years we had to put a debt 

surcharge because debt was so bloody high. And we made an 

effort to try and make sure that the debt surcharge was 

eliminated, that people had enough of paying that surcharge 

because obviously the provincial government was doing better 

and better as each year came through. 

 

[15:00] 

 

We looked at things like, for example, the taxation system for 

low-income people. We also began the process to eliminate the 

taxation system for low-income people because we noticed that 

a lot of the evidence showed that, you know, as you leave less 

taxes for the people that earned less in the province, that’s 

actually good for the economy and spurs development and 

certainly spurs spending which in turn helps the government 

and economy overall. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also looked at the rate of taxation that 

many families, many people, many young people also were 

forced to pay in the early years because of the debt. And I think 

it was a four-year strategy that we implemented to talk about 

not just corporate debt but to also talk about personal taxation. 

And these were some of the issues that were dealt with in the 

’90s. 

 

And certainly I think overall that we’re seeing a lot of good 

evidence that the taxation system itself, if properly controlled, if 

properly developed, and if properly thought through, could be 

of a significant benefit to a province and to her people. 

 

So I think it’s important that we pay very close attention to the 

taxes and the system that’s being implemented today through 

this particular bill. I think Bill 135 is obviously a bill that needs 

very, very close scrutiny because obviously we don’t want to 

see any extra taxation being imposed on the people of 

Saskatchewan because there are many reasons why. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we think that it’s obviously . . . You know, before we 

support the particular bill, we want to make sure that what the 

intended plan is with this bill is really what is being delivered 

overall. 

 

Finally I would say, Mr. Speaker, that it comes to the overall 

taxation system. There was a lot of good work and some great 

work being done in the early ’90s as a result of the NDP taking 

over office. There was a royalty tax that was looked at. There 

was the corporate tax system that was looked at. There was the 

personal income tax system that was looked at. The land tax 

issue was looked at. The whole array of taxes that were out 

there, the province of Saskatchewan took a great amount of 

time and took a great amount of effort to look at how taxes and 

the challenge of meeting all those taxes were playing on the 

Saskatchewan people overall. And over time, as the economy 

grew and grew stronger, less taxes were needed. And we want 

to see that particular action, that particular activity continue on 

for many, many years. 

 

So obviously any taxation bills are really important. At the 

outset we see this particular tax bill being complemented to 

some of the earlier work around the royalty tax, around the 

personal tax, around the issues of the debt surcharge tax, and all 

the other taxes that were in place over the years in 

Saskatchewan that have since been eliminated to consecutive 

governments. And it’s always important to pay very close 

attention to files of this sort. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a lot more people have a lot more things to 

add on this particular bill, and so on that note I move that we 

adjourn debate on Bill 135, The Income Tax Amendment Act. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 135, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 136 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move second reading of the Bill No. 136, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2014. Saskatchewan’s oil and 

gas sector has grown substantially in recent years and we expect 

it to continue to grow into the future. Saskatchewan is setting 

records in oil production, a record in 2012 and again in 2013. 

 

We need a system that is strong but efficient, with regulation, 

and that it can ensure that it will keep pace with this growing 

industry. Mr. Speaker, this bill will amend the Act and replace 

10 existing fees and charges with a single levy. The current 10 

fees are the fee to drill a new well, the fee to transfer a well 

licence, the fee to license a structure test hole, the fee to change 

a well name, the fee for a facility licence, the fee to transfer a 

facility licence, the fee to deepen or re-spud an abandoned well, 

the fee for a new pipeline, the fee to amend a pipeline licence, 

and, no. 10, a fee to extend a pipeline. 

 



April 8, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5117 

This will simplify the application process for the industry and 

for government, and will eliminate 20,000 invoices being sent 

out by government and 20,000 transactions and bills being paid 

by industry each year. 

 

The amendment to this Act will have companies paying one 

annual fee instead of several fees throughout the year. Licence 

holders will be billed June 1st of each year. All operating wells 

are placed in one of eight classes. Classification is based on 

annual production data as reported on December 31st of the 

preceding year. Each class is charged a base fee, multiplied by 

an adjustment factor. Mr. Speaker, this adjustment factor will 

be adjusted on a yearly basis to ensure that industry is paying 

90 per cent of the costs related to servicing the industry and for 

regulating it as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The adjustment factor will be set annually by order in council to 

ensure that total fees collected satisfy revenue requirements for 

regulating the sector. The amendments to this Act will enable us 

to enhance our efforts to regulate and monitor the oil and gas 

development in Saskatchewan and help keep pace with the 

rapid growth of the oil patch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the Act government will retain control over 

all regulatory functions but will provide resources for enhanced 

service levels to industry. These enhanced service levels will 

include multiple things. One, same-day approvals for routine 

horizontal well applications, enhanced air pollutant monitoring 

and enforcement, increased oversight for contaminated sites, 

and enhanced well and facility operating monitoring and 

enforcement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also looking to move forward with a 

single-window approach for industry. Today they may have to 

approach multiple different ministries in government to drill a 

single well. We think, Mr. Speaker, the level of service that 

would be appropriate would . . . that we would have one 

window where industry could come and all of those processes 

and that oversight would still be done. But for the customer or 

the investor, Mr. Speaker, they would only have one point of 

contact. 

 

Brad Herald from the Canadian Association of Petroleum 

Producers said in regards to the levy, Mr. Speaker, that “this 

positions us for the next decade of growth, that by modernizing 

our system and ensuring that the capacity would be there to 

grow and allow the industry to grow, that it positioned industry 

for a decade or more of growth.” 

 

The chief operating officer for Teine Energy, Jay Denney, said, 

“It’s a better system, and at the end of the day this is as 

competitive or more competitive than other western provinces 

that are producing oil and gas. And I think we can support it.” 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was Jay Denney, COO [chief operating 

officer] of Teine Energy. 

 

Both industry and government will continue to benefit from 

Saskatchewan’s reputation as a responsible resource 

jurisdiction. With that, I am pleased to move second reading of 

The Oil and Gas Conservation Act, 2014. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 136, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . I recognize the 

member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m pleased to offer the official opposition’s initial comments 

on this particular bill, Bill 136, which of course speaks about 

amendments to The Oil and Gas Conservation Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the minister very briefly spoke about coordinating the fees 

for the year and talked about defining the classes of wells and 

of course trying to coordinate those fees for the industry as per 

the classification of wells, as I understood him. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it also talks about enhancing the service levels to the 

industry. And he made reference to some of the qualifications 

that the industry provided to him as it relates to Bill 136. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that the province of 

Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan know that there’s so 

much that you have to be careful of and to watch very, very 

carefully when you talk about income tax changes, when you 

talk about trying to attract investment, talking about the oil and 

gas sector, to make sure that Saskatchewan is always wary of 

the balancing that is required, not only for our own finances as a 

province, but to ensure that issues, for example, environmental 

challenges are not lost in the mix. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I remember having a number of meetings 

with the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers and, Mr. 

Speaker, they were very pleased when the Calvert government 

announced a number of changes to the royalty structure. And 

we’ve seen en masse the people from Alberta coming to 

Saskatchewan, and we see the Bakken play come into effect. 

We’ve seen all this activity and we’ve seen all the investment 

that occurred when of course the changes were put in place. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that it’s very, very important 

that as a province that you put the right regime, not only the tax 

regime in place, but the royalty regime and the support 

mechanisms in place to be able to achieve strategic investment 

into our economy, whether that be in oil and gas as this bill 

certainly makes a lot of points towards, but also, Mr. Speaker, 

that the next step must be also taken to balance some of the 

environmental challenges to ensure that we have a sustained 

economy for years to come, to ensure that we attract as many of 

the people of Saskatchewan to participate and benefit from that 

activity or that overall strategy that the government has. And 

that’s one of the things that’s really, really important I think that 

we want to look at in terms of the overall purpose of this bill, is 

to make sure that we take absolutely everything into account 

that’s important for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think from our perspective, we watch very carefully the 

taxation system that’s being implemented by the government, 

but certainly some of the oil and gas plans that they might have 

and some of the amendments that they might have as dictated in 

Bill 136. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that streamlining regulations is 

pretty darn important. We know that industry doesn’t want to be 

hampered with going to 20 different offices on 20 different days 

and paying 50 different fees. We understand that. It is very 



5118 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2014 

common sense that you would go to one particular avenue of 

authorization, if you will, and get the proper permits, get the 

proper licences, and of course be able to invest in your 

particular sector and create jobs and of course stimulate the 

economy overall. It’s kind of amazing that after seven years, 

we’re getting some effort by this government and in particular 

by this minister to try and do some of the coordination of the 

fees on an annual basis. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you hear the definition of the class of 

wells, that also begs the question . . . is this stuff should have 

been done years ago. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly something 

that I think the people of Saskatchewan can clearly understand. 

 

So again I would point out that CAPP [Canadian Association of 

Petroleum Producers] is a very important industry. CAPP has 

led on many, many occasions the strategic investment into 

Saskatchewan that we see, the boom in the economy growing 

strong as a result of that, of course potash and the agricultural 

sector and uranium and the list goes on as to what great, great 

advantages that Saskatchewan has overall. But clearly oil and 

gas is one of the immediate industries that we want to keep, not 

only attractive, but keep for many, many years. 

 

And we understand that on this side of the Assembly. When 

CAPP certainly approached us on many, many fronts, Mr. 

Speaker, I know that there was a ton of ministers that were 

continually working with CAPP, and they were talking about 

how we can make Saskatchewan strong. And we’re seeing 

some of that initiative over the last number of years now in 

Saskatchewan finally bear fruit. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

point out it is people like the former Premier Lorne Calvert, 

people like Eric Cline, people like Eldon Lautermilch, people 

like Maynard Sonntag, people like Clay Serby — these are the 

people in and around cabinet at that time that had some very, 

very good discussions and some very hard discussions and 

made some very good decisions, of which we’re seeing a lot of 

benefit from today. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So it’s nice to be able to see some of this activity happening in 

Bill 136. We’re kind of confused and concerned why it took 

this long to coordinate all the fees for the oil sector, Mr. 

Speaker. Our argument is that the coordination and the avoiding 

duplication and stimulating supports for the oil and gas sectors 

should have been done years ago. I think the next level of work 

needs to happen to ensure, as I mentioned at the outset, to 

ensure that we have an environmental piece attached to many of 

what they’re doing in the oil and gas sector to ensure that we 

have not only a booming resource economy, but we also have a 

very stable environmental plan, Mr. Speaker. Because 

obviously the people of Saskatchewan want to be able to see 

both, and we have to make the effort to achieve both. 

 

So there’s a lot of issues that plays here, Mr. Speaker. From our 

perspective, we see a lot of waste in terms of lean, $40 million 

that was just a complete waste of money. These are some of the 

things that, from our perspective, we say it’s important to do the 

amendments as attached to Bill 136. But it’s also important to 

remind people that on one hand, while they’re trying to improve 

efficiency and service to the oil and gas industry, you see a 

waste of money to a lean program. And to me, I don’t think that 

. . . The conflict of where you’re spending your money, at the 

same time trying to attract more support for the oil and gas 

industry, we need to also marry that and make that connection. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this particular 

bill. People are out there, they’re looking very closely. And they 

want to see where Bill 136 is going to, what the impacts are 

going to be. They’ll talk to industry folks on their own. We’ll 

do a network of contacts to ensure that they have the 

opportunity, including the environmental industry or the 

environmental CBOs that have a lot of issues that they want to 

raise. We will talk to people about those issues as time goes on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to add on this particular 

bill. So therefore I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 136. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 136, The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, in order to facilitate the 

work of committees, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:17.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5101 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5101 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5101 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5102 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5102 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5102 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5102 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5102 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5103 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Students Promote Environmental Sustainability 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5103 

 Prince Albert Firefighter Retires After 32 Years 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5103 

 Saskatoon Woman Recognized as Francophone Leader 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5103 

 Housing Development in Maidstone 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5104 

 Davidson Residents Join Charity Mission 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5104 

 Spring Fling Supports Programs for People With Intellectual Disabilities 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5104 

 Doctors’ Night Out 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5105 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Travel Expenses 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5105 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5105 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5110 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5110 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5110 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5110 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5110 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5110 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5111 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5111 

 Bill No. 133 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5112 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5112 

 Bill No. 134 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2014 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5113 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5113 

 Bill No. 135 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5114 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5115 

 Bill No. 136 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2014 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5116 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5117 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


