
























































Hansard: April 28, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 54A  MONDAY, APRIL 28, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5231 
 April 28, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — In accordance with section 38 of The 
Ombudsman Act, 2012, it is my privilege and duty to submit to 
you the 41st annual report of the Provincial Ombudsman for the 
year 2013. I so table the Ombudsman of Saskatchewan report. 
 
As well I would like to introduce to the House our Provincial 
Ombudsman, Ms. Mary McFadyen and her staff: Janet 
Mirwaldt, Kelly Chessie, and Leila Dueck. Would all members 
please welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I was going to deal with 
the National Day of Mourning leave. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 
leave to do a statement on the annual Day of Mourning. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 

COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 
 

National Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the 
National Day of Mourning for workers killed or injured on the 
job. Across Canada, groups will gather to remember those who 
lost their lives from workplace incident or illness. 
 
Our flags are flying at half-mast here at the Legislative Building 
and vigils are being held throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, 
the Day of Mourning is a time to respectfully honour and mourn 
those lost and to express our condolences to the families, 
friends, and colleagues who are grieving. It is impossible to 
imagine the pain the families must deal with every day. 
 
The Day of Mourning also serves to remind us about the 
importance of workplace health and safety. While we can never 
bring back those who lost their lives, I hope we can learn 
something from their loss. Each and every one of us is 
responsible for safety. We all need to take care of each other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all of my colleagues here in the legislature to 
renew their personal commitments to safety and to remember 
each day to consider safety in all they do. I ask everyone to 
make sure that they renew that commitment, whether or not a 
person is the employer or the employee. Regardless of the 
industry you work in, the size of the company you work for, 
please consider the health and safety of everyone and make 
protecting them a priority. 
 
Saskatchewan continues to have the second-highest workplace 
injury rate in Canada despite continued efforts to fight those 

statistics. We know that it is more than just statistics. The 
numbers don’t convey the lives affected, the financial and 
emotional turmoil, or the short- and long-term effects of each 
injury. 
 
Our goal continues to be Mission: Zero — zero injuries, zero 
suffering. Safety quite simply should be what we do around 
here, a part of personal and workplace culture. We all need to 
arrive home safely at the end of the day to spend time with 
family and friends, enjoy our leisure hours, and be active 
members of our communities. 
 
In 2013 the Workers’ Compensation Board reported that 35 
people lost their lives in 2013 as a result of workplace injuries 
or illnesses. Some of those people suffered from, and untimely 
lost, their battles with health issues caused by exposure to 
asbestos years ago. We have learned from their suffering and 
through education and legislation that we can reduce and 
eliminate those risks. For others though, their lives were 
tragically cut short by preventable accidents. None of these 
deaths should’ve occurred. 
 
The names of those we honour today are being read into the 
official record and will be inscribed in the national registry at 
the Canadian Labour Congress in Ottawa. 
 
I would ask that all members please rise while we read the 
names of those who lost their lives. 
 
Jason Cluney Gordon Ambrose 
James Castro Julius Ngilangil 
Kelly Kornberger Lyndon Lerat 
Nathan Sandfly Thomas Ruszkowski 
Jesse Scott David Stadnyk 
Andrew Hann Lawrence Yuzik 
Justin Knackstedt William King 
Dennis Solonenko Larry Hazelwanter 
Larry Myden Alfred Eberle 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will read the next 17 names. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — 
 
Marcel Perreaux Robert Fry 
Gordon Carson John Boxall 
Herbert Bunn Art Landry 
James Dietrich Mervin Bodnarchuk 
Kenneth Coombes Garry Chadney 
Jamie Jijian Christian Schlaht 
Bruce Little Helmer Oakley 
Gordon Wruth Robert Hain 
Harold Fahl  
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Not included among those names are the 
approximately 14 people who lose their lives working on 
Saskatchewan farms and ranches each year. Today we honour 
their memories as well. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I offer our 
sincere condolences to the family and friends who are grieving 
their losses. Mr. Speaker, to commemorate the Day of 
Mourning, I ask that we observe a moment of silence in this 



5232 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2014 

House. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Policing and 
Corrections. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce 28 grade 3 and 4 students seated in your west gallery. 
The students are from St. Gabriel School, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Yvonne Reding, and their 
chaperone, Iris LeBoldus. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these young students to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to join here today and introduce a group seated in the 
east gallery. I’m talking about the group from Transition to 
Trades who have joined us here today with staff: Jessica 
McFarlane and Michael Ripplinger. Mr. Speaker, if I could just 
very quickly read the names of the participants into the record. 
We’re joined with Arianna Becker, Ashley Bruneau, Devon 
Ausland, Joeleoj Itong, Magnus Baer, Mohammed Abdalbyine, 
Robel Tesfu, Shaynna Englot, Solomon Munro, and Zack 
Quewezance. 
 
Transition to Trades is a really excellent program helping young 
people to get connected to not just to the community of North 
Central — that’s a vital part of this program — but to jobs in 
the building construction industry. And it’s really good to see 
these young people here today. I have the opportunity to meet 
with them later, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll be interested to get their 
take on the proceedings here today. 
 
So please join with me in welcoming this group from Transition 
to Trades here to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 
to welcome two guests today who are representatives of the 
Ahmadiyya movement in Islam. They are certainly no strangers 
to this Assembly, and it gives me great pleasure to see them 
every time they are able to visit. With us today are Nasser 
Malik and Musaddaq Hayat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ahmadiyya movement in Islam carries a 
simple message: love for all, hatred for none. As our province 
continues to grow and we welcome people from around the 
world of many different faiths, one of the biggest challenges 
facing all of us is to remember the values we share are stronger 
than those that would seek to divide us. 
 
I want to thank these individuals for taking the time to come 
here today and for their efforts in contributing to humanity and 

peace in our world. And I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them to their Assembly, and also thank them for 
coming down on what I understand were some rather difficult 
roads. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Minister of Labour in extending a welcome to the two 
guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from the Ahmadiyya 
community. Certainly what the minister says in terms of the 
community promoting tolerance, acceptance, multiculturalism 
within Canada, it’s greatly appreciated for the work that they do 
and the message that they spread throughout communities. And 
I’ll particularly say their Canada Day celebrations in Saskatoon 
are always a highlight of a good day as part of the July 1st 
activities. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these guests to the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to join 
with the member from Wascana Plains in welcoming Ms. 
Reding’s class. A lot of familiar faces in that class. I’ve been 
able to coach several of them on occasion. And there’s one 
person that’s very special to me in particular: my middle son, 
Ryan, is in that class. So if he wants to maybe give a little wave, 
Ryan. No? He’s a little shy like his old man, so that’s all right. 
It’ll be interesting to ask him which of my jobs he likes 
attending more, my previous one or my current one. So we’ll 
ask him that later. So welcome to Ms. Reding’s class. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — I’d like to ask for leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has requested 
leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
extreme pleasure to welcome one of the guests from St. Gabriel 
School. I want to join my colleagues in recognizing the entire 
class, and of course the chaperones and the students. But there’s 
one special girl I want to say hello to, and that is my 
grandniece, Ava Ledingham. Ava is obviously here to learn 
about laws, Mr. Speaker. And it gives me a great honour as the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Athabasca to 
recognize her and her class today, but to also pay tribute to her 
brother Lincoln and her sister Sophia and of course their dad 
Blair. 
 
And I just want to point out that these three children are the 
children of my late niece, Chantelle Desmarais, and to let them 
know that we’re certainly glad to have them here today, and to 
point out to Ava that she doesn’t realize how rich that she really 
is because she’s got a great dad, a great uncle, a great brother, a 
great sister, and a great set of grandparents. And, Mr. Speaker, 



April 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5233 

she doesn’t realize that she’s related to 80 per cent of my 
constituency. So Ava’s very, very rich in the sense of having a 
very, very big family. But to point out to Ava and to her brother 
and her sister and her dad that there’s 80 per cent of my 
constituency that always has prayers for her. 
 
And we wish her, as a young lady, courage, determination, and 
confidence as she enters her adult life, and to point out as she 
looks at this Assembly transcript in the years from now, Mr. 
Speaker, all I want to say to her is, God be with you. God bless 
you, and confidence in your future, Ava. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to join the member 
opposite in welcoming members from Transition to Trades here 
in their Assembly. We know how significant this program is. In 
fact it was the topic of a very significant documentary put 
together by CBC’s [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Geoff 
Leo just last year. And so I would ask all members of this 
Assembly again to join the member opposite in welcoming 
these industrious citizens of Saskatchewan to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Reading and receiving petitions. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Holidays. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present a petition against Saskatchewan 
health care laundry privatization. And we know that in May 
2013 the Government of Saskatchewan announced its plan to 
privatize health care laundry in Saskatchewan, handing it over 
to a for-profit, Alberta-based corporation, K-Bro Linen. And we 
know that as a result of the decision to privatize health care 
laundry, six non-profit health care laundry facilities will be 
closed within two years in the communities of Prince Albert, 
Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon. And 
we know that the privatization of health care laundry will mean 
that fair-wage jobs will be replaced with poverty wages, and 
public accountability will be lost. I’d like to read the prayer, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 
government to reverse the misguided decision to privatize 
Saskatchewan’s health care laundry which will result in the 
devastating loss of over 300 jobs in the communities of 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Weyburn, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And moreover, the privatization of health care laundry will 
misuse vital taxpayers’ dollars by taking money out of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to boost the profits of 
an Alberta-based corporation; and furthermore, the 
privatization of health care laundry will put patient care at 
risk as Saskatchewan’s health regions lose direct control 
over laundry, and thereby will have a significantly reduced 

ability to quickly and effectively respond to infectious 
outbreaks in health care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
the lack of safety on Dewdney Avenue and the inundation of 
heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue. They recognize 
that this heavy-haul truck traffic, semi traffic is a result of 
actions of this provincial government, and they recognize that 
any further delays by that government to ensure safety are 
entirely unacceptable. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 
purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 
are very proud homeowners in their communities. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government stubbornly 
ignored the call to maintain this program. Instead it cancelled 
the RPO. That means the dream of homeownership is destroyed 
for many families in the North. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 
government to restore the RPO, the rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 
them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 
communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
again today to present petitions on highways, Mr. Speaker. And 
this particular highway, the petition is being served for the 



5234 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2014 

community of Patuanak and also the English River First 
Nations. And reading the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to ensure that the 
provincial government commit to repairing and upgrading 
Highway 918. 
 

And of course, that is the road that services Patuanak and the 
English River First Nations. And the people that have signed 
this petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition for real 
action on climate change. The residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan who have signed this petition wish to bring to 
our attention the following: that Saskatchewan produces the 
highest greenhouse gas emissions per capita in all of Canada; 
that Saskatchewan’s emissions have continued to grow to 74 
million megatonnes, as reported by Environment Canada in 
October 2013, and show no signs of decreasing; that slashing 
programs such as the Go Green Fund and EnerGuide for 
Houses energy efficiency programs have set the province on a 
backwards course. So in the prayer that reads as follows, they: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan enacts a real plan and allocates appropriate 
funding in the provincial budget to tackle climate change 
by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, helping families 
transition to energy-efficient homes, and encouraging 
everyone in the province to take real action to protect the 
environment. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from the city of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Holocaust Memorial Day 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today marks 
Yom HaShoah, Holocaust Memorial Day. It is during this time 
that the world remembers and reflects upon the atrocities of the 
Holocaust which shall never be forgotten. Mr. Speaker, it is 
critical that the world continues to remember and mourn the six 
million people who perished at the hands of the Nazis during 
the Holocaust. It is also necessary that we resolve to never 
forget the pain, suffering, and strength of an entire people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though the horrific events at the concentration 
camps leading up to and during World War II are nearly 
unspeakable, the world cannot afford to not talk about the 
abhorrent consequences of hatred and anti-Semitism. The 
concentration camps of Auschwitz, Treblinka, and Dachau will 
stand as an eerie reminder of the cruelty that humanity is 
capable of and the consequences of allowing hatred to guide 
human action. 

When we take the opportunity to mark this important event, we 
are focused not only on remembering the plight of the victims 
but also ensuring that we continue to educate ourselves and 
others about the Holocaust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 
remembering all those who suffered and were lost during the 
extremely dark days and the dark times of the Holocaust, and 
resolve to never forget. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

National Day of Mourning 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, since 1985, April 28th has been 
recognized across Canada as the International Day of Mourning 
for workers killed or injured on the job. The purpose of the Day 
of Mourning is twofold. We have an opportunity to remember 
and honour our fallen workers, but it is also a time to renew the 
commitment to prevent further work-related injuries and deaths. 
 
A private member’s bill established April 28th as the National 
Day of Mourning in 1991. For over two decades, Canadians 
have been joining people across the globe to honour the men 
and women who have been injured or killed on the job. 
 
Meanwhile, in the last two decades, we’ve also seen the number 
of deaths on the job rising. Youth and inexperienced workers 
are often facing the highest risk. It saddens me, Mr. Speaker, to 
report that since last April 28th, 31 people have died on the job 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
As legislators, it’s crucial that on this day we commit to 
legislation and action that better promotes health and safety 
practices. One death is too many, Mr. Speaker. And I call on 
members of the Assembly to use our positions of influence to 
continue supporting workers’ rights and safety. I ask also that 
everyone pause and remember both those who have lost their 
lives and to also commit to fighting for the living. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Child Welfare Legislation Review 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
in the House to talk about a very important development in the 
child welfare transformation strategy. Today marks the 
beginning of the child welfare legislation review engagements. 
Beginning today and continuing until June 30th, 2014, service 
providers, First Nations and Métis organizations and citizens, 
other child welfare stakeholders, and the general public in 
Saskatchewan will engage in the ministry in one of three ways: 
face-to-face engagement sessions, written submissions, and 
online engagement. 
 
The online engagement component is a survey anyone with an 
interest in child welfare in Saskatchewan may complete. This 
questionnaire can be accessed through the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s website. 
 
The Child and Family Services Act and The Adoption Act, 1998 



April 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5235 

are the two pieces of legislation that are being reviewed. These 
two Acts not only guide the ministry in their daily work but also 
form the foundation of the child welfare system here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The protection of children and their overall well-being is a 
priority that we all share, and reviewing and updating our 
legislation is a critical step towards transforming the child 
welfare system in shaping the future of children and families in 
our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Earth Day 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last Tuesday, April 22nd, was 
Earth Day. This day of recognition has been celebrated in 
Canada for over four decades, providing an opportunity to raise 
awareness about the health of our planet and to call for action in 
ensuring a greener future. 
 
It’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not meeting these 
challenges in Canada. Environmental issues must be met 
head-on, and we will not see progress if we continue to see 
stalling on a much needed action. We were reminded of this last 
week with the release of the fifth assessment report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Even with some 
progress, we have collectively fallen short on the urgent action 
necessary to avoid the devastating effects of climate change. 
 
Here in the province, we are at a pivotal point in our province’s 
climate journey. This government continues to forgo the 
opportunity to be leaders in the fight against climate change, 
missing the opportunity to be good environmental stewards 
while also maintaining a strong and growing economy. 
 
It is not an either-or, Mr. Speaker. It’s the ability to balance 
these expectations that defines our value as leaders. Earth Day 
reminds us of our need for a comprehensive plan to reduce 
emissions, shift towards greener options while ensuring our 
natural resources are developed sustainably. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
up to us to ensure our children have better economic 
opportunities than we had and to leave our earth in a better 
condition than we found it. 
 
I call on members to recognize this important day and to call on 
our governments to take action in facing the reality of climate 
change and our ecological crisis. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Administrative Professionals Week 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week was 
Administrative Professionals Week, which included 
Administrative Professionals Day on Wednesday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of us could do our job without our admins 
and our constituency assistants. They make sure that we are on 
time, that we are prepared for all our meetings. They organize 
our schedule, and they are the first point of contact for our 

constituents and for the public. In short, Mr. Speaker, they 
make all of our lives so much easier, and we do appreciate them 
for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity on behalf of 
our government to say a big thank you to all of our admins who 
work in our caucus office, our ministers’ offices, and our 
constituency assistants. 
 
I would like to say a special thank you to Terry Lynn Carefoot, 
who keeps our caucus office going, and I would like to say a 
personal thank you to Marcus Abrametz, my constituency 
assistant, without whom I would find my job very hard to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me saying a very big 
thank you to all administrative staff here in the building and to 
all of our constituency assistants. All of you truly keep this 
province running. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Prince Albert Mintos Win Telus Cup 
 
Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was an exciting 
week of hockey in Moose Jaw with the national midget AAA 
hockey tournament, the Telus Cup, being hosted at Mosaic 
Place this past week. 
 
The top five teams from all over the country, along with the 
host team, Moose Jaw Generals, gathered together to play their 
best hockey of the season in hopes of capturing the national 
title. But it was the Saskatchewan AAA champions, the Prince 
Albert Mintos, who stole the show as they won their third Telus 
Cup title in a very memorable fashion. They clinched the title 
last night in triple overtime, breaking the record for the longest 
game in Telus Cup history. 
 
Dakota Boutin scored with just 1:24 left in the triple overtime 
period to give the Mintos a 4-3 victory over the Châteauguay 
Grenadiers in the exciting championship final. It was over 100 
minutes of intense hockey, making it a treat for the crowd and a 
game that players from both sides will remember forever. The 
sticks of Boutin and both goalies, who each made over 60 
saves, will be going into the Hockey Hall of Fame for their part 
in making history at the Telus Cup tournament. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Prince Albert Mintos hockey organization, Coach Ken 
Morrison, a good friend of mine, on their Telus Cup victory. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Saskatchewan Children’s Hospital 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday 
myself, along with the Minister of Health and the Minister of 
Advanced Education, had the pleasure of attending a great 
announcement at the Royal University Hospital. The Minister 
of Health announced an additional $20 million investment to 
add 24 in-patient beds to the children’s hospital of 
Saskatchewan, for a total of 176 private in-patient beds. This 



5236 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2014 

will increase the overall size of the hospital by 11 per cent, or 
approximately 38,000 square feet, and bring the total provincial 
investment in the children’s hospital of Saskatchewan to over 
$235 million. 
 
This investment was made because of historic population 
growth in Saskatchewan. For the first time, more than 1.1 
million people call Saskatchewan home. We saw our population 
grow by 100,000 in just six short years. This is why we are 
adding beds to the children’s hospital. Mr. Speaker, that 
population growth would have never happened under the NDP 
[New Democratic Party]. Year after year, we saw people 
leaving Saskatchewan in droves. 
 
I was surprised, Mr. Speaker, not to see any opposition MLAs 
there for such a great announcement. We later learned that the 
Leader of the Opposition was doing interviews in a different 
area of RUH [Royal University Hospital] after the 
announcement. Why wasn’t the Leader of the Opposition there 
to attend this announcement? Was it because he couldn’t stand 
in for an announcement that would have never happened under 
the NDP? Mr. Speaker, will the Leader of the Opposition stand 
up here today and declare his support for the children’s hospital 
of Saskatchewan? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Temporary Foreign Worker Program 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier: when did the government learn about the servers who 
lost their jobs because of the abuse of the temporary foreign 
worker program in Weyburn? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in consultation here just now 
with the Minister of Immigration and speaking on behalf of 
myself personally, the day that the story broke is when the 
minister first found out about it, and that’s when I first heard 
about it as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s an interesting 
answer that the Premier provides because Sandy Nelson and 
Shaunna Jennison-Yung lost their jobs last month and were 
replaced by temporary foreign workers. 
 
Sandy and Shaunna contacted the Ministry of Labour about this 
on April 7th, and they spoke, Mr. Speaker, with the Minister of 
Health, the member from Weyburn, on April 11th. So well 
before, Mr. Speaker, the story broke in the news, before it was 
in the media coverage, this government was notified about this, 
Mr. Speaker. They were notified about a specific abuse in the 
temporary foreign worker program about Canadian citizens, 
about Saskatchewan residents losing their jobs and being 
replaced by temporary foreign workers. So my question is for 
the Premier: why didn’t the government, why didn’t the 

government do anything when they learned about this abuse of 
the temporary foreign worker program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat again for the hon. 
member, I first heard about it when this particular story broke. 
That was his first question. That was my first answer, and it 
remains the answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can also inform the House that even when the 
individuals involved met with the MLA expressing these 
concerns, they were actually unsure at that time whether those 
who were staying on the job at the restaurant were in fact 
nominee program participants — in other words, part of the 
permanent residency stream — or in fact TFWs [temporary 
foreign worker]. Even those folks were unsure of that yet. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that the 
investigation from the federal government’s on the way. I know 
the minister responsible for this file, the member for 
Kindersley, has already written . . . Last week when we became 
aware of this story, he wrote immediately to the minister in 
charge of the file in Ottawa, offering the support of the 
provincial government’s integrity unit that we have within the 
immigration offices of the Government of Saskatchewan and 
encouraging the federal government to ensure that the rules of 
the temporary foreign worker program are followed here and 
across the country, and that is that it is a last resort program. 
Canadians must be offered the job first, Mr. Speaker. We’ll get 
into this perhaps in subsequent answers. There’s certainly a role 
for the program, a program properly enforced, and that was our 
encouragement to the federal government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I asked when the government 
learned of the two servers losing their jobs because of the 
temporary foreign worker program, Mr. Speaker. But the 
Premier said that he learned, as well as the minister, on the day 
that it broke in the news. 
 
The women, Mr. Speaker, emailed the Ministry of Labour on 
April 7th and they met with the Minister of Health, a senior 
member of cabinet, on April 11th. Yet Sandy and Shaunna 
heard nothing back from the government or from the minister, 
Mr. Speaker, until the story was in the news and getting 
national coverage. My question to the Premier: why didn’t this 
government take the issue seriously when it was brought to 
their attention? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a labour relations issue was 
brought to the MLA for Weyburn-Big Muddy. The issue was 
followed on by the member, Mr. Speaker, and by ministries of 
the government. 
 
I want to be very clear again. While the hon. member is looking 
to torque the facts again in this House, let me be very clear. Let 
me be very clear. Those who were initially making the 
complaints were not 100 per cent sure, just as the government 
was not 100 per cent sure, that it was a TFW situation. There 



April 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5237 

are other people in this province today working. They’re a part 
of the nominee program. They’re part of the federal stream of 
immigration. And it’s our information that the individuals were 
not completely certain this was a temporary foreign workers 
issue. 
 
The matter was however dealt with, with respect to the fact that 
it might be of provincial jurisdiction. And then when the issue 
was made public — and by the way, my understanding is the 
investigation will now be under way by the federal government 
— but now when the CBC story was made public, Mr. Speaker, 
I asked the minister responsible to immediately write to his 
counterpart in Ottawa to ensure that they knew we supported 
their enforcement of the actual TFW principles of the program, 
and also we’d commit our resources to helping them in any 
investigation and the enforcement of the principles of that 
program. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what a dismissive approach we 
see from this government, Mr. Speaker. They are notified. The 
Ministry of Labour is emailed on April 7th. A senior member of 
cabinet is notified about this on April 11th, Mr. Speaker, but 
they do nothing when they are told about this. And now, Mr. 
Speaker, they heckle and they blame the servers, Mr. Speaker, 
for not taking the right action when in fact they brought it to the 
government members’ attention. 
 
Under this government, Mr. Speaker, there has been a 300 per 
cent increase in the number of temporary foreign workers in 
Saskatchewan — a 300 per cent increase. There are nearly 
12,000 temporary foreign workers in our province now. So my 
specific question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how many other 
cases of abuse have been brought to the government’s attention, 
and did the government do anything to follow up on those 
issues? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, none that I’m aware of. That’s 
not to say employees perhaps have not brought forward 
concerns either to MLAs or their members of parliament, 
because this is a federal program. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to caution all members of the House, 
want to caution all members of the House to recognize that the 
temporary foreign workers program, when it’s operated based 
on its principles, this federal program plays a role in 
jurisdictions where there is an acute labour shortage. I wonder if 
the hon. member is aware, Mr. Speaker, that in 2012 there were 
2,001 temporary foreign workers who became permanent 
residents through the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 
program. Fifty per cent, Mr. Speaker, made up of students and 
workers because there are also students in this category. And I 
would expect that that Leader of the Opposition and that party 
would want to support those students as they come here and 
enter the stream to become a permanent resident. 
 
By the way, in 2013 . . . Well the deputy leader doesn’t want to 
hear the facts. There are concerns we have with the temporary 
foreign worker program but, Mr. Speaker, there are also 
attributes of the program that are good for the province of 

Saskatchewan. In 2013 there were 2,461 temporary foreign 
workers who became permanent residents through the 
Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program. That’s 55 per cent. 
We want the program in force. It must be Canadians first. It 
must be a last resort, but let’s not forget that many of these 
TFWs become permanent residents, welcome residents to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, temporary foreign workers, Mr. 
Speaker, provide, Mr. Speaker, service in the province. And the 
exploitation of temporary foreign workers, Mr. Speaker, is 
unacceptable. 
 
I met with Sandy and Shaunna in Weyburn last Thursday, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t blame temporary foreign workers. They 
blame a temporary foreign worker program that is too easily 
and too often abused. And we see examples now, Mr. Speaker, 
when concerns are raised with this government about abuse, 
they don’t follow up; they don’t pay attention; they don’t listen 
to the concerns being raised, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sandy and Shaunna, Mr. Speaker, they want to ensure that 
temporary foreign workers are not exploited. And they want to 
ensure that Canadians are never passed over for jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. Far too often, Mr. Speaker, the temporary foreign 
worker program is abused. 
 
My question to the Premier: what is the government doing to 
put a stop to that? What is he doing to ensure that temporary 
foreign workers are not exploited in the province? And what is 
the government doing to ensure that Canadians are not passed 
over for jobs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the two individuals met with 
the member, their Member of the Legislative Assembly, on the 
11th. And five days later they got a call back from Labour 
Relations, Mr. Speaker, because this side of the House takes 
these issues very seriously. 
 
Now it’s important to point out that this is a federal program 
and so the things that we do are typically in support of or in 
advice to the federal government. What we have done in this 
regard is, as soon as I became aware of this issue, we asked the 
minister to write to the federal minister expressing our concern 
about any abuses of the program — it must be a last resort — 
and also our offer to help in terms of investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have worked hard on this side of the House to 
make Saskatchewan a welcoming environment for new 
workers. Mr. Speaker, when we were in the Philippines this fall 
we signed an important MOU [memorandum of understanding] 
with that government in terms of preferred status from the 
Philippines for people from that country coming to work in our 
province. They signed that MOU with us, Mr. Speaker. Why? 
Because we have the strictest and toughest protection for 
foreign workers, for new residents coming into the province of 
Saskatchewan. In fact I think we were heralded in that regard by 
the Canadian Labour Congress. 
 



5238 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2014 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Sandy and Shaunna, the two 
servers from Weyburn, say that they were not contacted back by 
government, Mr. Speaker. What they are advocating for, and 
what concerned people in Saskatchewan are advocating for, is 
that temporary foreign workers not be exploited and that 
Canadians are not passed over for jobs, Mr. Speaker, that 
temporary foreign workers are not filling jobs that Canadians 
should and could be filling, like this government used 
temporary foreign workers, Mr. Speaker, for a cashier position 
at a Liquor Board store. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said that he’s not aware of instances 
of abuse being raised with the government of the some 12,000 
individuals who are temporary foreign workers in the province. 
Does the Premier stand by that remark? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have learned in this 
session to check the facts very carefully as they’re presented in 
this House by the member that was just on his feet. I will repeat 
exactly what happens here in terms of the sequence of events. 
 
The two individuals met with their MLA, contacted their MLA 
first on the 9th of April. They then met with the MLA, with the 
Minister of Health. The MLA for Weyburn-Big Muddy met 
with them April 11th, two days later. And then on April 16th 
they did receive contact from the Labour Relations Board to 
investigate it. 
 
But of course this is a federal issue. This is the issue of the 
temporary foreign workers, one that we take seriously. And 
we’re working with the federal government, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that it’s enforced, but also to prevent perhaps what is the 
position of the NDP, and certainly some of their friends in 
labour, for the complete scrapping of the temporary foreign 
workers program, Mr. Speaker, which would bring many 
businesses to a halt in the province of Saskatchewan, which 
would stop I think the helpful process of seeing 55 per cent of 
those who are classified as temporary foreign workers in 2013 
become permanent residents right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
These are the facts of the matter. It’s important to lay them out 
before the House, Mr. Speaker. It’s important to send a signal to 
the federal government that the program must be enforced, but 
unlike perhaps members opposite or at least their allies, there is 
a role for this program to have more permanent residents in 
Saskatchewan and also to keep our economy moving forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Education Funding and the Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, right before the Easter 
break this government received a scathing letter from the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association. Our province’s 
school board trustees raised major concerns about the negative 
impact of that government’s budget. And school board trustees 
specifically raised concerns about the lean initiative clawback 
that this government has imposed on our schools and 

classrooms. My question is for the Premier: has he reversed this 
lean initiative clawback that he’s imposed on students yet? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we received 
correspondence from the president of the Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association shortly before the Easter break. I indicated 
then that I was looking forward to having a meeting with the 
president and, Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite 
that that meeting will take place later this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will address the concerns that they’ve raised. 
We expect our school divisions to effect efficiencies as we have 
throughout government. Mr. Speaker, we had targets that we 
set. They were discussed with the various school divisions and 
we will work with them to ensure that they are able to fulfill 
their mandate as providing education in our province. Mr. 
Speaker, we have made substantial increases, as I mentioned 
last week, with funding throughout the province and, Mr. 
Speaker, we will continue to work to meet those goals. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
continually refused to focus on the basics, the things that really 
matter to success for students, things like overcrowded 
classrooms, schools that desperately need repairs, and students 
that aren’t getting the one-on-one attention they need. So it’s no 
wonder why elected school board trustees who are desperately, 
desperately trying to focus on what matters to students are 
incredibly frustrated by this government’s lean initiative 
clawback. So to the Premier: why on earth hasn’t he reversed 
this lean initiative clawback yet, and why is he dismissing the 
concerns of the elected school board leaders across this 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the education budget in 
our province is nearly $2 billion. There is no reason why we 
should not look for efficiencies in that sector. I can advise the 
House some of the efficiencies that we’ve already used and 
already developed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Prairie school division has reduced students’ wait times for 
speech-language pathologists by a half. Students’ occupational 
therapist wait time in the division dropped to seven weeks 
where it was previously 18 weeks. In Regina Public School 
Division, we made hiring staff more efficient, reducing 
application processing time by 75 per cent. The Light of Christ 
School Division used lean to improve student attendance and 
improve transitions from elementary to high school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll make no apologies for wanting to make our 
school system more efficient and more effective and to ensure 
that we’re able to commit resources fully to the front line where 
teachers are doing very good work throughout the province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not taking any lessons from the 
members opposite in this area. 
 
[14:15] 
 



April 28, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5239 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the SSBA [Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association] letter says: 
 

Boards may not always agree with the budget decisions 
made by the provincial government. However, as shared 
leaders in education, they firmly believe they should have 
been consulted with and informed in a manner which 
enables them to proactively prepare for a potential impact 
resulting from the province’s actions. 

 
This government shouldn’t have imposed the lean initiative 
clawback in the first place. But if it was considering doing so, it 
should have had the decency to consult the elected school board 
leaders of this province in advance, and for that government to 
learn the consequences of their actions from school boards 
before springing it on school boards at budget time, announcing 
this surprise clawback. But the Premier and the Education 
minister didn’t bother to do that. 
 
To the Premier: why won’t he just admit that this was a 
mistake, scrap the lean initiative clawback that his government 
has imposed on schools, classrooms, and students? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to advise the 
members opposite that each and every year we’ve raised the 
funding that’s gone to school divisions. Since November 2007, 
there’s been an increase of 26 per cent in operating funding. 
Total pre-K [pre-kindergarten] funding is now in excess of $1.8 
billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1993 and 1994 the NDP had their own method 
of clawbacks. They actually reduced the operating grant from 
the province. In 1995 they gave school divisions zero per cent. 
This was at a time when there were over 20,000 more students 
in our education system than there is today. According to a June 
2001 enrolment paper produced under the NDP, they predicted 
that by 2010 there would only be 140,000 students in the 
province. There were in fact 160,000. Today there’s over 
170,000. The NDP didn’t plan for growth. They planned for 
decline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to do that. We’ve had 
record investment. We’ve had over $700 million on school 
projects big and small, 43 major capital projects, 22 brand new 
schools, and 25 major renovations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Children’s Hospital 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The government finally acknowledged last 
week that its first redesign of the children’s hospital was 
flawed. The first redesign occurred when the government 
brought in its high-priced lean consultant, John Black, to shrink 
the children’s hospital. This government ignored concerns from 
front-line health care workers who were adamant that the 
proposed hospital was too small, and when we asked questions 
about this in the fall, the government scoffed. But now the 

government is scrambling to re-expand the design. 
 
To the minister: how did the lean consultants and the 
government get their first redesign of the children’s hospital so 
wrong? Why didn’t he listen to the front-line workers, the real 
experts, instead of listening to John Black? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m really pleased to be able to talk about the 
children’s hospital and the design that’s been approved, the 
additional 24 beds that will bring us up to 176 beds, private 
beds, that I think will serve the children and the families of 
Saskatchewan for many years to come. 
 
I do want to, though, correct the member opposite in the lead-in 
to her question. Certainly December 3rd I believe was the date 
of 2013 in this very Chamber where I acknowledged that the 
children’s hospital steering committee was looking at whether 
or not the numbers were adequate just in terms of the 
projections that were used back in 2009 to 2013 and 2012 when 
the project was approved. But very clearly, Mr. Speaker, this is 
a very good news story. It’s because this province is growing 
like never before, 100,000 people which the members opposite 
said would be impossible to grow in 10 years. Mr. Speaker, the 
truth of the matter is we’ve grown that large in just six years 
and we’re going to continue to grow as a province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The government keeps saying that the lean 
consultants helped with the flow of the building, but now we’ve 
learned that the lean consultants planned for the hospital to be 
entirely paperless. That’s not happening. So now the 
government is not only scrambling to expand the hospital; it’s 
also scrambling to figure out where the paper files will be 
stored. Yet we’ve received an internal memo that shows the 
government knew about this problem as early as February 2013, 
so it’s baffling why this government still hasn’t fixed the lean 
consultants’ mess yet. To the minister: why not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
certainly the children’s hospital is being designed for an 
electronic health record. That is still very much the case. 
However the complete electronic health record, knowing that 
this is a large project as we’re trying to roll out electronic health 
records, as has been the case for many years, it is a complex 
system. It’s not going to be in place when the doors do open at 
the children’s hospital. 
 
That being said, we do know that there are currently no 
facilities in Canada today that are completely paperless. The 
intention is to get there. The intention for the hospital is to be 
set up that way. But certainly we are making our way down that 
path, and we will come to a day where the children’s hospital, 
as well as a number of facilities, will be paperless. But that is a 
journey we are embarking on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 



5240 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2014 

Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This government ignored concerns from 
front-line health care workers. It listened to its $40 million lean 
consultant, and it shrunk the children’s hospital. And this 
government knew that it wouldn’t be able to have a paperless 
hospital, yet it kept plowing ahead with the lean consultant’s 
plan anyhow. Now it is scrambling to fix both problems. 
 
Last week the government released drawings showing a 
“potential area of expansion,” and it hasn’t adjusted the flow of 
the hospital to account for paper files yet. To the minister: how 
can this government be confident that its estimate of a $20 
million cost overrun is accurate when it doesn’t even have new 
blueprints done up yet? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s important to note at the beginning just to 
say that certainly we want to move to a paperless system. That’s 
what eHealth is all about. A number of provinces are moving 
towards an electronic health record. Currently there are no 
facilities in Canada that are completely paperless. The intent is 
to get there. But we are working our ways towards that, and that 
is a part of this process. 
 
But I think it’s just striking, a couple of things: first of all, to 
hear members opposite talk about the work that this government 
has done to design a children’s hospital. It’s pretty clear, Mr. 
Speaker, when people of Saskatchewan look at this 
government, they see a government that is prepared to build, 
design, build, and fund a children’s hospital in this province — 
something that we never saw from the members opposite — 
and a government, Mr. Speaker, that is willing to look and hear 
from front-line workers to make changes to the design to 
improve it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is coming from a party opposite, and I quote 
from a very senior member of their government, almost 11 
years ago to the day. I quote: 
 

. . . I find really interesting, that they say — that is the 
Saskatchewan Party opposition says — they say that not 
only will they stop, stop these population trends; they’re 
going to reverse them . . . So dramatically that they 
propose to increase the population of Saskatchewan by 
100,000. Well it is so over the top . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Environmental Protection 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, a new report out from 
Environment Canada last week reconfirms that Saskatchewan’s 
greenhouse gas emissions are still going the wrong direction. 
 
When we asked the government in committee to reveal its 
climate change plan, the minister couldn’t do so. He seems to 
hope that public awareness is all that is needed to reach his 
promised reduction goal of 20 million megatonnes of pollution. 
But this government has slashed green spending in the budget. 

It’s cut climate change funding by 82 per cent, and it has 
refused to implement its own carbon levy through the 
Technology Fund, despite promising to do so since 2009 and 
despite paying a consultant to put together a business plan for it. 
The minister has finally admitted he’s not optimistic about his 
government’s plan. 
 
To the minister: the public deserves to know. Will this minister 
come clean and tell us what his real emission targets are? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you to the member. It’s always a pleasure to 
talk about Saskatchewan’s environmental record and the 
environmental sustainability that’s taking place along with the 
economic stability as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m well aware of the document that was released 
by the federal government last week. In fact the information 
that it shows is that our emissions are down 3.37 tonnes per 
capita since 2007. So again, I’ve said in this House before, our 
record is much better than the record under the NDP.  
 
We’ve also talked about the many initiatives I wish I had time 
to go into. But I think most importantly is a quote here from . . . 
Well I’ll quote it: 
 

Certainly that’s a huge step forward, and I don’t want to 
minimize the efforts that have been made on that front. I 
think it’s incredibly important, and [we] certainly . . . see 
other jurisdictions doing that as well. 

 
Who is that from? None other than the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana, the NDP Environment critic. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committee this afternoon and this evening, 
I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:26.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5231 
COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 
 National Day of Mourning 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5231 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5231 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5232 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5232 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5232 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5232 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5232 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5232 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5233 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5233 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5233 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5233 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5233 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5234 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Holocaust Memorial Day 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5234 
 National Day of Mourning 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5234 
 Child Welfare Legislation Review 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5234 
 Earth Day 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5235 
 Administrative Professionals Week 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5235 
 Prince Albert Mintos Win Telus Cup 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5235 
 Saskatchewan Children’s Hospital 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5235 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Temporary Foreign Worker Program 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5236 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5236 
 Education Funding and the Lean Initiative 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5238 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5238 
 Children’s Hospital 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5239 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5239 
 Environmental Protection 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5240 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5240 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


