
























































Hansard: May 14, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 64A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 14, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5409 
 May 14, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to section 39, I wish to table the 
Advocate for Children and Youth report. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is 
a busy day at the legislature as we wind down this spring 
session. And I have some guests that I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in no particular order, we had an event this 
morning where we were able to give about five completely 
signed Grey Cup footballs to community-based organizations 
and other champions of local and provincial efforts who will 
now use these footballs as leverage to raise a little bit of money 
for their cause. I want to highlight Major Mike Hoeft from the 
Salvation Army. He’s the commander for the Saskatchewan 
area. And he’s joined by Julia Wyeth. She handles government 
relations, and they’re seated in your gallery. 
 
In a moment in a more formal way, the Saskatoon Kinsmen will 
be introduced. They were one of the groups as well this 
morning. I note there’s Kerry Heid and his team from Magna 
here, and SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology] board members as well. Mr. Speaker, we want 
to welcome them. 
 
But even more important than all of these very important people 
are some constituents from Swift Current. Sixty-two students 
from Ashley Park School, Mr. Speaker, in my hometown are 
here, and I want to welcome them through you to the 
Legislative Assembly today. They are joined by their teachers: 
Lynn Anderson, Mark Siemens, Jobi Regier, and Alice 
Hardowa; and educational assistants, Tina Smart and Angela 
Sauder. Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to meeting with all of 
the students just a little bit later on, and I would ask all 
members of this Assembly to please welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d ask leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 
requested leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we have individuals from two distinguished groups of 
work that’s being undertaken here within the province. I’d like 
to start by recognizing those with Magna Electric and those 
associated with SIAST to begin. 
 
So Dr. Larry Rosia is here as well as our Chair, Ralph Boychuk. 
Kerry Heid, as the Premier has already highlighted, is here; 
Erick Erickson; Brent Waldo; Donna Birkmaier; Arlene 
Unvoas; as well, Pam Schwann. And I’d also like to recognize 
Kerwin Boser, Jarret Solberg, and Curtis Brandt. And we know 
that there’s also a champion of SIAST, and that’s one Mr. 
Curtis Kimpton who’s here as well, already recognized. 
 
To this list, I would ask as well that we be able to recognize and 
say thanks to a number of promoters who are here to help 
ensure that SAGES [Saskatchewan advantage grant for 
education savings], the provincial RESP [registered education 
savings plan] that we’ve just announced, will be a success and 
ensure that post-secondary education will be increasingly 
affordable and accessible to Saskatchewan families. 
 
And so from the Canadian Scholarship Trust Foundation, Peter 
Lewis; from AGF Investments, Chris Haines; RBC [Royal 
Bank of Canada] has Pamela Bryden here; Scotiabank has Jane 
Button, as well as Maurene Kayter; BMO [Bank of Montreal] 
has Trevor Philp and Robert Armstrong; and Concentra has Ken 
Kosolofski, the president and CEO [chief executive officer]. 
And I’m delighted to be able to recognize groups from both 
distinguished communities who are helping to ensure the 
success and excellence of post-secondary education in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll ask all 
members to help me welcome them here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister and certainly the Premier in welcoming 
the guests here today, in terms of the folks from SIAST, Dr. 
Rosia, Chairman Boychuk, the other folks from SIAST; those 
from Magna Electric; and also the representatives from 
throughout the financial services sector here in the province 
here to see the launch of the provincial RESP, making sure that 
gets under way in a good way. Good to see them here today. 
 
And I’d again join with the minister and the Premier in thanking 
these individuals for their good work in the province and to 
welcome them again to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery today we have 
some people I’d like to introduce to their Assembly. And 
they’re real pillars of the community of Saskatoon, and I’m 
lucky enough to call them friends as well. With us today we 
have Adam Wolf — if you can stand, give me a wave — he’s 
our current president of the Kinsmen Club of Saskatoon. Chad 
Empey is the past president of the club. Jae Malinowski is the 
current director of the club, and with them is Curtis Kimpton, 
past national Kin president. 



5410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2014 

I have a member’s statement a little bit later on that’s going to 
highlight some of the fundraising that they have been doing in 
Saskatoon, and I’d invite everyone to welcome them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member opposite in welcoming the folks from 
Kinsmen here and salute their good work that they do in our 
communities, and I know particularly in Saskatoon. I ask 
members to join with me and us in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the west 
gallery, I’ve got a group from Dr. Hanna School in Argyle Park 
in my constituency. And with us today is a teacher, Miranda 
Field, music teacher. Give us a wave. I’ve got Alyssa Ballan. 
I’ve got Daniel Oduwole. I’ve got Anastasia Vaksman, and I’ve 
got Kiara Cellar. 
 
Also with them today is Carl Flis, and Carl is the Electronic 
Products Recycling Association. And I’m going to talk a little 
bit more about an event I attended last week, but I’d ask all 
members to join me, welcoming this group to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce the guests, a couple of guests in your gallery, to you 
and through you and to the members of this Legislative 
Assembly. Honouring a veteran, a First Nations veteran of 
Montreal Cree Nation, Norman Henderson. Give us a wave, 
Norman. It’s an honour to have a veteran here that have served 
for our province and our country. In so many way, he’s given so 
much. I want to thank you for that. But to his wife of 46 years, 
Myrna, please give us a wave and be recognized for the good 
work and support you’ve given Norman and your family. 
 
I just want to ask all members to give them a hand and welcome 
to their Legislative Assembly. Honouring our veterans is so 
important. And we’ll be doing a member statement and a few 
other things for them. Anyway I’d ask all my colleagues to 
please join me in welcoming Norman and his wife to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the east gallery is a group of very special people. They’re from 
Vanier Collegiate, 19 grade 12 students from Vanier Collegiate. 
What makes them so special, Mr. Speaker, is that they don’t 
have to have a chaperone; they just come with their teacher, Mr. 
Panko. So very good to have them. 
 
We met with them a little bit before, this morning, and 
answered their questions. They were quite interested in the 
dome of this building. So I’d ask all members to welcome the 
grade 12 class of Vanier Collegiate from Moose Jaw. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce a 
few individuals seated in the east gallery: first Vice-chief 
Kimberly Jonathan of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations, also along is Tribal Chief Gwen O’Soup with us, and a 
delegation, I believe, from the Yorkton area. And I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming these individuals to the 
Assembly today. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to give a 
word of thanks to an individual who is seated in your gallery, 
and that’s Mr. Kyall Glennie who has served in our caucus 
office for some time in a staff position. Kyall’s going on to 
some other adventures for a period of time, but I want to 
express on behalf of the NDP [New Democratic Party] team our 
appreciation for what he has done and, more importantly, our 
appreciation and thanks for his friendship. We wish him all the 
best with his next steps and look forward to his return to the 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming a number of 
individuals from the Yorkton Tribal Council and from the FSIN 
[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] to the Assembly. 
We have with us today Chief Isabel O’Soup from the Key First 
Nation, YTC [Yorkton Tribal Council] and family services 
director Raymond Shingoose, Mary Culbertson also from YTC. 
I’m not sure if Chief Whitehawk is here. We have Elder Sam 
Isaac who is joining us, as well as Chief Norman Whitehawk 
from Cote First Nation. And from the FSIN, we have FSIN’s 
first Vice-chief Kimberly Jonathan and executive assistant 
Josephine Williams. 
 
All of these individuals have worked tirelessly to protect our 
children in care, and I value the relationship they have with our 
government. We realize there is always a lot more work to do 
when it comes to protecting our children, but I appreciate the 
hard work they do, and I ask all my colleagues to join with me 
in welcoming them to this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
couple of delegates that are here in Regina this week for the 
94th annual Rural Municipal Administrators’ Association 
annual conference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery — and I’d ask them just to give a 
quick wave — we have Jennifer Thompson who is the 
administrator for the RM [rural municipality] of Lake Lenore 
and also Joni Mack who is the administrator for the RM of 
Prairie Rose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to speak to the delegates 
yesterday during their opening luncheon, and I’ll have an 
opportunity again tonight at their annual banquet. I very much 
appreciate the fact that these delegates took time out of their 
schedule to watch the proceedings today, and I’d ask all 



May 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5411 

members to please give them a warm welcome to their 
Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister opposite and welcome these leaders to their 
Assembly, these leaders within municipalities in our province, 
these rural administrators. And I thank them for joining us here 
today. I thank them for what they do on a day-to-day basis, and 
I thank all of the rural administrators and municipal 
administrators across this province. Of course they provide a 
very important role and service to the people of this province 
and their communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join my colleague from Cumberland in welcoming Mr. 
Norman Henderson and his wife, Myrna. And obviously as a 
show of respect to Norman and many of the veterans that served 
for our country, it’s also important to recognize his heritage, his 
language. So I want to say in Cree to him: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Welcome to your Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to join with the Premier in 
welcoming the group from Swift Current. I had the opportunity 
to visit Ashley Park School for a presentation in February with 
the classes, grade 4 and 5. 
 
As well I’d like to welcome Mr. Doug Panko from Moose Jaw 
here, who is a committee member on the social studies teachers’ 
institute. So I’d ask members to welcome them to the 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today to present a petition calling for real action on climate 
change. We know that Saskatchewan produces the highest 
greenhouse gas emissions per capita in all of Canada and that 
the Saskatchewan government has failed to tackle climate 
change, reduce emissions to the province’s own targets, or put 
in a real plan to protect the natural environment. 
 
We know that slashing programs such as the Go Green Fund 
and the EnerGuide for Houses energy efficiency program set 
the province on a backwards course, and that since 2009 the 
Government of Saskatchewan has reduced climate change 
funding by 83 per cent, including another 35 per cent cut in the 
2014-15 budget. 
 
[13:45] 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a real 

plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 
 

Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from right 
across the province. I do so present. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 
the lack of safety on Dewdney Avenue, the need to reroute the 
heavy-haul truck traffic from Dewdney Avenue. They note that 
any further delays from that government to address a problem 
that was created by that government are entirely unacceptable. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and the infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina and Humboldt. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand to 
present a petition from residents who are concerned about the 
lucrative lean contracts that this government has signed. And 
they highlight in the petition, Mr. Speaker, about a $40 million 
contract with the US [United States] consultant and the fact that 
this government’s flying in Japanese senseis at $3,500 per day, 
all at the same time as ignoring the basics. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to cancel its lucrative contracts with 
out-of-country lean consultants and instead focus its 
resources on actually listening to front-line health care 
workers and fixing the basics in health care and seniors’ 
care. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 
all over Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 



5412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2014 

behalf of residents of La Ronge. The northern road, Highway 
102 north of La Ronge, is used in many different ways: the 
mining industry; the forestry sector; residents use it for 
trapping, fishing, to gather mushrooms, blueberry picking. We 
also have tourists using that road to go into our beautiful North 
and some of our lakes to do fishing and everything else. And 
that road provides them . . . and they would like to have that 
road a safe road to travel on. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to recognize the repair and maintenance 
on the La Ronge northern road, Highway 102, is important 
to northern residents and must be undertaken immediately. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I present 
a petition in relation to this government’s choice to kill the 
opportunity for people to own their own homes in northern 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to restore the rent-to-own option for 
responsible renters of the social housing program and to 
reinstate the remote housing program. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular page, 
Mr. Speaker, they have signed from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition for a residents-in-care bill of rights. 
The signators point out that residents in care have the right to 
dignity, respect, and safety; that residents in care deserve basic 
guarantees of the quality of care they ought to receive; that 
residents in care have the right to individualized care that meets 
or exceeds minimum quality of care standards; that it is the 
responsibility of the provincial government to ensure consistent 
standards of care in facilities throughout Saskatchewan; and 
that requiring each care home to post a residents-in-care bill of 
rights will guarantee that senior residents have individualized 
care plans and minimum quality of care standards. It reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan adopt 
Bill 606, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, which 
would provide Saskatchewan seniors with the right to 
quality, high-level standards of care in seniors’ care 
homes. 

 
I so submit, Mr. Speaker. This petition is signed from people all 
across Saskatchewan including Carrot River, Carnduff, Maple 

Creek, Canora, Saskatoon, Regina, Meadow Lake, Vanscoy, 
Preeceville, La Ronge, Estevan, Wadena, Melville, Humboldt, 
Martensville, and Muenster. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition calling for improved safety on Highway No. 1 East 
between Regina and Balgonie. The petitioners, in the prayer 
that reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan, until the overpasses are built along this 
corridor: (1) immediately install traffic lights at 
appropriate locations along Highway 1 between Regina 
and Balgonie, (2) immediately reduce speed limits to 
appropriate levels within this corridor, and (3) take steps 
to ensure that the speed limits are enforced. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by a great many citizens 
throughout Saskatchewan. This particular batch represents 
citizens from Vibank, Regina, Qu’Appelle, Emerald Park, 
White City, Pilot Butte, Sedley, Balgonie, Kipling, Silton, 
Francis, Odessa, McLean, Edenwold, Craven, Grand Coulee, 
Lebret, Davin, Copper Sands, Southey, Dysart, Gray, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Yorkton, Pense, Rouleau, Milestone, Lipton, 
Regina Beach, Kronau, Duval, Lumsden, Indian Head, 
Wolseley, Cupar, Riceton, Zehner, Stoughton, Lajord, St. 
Joseph’s Colony, Buena Vista, Hudson Bay, Blaine Lake, 
Moose Jaw, Canora, Kendal, Stone Point, Fleming, and 
Neudorf. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition from Saskatchewan residents who are opposed to the 
correctional service job privatization, especially as it relates to 
food services. The costs will escalate. The safety of staff, 
inmates, and the public will be put at risk. Local businesses will 
lose contracts. Inmate training and rehabilitation will be 
undermined, and the entry of full-scale privatization of the 
corrections system will be opened if the government goes ahead 
with this plan. And these petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel its privatization in the corrections and young 
offenders facilities in Canada. 

 
And these petitions are signed by people from Buffalo Narrows, 
Prince Albert, White City, and Regina. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition to properly address the grain transportation crisis. And 
the undersigned residents bring to our attention a few things. 
First, that the grain transportation crisis is hurting many 
producers across the province as last year’s record crop sits in 
bins, causing a huge financial crunch on producers who have 
limited cash flow to pay their many bills and loans; that even 



May 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5413 

under proposed emergency federal legislation, the requirements 
for the volume of grain to be shipped and penalties put on the 
railways for non-compliance are too weak; that the Government 
of Saskatchewan has supported the federal government instead 
of standing up to their weak and slow action; and there’s no real 
strategy put in place by this government to get the system ready 
for this year’s crop. 
 
We, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan push for the federal government to require 
the railway companies, by law, to have the capacity to 
handle large volumes of grain like this year’s crop in a 
timely and efficient fashion, and to push for open running 
rights on the railway system to ease future backlogs and 
introduce more competition into the grain transportation 
system. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of the city of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Alumni Award Winners Donate to Electrical 
Engineering Technology Program 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise 
to thank Kerry Heid, Kerwin Boser, Jarret Solberg, and Curtis 
Brandt, founders of Magna Electric Corporation, for their 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Magna Electric Corporation is a leading Canadian 
electrical power system, engineering, testing, construction, 
manufacturing, and commissioning service company. The 
company was recently acquired by Shermco Industries, North 
America’s leading independent provider of electrical services of 
energy, utility, infrastructure, and industrial companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 26th this year at the SIAST President’s 
Gala in Saskatoon, President Larry Rosia presented the 
inaugural Alumni Award to these four Saskatchewan 
entrepreneurs for their outstanding contribution to SIAST. All 
four honourees graduated from electrical engineering 
technology at SIAST Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw and started 
Saskatchewan-based Magna Electric Corporation, which has 
grown from a very modest beginning to produce revenues of 
121 million in 2013 with over 500 employees in this province. 
As Kerry Heid said to me, “That’s not too bad for a couple of 
local boys.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, after hearing the founders of Magna Electric 
Corporation being honoured by SIAST, Shermco Industries 
Canada decided to contribute $100,000 to the electrical 
engineering technology program at Palliser Campus in Moose 
Jaw. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
 

Honouring Aboriginal and First Nations Veterans 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to recognize the contributions of Canada’s 
Aboriginal and First Nations veterans, which cannot be 
overstated. Aboriginal and First Nations Canadians have 
demonstrated their great service and sacrifice for our country 
through their participation in all of Canada’s major conflicts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the Saskatchewan First Nations and 
Métis who served in World War I, World War II, and Korea 
came from isolated areas of our province. The reasons for 
enlisting are many, but patriotism and protection of their 
country are first and foremost. Large numbers of Aboriginal 
and First Nations soldiers served this province with pride and 
distinction. Many were highly praised for their skill, for their 
bravery, and decorated with honours and awards. Unfortunately 
many also paid the ultimate price for our freedom today: they 
lost their lives and never came home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the member from Cumberland and I had the 
opportunity and honour to share a meal and a great conversation 
with Norman Henderson and his wife, Myrna. Norman is the 
P.A. [Prince Albert] branch vice-president of the First Nations 
veterans of Canada, and he stated the following concern: “First 
Nations veterans are only seeking the same level of 
compensation as other Canadians who have defended their 
country.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we owe all those that served their country a huge 
debt of gratitude, and that includes First Nations and Métis 
solders as well. Their contributions, their courage, their 
sacrifices, and their accomplishments will never be forgotten. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today was 
the launch of the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 
savings. SAGES allows our government to provide a grant of 
10 per cent on contributions made to a registered education 
savings plan to a maximum of $250 per child per year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that Saskatchewan 
families can now apply for SAGES through the following 
promoters: Raymond James Ltd., Global Growth Assets Inc., 
Global Educational Trust Foundation, Heritage Educational 
Foundation, and Credential Securities Inc. As well, Mr. 
Speaker, Canadian Scholarship Trust Foundation, Invesco 
Canada Ltd., Royal Bank of Canada, NEI Investments, and 
AGF Investments Inc. will be ready to deliver SAGES in the 
coming months. There are also many other financial institutions 
that will be ready to offer the program next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Canada administers SAGES 
on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. People with new 
and existing RESPs can apply for SAGES through the 
participating financial institutions. Contributions made to 
eligible RESPs will receive the SAGES grant retroactively to 
January 1st, 2013. 



5414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2014 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that the first SAGES grants 
were paid in January 2014. As part of the Saskatchewan plan 
for growth, our government wants to ensure that more students 
are able to participate and complete their post-secondary 
education. SAGES is one of the many initiatives we invested in 
to make this possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

A Million Acts of Friendship 
Donation to Regina Humane Society 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a moment 
to thank the teachers, students, parents, and the school 
communities of Ruth M. Buck and W.H. Ford for their 
incredible work coordinating a fundraiser for the Regina 
Humane Society. I am pleased to announce classes from W.H. 
Ford and Ruth M. Buck have completed their fundraising 
projects for the Regina Humane Society as part of the let’s be 
compassionate initiative as part of A Million Acts of 
Friendship. 
 
A Million Acts of Friendship is a program working to end 
bullying and create networks in schools to promote and 
reinforce positive social behaviours. Alongside the incredible 
leadership of the students, teachers Ms. Acton and Ms. Blake 
helped coordinate local bake sales that raised a total of $705. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s encouraging to see kids becoming engaged in 
bettering their communities at such a young age, and I was 
pleased to join with them, celebrate, and witness the cheque 
presentation at the Humane Society last week. 
 
I would like to extend a special thanks to the team at the 
Humane Society, including education coordinator Ms. Kristin 
Folk who went out of her way to accommodate this important 
contribution and project. I ask all members to join with me in 
recognizing the incredible community service of Ms. Acton, 
Ms. Blake, the students, parents, and school communities of 
Buck and Ford as well as the Regina Humane Society. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Fundraising by Kinsmen Club of Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in the House 
today to recognize the Kinsmen Club of Saskatoon. The 
Kinsmen Club has done an amazing job in raising funds for the 
enrichment of our communities. To date they have raised over 
$20 million through several different initiatives in Saskatoon. 
 
One of the largest fundraisers is the Kinsmen Home Lottery, 
which is currently under way. The Home Lottery was the first 
home lottery of its kind in Canada and the world, and has raised 
over $10 million in proceeds alone. These proceeds help us feed 
Saskatoon’s hungry; sponsor the dreams and aspirations of 
bright young scholars, athletes, musicians, artists; ensure safety 
at schools; care for the elderly and for those with special needs; 
build parks; and support local festivals. They are very proud to 
continue to give back and serve the community’s greatest need, 

and are very appreciative by the support they have received 
over the years from Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. Right now 
the Kinsmen Club of Saskatoon is embarking on a shared 
learning centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join me in 
recognizing and thanking the Kinsmen Club of Saskatoon for 
all that they have done and continue to do to raise money for 
our community. Their efforts are greatly valued and results can 
be seen city wide. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Voices of Nature Event 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Thursday 
I had the great opportunity to attend the Voices of Nature 
concert event at Dr. L.M. Hanna School. Sponsored by Carl Flis 
of Electronic Products Recycling Association, this event 
promoted recycling and environmental awareness to young 
people through music and songs that were produced by the 
Artist Response Team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 100 kids from Dr. Hanna School spent weeks 
learning lyrics and actions to songs such as “Big Change Starts 
Small” and “My Roots Go Down.” On May 8th in front of 
family and friends, these students had the opportunity to 
perform their songs while accompanied by the Artist Response 
Team members: Holly, Kevin, and the Wilds band. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event was a fun and creative way to teach 
children about the importance of recycling and environmental 
sustainability as a whole. Saskatchewan has plenty of space, 
clean air, land, and water, and an abundance of natural 
resources that contribute to our good fortune, but it is our 
responsibility to ensure we protect our environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in thanking Carl 
Flis of Electronic Products Recycling Association for 
sponsoring this event; the Artist Response Team for producing 
the songs and performing them with the children; to Principal 
Karen Burns, Miranda Field, and the rest of the staff for their 
support. I’d also like to commend the students of Dr. L.M. 
Hanna School for the hard work that they put into learning the 
songs, and congratulate them on a wonderful performance. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

New Democratic Party Policy 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, if anyone in Saskatchewan was 
expecting innovation and new ideas from the NDP during this 
spring session, they must be sorely disappointed. They may 
have a new leader, but it’s the same tired, old NDP. After 14 
months as NDP leader, he still has no position on anything. 
There have been no new ideas. And if anyone else has a new 
idea, that NDP leader is firmly against it. 
 
The NDP leader says he wants new schools, but he opposes the 
nine new schools we are building including one in his very own 



May 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5415 

constituency because they’re P3s [public-private partnership]. 
He talks about improving efficiencies in the health care system, 
but he opposes all the service improvements and cost savings 
achieved through lean. The NDP talks about helping vulnerable 
people, but when our government gets together with the private 
sector to help single mothers using Canada’s first social impact 
bond, the NDP are against that too. 
 
The NDP leader talks about a smart growth plan but he hasn’t 
offered a single idea on what should be in that plan. He even 
opposes private liquor stores, including a very successful new 
co-op liquor store right in Saskatoon. 
 
That NDP leader has no idea what he stands for. He has no 
policy, no new ideas, nothing new to offer the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the NDP can continue to live in the 
past. They can continue to offer nothing and cling to their failed 
ideology. On the other hand, our government will continue to 
work for the Saskatchewan people to offer new ideas and 
innovation that’ll keep Saskatchewan moving forward. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

University of Saskatchewan Review Process 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Robert 
Buckingham raised very serious concerns yesterday about the 
implication of TransformUS for the University of 
Saskatchewan, particulary with respect to the school of public 
health, the school that he played a major role in building. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Buckingham was called into an 
office, was fired, was escorted off the campus by police, and 
was told that he was banned from the University of 
Saskatchewan forever. It’s absolutely unacceptable and it’s 
absolutely appalling. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: does he share this 
view? And when will he finally start asking some tough 
questions about what is happening at the University of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the reputation of the 
University of Saskatchewan, the university that I went to, is at 
the very top of the priority list for the Government of 
Saskatchewan, as is the reputation of the University of Regina 
and all of our post-secondary institutions. Witness, Mr. 
Speaker, the fact that we have as a government increased 
significantly investments on that campus in particular and 
across the post-secondary sector in Saskatchewan. We’ve 
increased funding for capital. We’ve increased funding for 
operating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recent events at the University of 
Saskatchewan, including the ones highlighted by the Leader of 
the Opposition today, are of concern. I can inform members of 
the House that the minister has been engaged in this particular 
issue on a regular basis with the chairman of the board. In fact a 
letter today to the chairman of the board, asking with respect to 

the school of public health, asking as to accreditation questions, 
and seeking assurance that short-term decisions taken as a result 
or in part attendant to the TransformUS are not getting in the 
way of the long-term objective that the board would have, I 
would expect the university senior management would have, 
senior leadership would have, and that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has, which would be that this university continue 
to be the pre-eminent institution that it is across the country. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier says that the minister 
is engaged on this file. I’m told that he told the media that he 
found out about Dr. Buckingham’s firing through Twitter. 
That’s hardly being engaged, hardly knowing what’s going on 
on campus. 
 
My specific question to the Premier was whether or not he 
thinks it’s acceptable that Dr. Buckingham was fired. Yes or 
no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the University of 
Saskatchewan, the University of Regina, or other 
post-secondary institutions don’t check with the minister with 
respect to human resource decisions they’re making on a 
day-to-day basis. Maybe he’s advocating that that’s the kind of 
government he envisions for the province of Saskatchewan. On 
this side of the House, notwithstanding concerns, we respect the 
independence of post-secondary institutions in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and are going to continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note in the letter which has now 
been made public to Dr. Buckingham, there is a reference in 
fact to an already decided upon administrative leave that was 
scheduled to begin July 1, 2014. Mr. Speaker, I’m reading that 
in the letter. I have no idea what the nature is or the cause for 
that administrative leave is, Mr. Speaker, to speak to the hon. 
member’s question. Does he know? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question was whether or not 
the Premier thinks that it’s acceptable that Dr. Buckingham was 
fired. And then he starts talking about the details of his contract. 
The fact is Dr. Buckingham was called into an office, was there 
with police, was fired and escorted off campus. And that’s the 
answer that we get from the Premier of the province? 
 
People in the province and especially people in our university 
campuses are concerned about this. Max FineDay, the president 
of the USSU [University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union], is 
calling the situation deplorable, and he says this: “The 
university is going in the wrong direction.” My question to the 
Premier: does he share this view? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a letter has been made public 
to Dr. Buckingham. And to answer the Leader of the 
Opposition’s question I guess, that he started with in that most 
recent question, that particular letter says the following, and I 



5416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2014 

quote: “This letter is also to advise you . . .” This is from the 
vice-president academic, Brett Fairbairn, to Dr. Buckingham: 
“This letter is also to advise you that the administrative leave 
scheduled to begin July 1, 2014 is hereby revoked.” 
 
We don’t know the nature of that leave. We don’t know the 
nature of the personnel file. Are we concerned, Mr. Speaker, 
with the events there? Are we wanting there to be the freedom 
at least on the academic side, certainly, for those to speak out 
who have concerns about TransformUS at that campus or other 
concerns in other campuses? Yes. Are we also respectful of the 
fact that in institutions like the Government of Saskatchewan 
and like universities, if you’re part of administration, you may 
forfeit a chance to do certain things in terms of being 
outspoken? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not know the details of that administrative 
regime at the University of Saskatchewan. We’re not going to 
interfere with its independence though. We’re concerned about 
the reputation of this institution, all of our post-secondary 
institutions, and that’s why the minister is going to be in 
constant contact with the chairman of the board. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, administrative leave is not 
punishment. It’s not like the probation that the Premier put the 
cabinet secretary on. Administrative leave is what’s built into 
contracts for academics in this situation, where they write a 
book and do what academics do at the completion of a contract. 
And for the Premier to confuse that with some sort of 
punishment that was coming down is absolutely strange, and 
shows a complete misunderstanding of what is going on. 
 
Dr. Buckingham raised concerns. He said that due process must 
be followed and that there must be open debate. For that he was 
fired, taken off campus with police, and banned for life. 
 
Here’s what the Canadian Association of University Teachers 
says about academic freedom as it applies to academic 
administrators, as the Premier was just commenting. They say: 
 

The exercise of academic freedom serves the common 
good of society and should not be constrained by appeals 
to such notions as loyalty to administrative leadership, 
cabinet solidarity, management rights, commitment to a 
team, or speaking with one voice. 
 

That’s the CAUT [Canadian Association of University 
Teachers] policy on academic freedom for administrators such 
as Dr. Buckingham. My question to the Premier, and to the 
minister as well because he was fuzzy on this yesterday in the 
scrum: do they agree? Does the Premier agree with this 
definition by the CAUT on academic freedom for 
administrators? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, does the Leader of the 
Opposition know every single detail around this particular case? 
Does he know the entire file? I don’t, Mr. Speaker. The 
Minister of Advanced Education will not know every single 
detail of a human resources file at the University of 

Saskatchewan. So if he’s looking for some declarator from this 
side of the House about whether this firing was just, we’re 
concerned about it. We want to find out more information. 
 
The minister is in contact with the Chair. We will find that out. 
But we are not prepared, we’re not prepared to take the 
irresponsible leap that the Leader of the Opposition is prepared 
to take, apparently, which is to say out of hand and 
categorically that the actions that the university have taken in 
this regard are fundamentally wrong. They are a source of 
concern. We need to get to the bottom of it. But if the member’s 
got details that we do not have, that other members of the 
House do not have, that has led him to this conclusion that this 
firing was wrong, and perhaps he’s advocating somehow we 
move to overturn it, I’d be interested in hearing that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the responses by the Premier are 
absolutely pathetic. He doesn’t even know what administrative 
leave is, Mr. Speaker. I question if he’s read the letter. It is so 
clear in the letter that Dr. Buckingham was fired for speaking 
out. Anyone that reads the letter will clearly see that, and that 
Premier and that front bench can see that. 
 
The Canadian Association of University Teachers says it 
doesn’t matter how a decision was reached, whether it’s 
consensus, majority vote, or through the exercise of legitimate 
authority; it is unacceptable to have academic freedom 
constrained. It’s unacceptable to have academics muzzled and 
put in a position where they cannot criticize a decision. 
 
Dr. Buckingham raised concerns. He was fired and given a 
lifetime ban from the university. It’s unacceptable, and the 
Premier should stand up and clearly say that. My question to the 
Premier: what is he going to do about this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on this day the minister has 
written to the chairman of the board of the university and is in 
constant contact with Ms. Milburn on this matter and on other 
matters related to TransformUS. He’s going to continue to do 
his work, and we’ll continue to ensure both the independence of 
the university and also work to do our part in ensuring its 
reputation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I will just say quite candidly, and I guess it’s an agreement 
here to disagree, that based on . . . as concerning as the events 
of today are, based on what we know, based on what the 
government knows, what the minister knows, and I dare say 
based on what the member knows, to stand up and categorically 
say that the decision is fundamentally wrong is a little 
premature. 
 
We need to find out all of the details. We are concerned about 
all of these details, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to get to the 
bottom of the situation through the minister and work with the 
university accordingly. 
 
[14:15] 
 



May 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5417 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, getting the details by Twitter is 
hardly staying on top of things. And this Premier and this 
government doesn’t know what’s going on, Mr. Speaker, 
because they have refused, absolutely refused, to ask the tough 
questions over the past months. 
 
They should’ve been asking questions when respected 
academics were coming forward, when the USSU had a motion 
of non-confidence in the TransformUS process. They should 
have been asking the right questions a long time ago, like 
whether or not deans and executive directors are being silenced. 
They should’ve been asking whether or not open debate is 
actually being encouraged on campus. They should’ve been 
asking whether or not due process is being followed. And they 
should’ve been asking whether or not academic freedom is 
being protected and is enshrined at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This government didn’t hesitate to condemn things going on at 
First Nations University of Canada, didn’t hesitate to condemn 
and then speak out of what was going on at the University of 
Regina, but they have been silent and have refused to take a 
stand when it comes to the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to the Premier, and he shouldn’t pass this off to the 
minister. My question to the Premier: why is it that he’ll speak 
out at other universities but he won’t pay attention to what’s 
going on at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, prior to this morning’s event, 
what was going on at the University of Saskatchewan, if we can 
remember it in a calm way, Mr. Speaker, is something called 
TransformUS, which had the concern of some people on 
campus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The principle of TransformUS though, as I understand it, was 
about the long-term sustainability of the institution. It was also 
about that particular institution wanting to make sure it was 
providing for its future reputationally, from a financial 
standpoint, and from a stability standpoint. That process we 
support. 
 
We also want to see those who are opposed to TransformUS, 
and my understanding is that staff at the university were 
certainly involved in the process, that the process itself is the 
source of some accountability on campus. We would want that 
people would be able to speak out with respect to the process, 
including to be critical of it. That’s all the while remembering 
that this is an independent university, Mr. Speaker, and has 
earned its independence. 
 
Now this morning the minister was talking to the chairman. 
Over the last number of days the minister has been talking to 
leadership. I believe late last week the minister met with the 
president of the university. So I know that the Hon. Leader of 
the Opposition is excited about some political points he thinks 
he can score on this file by somehow depicting a disinterest on 
the part of the government. I want to assure the member 
opposite and all of those now heckling over there that we have 

been on top of this from day one, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 
been in constant contact with the leadership of the university. 
We will continue to support the university financially and want 
to see that all public institutions in the province are being 
accountable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier and this government 
have not been on top of what’s going on at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Clear evidence is the Premier comes into 
question period today with lines prepared to slag Dr. 
Buckingham with respect to administrative leave and saying 
somehow this was already in the works. Completely 
unacceptable, completely inappropriate, and shows how closely 
they’re paying attention. 
 
Administrative leave, Mr. Speaker, is built into contracts, as the 
past president of the University of Saskatchewan had at the end 
of his contract. Dr. Buckingham, Mr. Speaker, spoke out 
because he was concerned about the accreditation of the school 
of public health, a school of public health that he helped, with 
colleagues, build to the reputable school that it is today. 
 
It’s significant, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier was not 
concerned about accreditation around the program. Well now 
we have a situation where the executive director is being fired 
and is given a lifetime ban from the university for the school of 
public health. My question to the Premier: does he think this 
will affect the accreditation of the school of public health? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know the answer 
to that question. Neither does the hon. member, whether or not 
a change in personnel is going to affect the accreditation. But 
just in a general sense we are concerned about the accreditation 
of the school of public health. And that is the nature of the 
minister’s letter that he sent this day to the chairman of the 
board of the University of Saskatchewan. We want to get to that 
answer very, very specifically. 
 
I will note that when the Leader of the Opposition has asked 
this exact question here in this Assembly, the minister has been 
able to indicate that, first of all, this is a top priority for the 
government, the accreditation issue. He has sought assurances, 
over and above the letter that went today, prior to the events of 
this morning with respect to Dr. Buckingham. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are very much concerned about the 
accreditation issue. We’ve demonstrated that both in terms of a 
liaison, a constant liaison between the minister and leadership at 
the university, and most recently this morning with a letter 
directed to the chairman of the board. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier continues to ignore 
the concerns that are heard from campus, and we see it by their 
lacklustre response here today in the approach that they’re 
taking. 
 
I asked the Premier, Mr. Speaker, whether or not he thinks it’s 



5418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2014 

appropriate that Dr. Buckingham was fired. I don’t think it’s 
appropriate. He refused to answer. I asked the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, whether or not he thinks academic freedom is 
important on campus and whether the violation of academic 
freedom is something to be concerned about. No concern 
coming from the Premier on that file. I asked the Premier if he’s 
listening to student leaders about whether or not the university 
is going in the wrong direction. No comment on that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Successive university presidents and leaders in this province 
have built up the University of Saskatchewan to the proud 
institution that it is. And when we have a decision, Mr. Speaker, 
that fires an executive director who calls into question academic 
freedom for administrators and all academics on campus, when 
the campus community is in an uproar and concerned about 
this, the president of the university is off meeting with Prime 
Minister Stephen Harper, all this government does is fires off a 
letter, makes no statement on whether or not it’s appropriate to 
fire someone, no statement whether or not academic freedom is 
sacrosanct. My question to the Premier: when will he pull his 
head out of the sand and start to take this seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the more my friend gets 
excited, the more he’s fast and loose with the facts. That has 
been the case in this spring session day after day. Because the 
fact of the matter is that since TransformUS and before 
TransformUS became public, the Minister of Advanced 
Education, this minister and the previous minister, have been 
involved with the University of Saskatchewan. There is a 
regular relationship, a regular liaison, Mr. Speaker, and there 
has been about this particular issue. Now this hasn’t been 
shouted across the floor of the Chamber perhaps when the 
minister meets with the president, as he did last Friday, or 
during the countless conversations that happen via telephone or 
the other meetings that occur. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the Leader of the 
Opposition’s attempts to depict this as something other than it 
is, this is the overall issue: the Government of Saskatchewan is 
very concerned about any reputational risk to any institution, 
Mr. Speaker. Witness the fact that we have invested record 
dollars into this specific post-secondary institution, 
post-secondary institutions in general. Witness the fact that our 
government moved very, very quickly to deal with a number of 
issues left behind by members opposite on the campus, Mr. 
Speaker. On this issue, as in many other issues, there is a great 
deal of talk from members opposite, but when they had the 
chance to actually walk the walk and provide funding and that 
kind of fiscal support to these institutions, they were missing in 
action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Coverage for Surgery 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Laura Cone has joined us today. She has 
endometriosis, a painful condition in which tissue that normally 
lines the inside of the uterus grows outside of the uterus and 
ends up becoming attached to other organs. For Laura, the pain 

has been constant and debilitating. She has had four surgeries. 
The last time was emergency surgery because her internal 
organs were shutting down. 
 
At the recommendation of her specialist from Saskatoon and 
another specialist in Alberta, Laura has booked herself for a 
different kind of surgery in June in Atlanta. With this surgery 
she has less than a 5 per cent chance of any reoccurrence of 
endometriosis. But this government has denied the application 
for out-of-country coverage. To the minister: why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for raising this issue. I don’t have the details of this 
particular case and I won’t be able to speak to them on the floor 
of the Assembly this afternoon. I’d certainly be willing to 
follow up with the critic opposite, or as well I believe the family 
is here this afternoon, to further discuss this. I’m not sure 
whether or not this has gone through the health review process 
that’s been set up, but again I would offer to meet with the 
family to find out more information on this particular case. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — I know Laura will be pleased to have that 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. The government has told Laura they 
won’t cover the Atlanta treatment because they want her to see 
surgeons in Canada. But here’s one of the problems with that. 
She was put on the wait-list for two surgeons in BC [British 
Columbia] only to hear recently that they are no longer taking 
out-of-province patients. The other surgeons have expected 
waits of over two years. 
 
After her request for coverage was denied last summer, Laura 
made the decision to try and wait out on the time it would take 
to see a Canadian surgeon, but that didn’t work. Only a month 
after her claim was denied, Laura was rushed to RUH [Royal 
University Hospital] needing emergency surgery that required a 
team of specialists. 
 
To the minister: Laura’s health and quality of life are in rapid 
decline. Why won’t this government cover this desperately 
needed surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, not knowing all the particulars, but I would certainly 
again as I did in my previous answer, offer to the family and to 
the critic opposite to meet with Laura and to discuss this issue 
with her. 
 
Certainly what we have tried to do as a government is invest in 
a surgical initiative which is premised around three ideas: 
sooner, safer, and smarter surgery. Obviously the sooner part of 
that is very important as well as the safer and the smarter. 
We’ve invested nearly $200 million to date in that, and 
knowing there are still some cases that we need to work on. 
 
I don’t know all the particulars of the case. I don’t know if this 
individual has gone through the health services review 



May 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5419 

committee. I’ll certainly be finding that out. If that has not been 
the case, that is a tribunal that this government has put in place 
to assess these types of situations where coverage is denied, but 
certainly again I would make the offer to meet with the family. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister should 
be aware of this. This was actually reported in The StarPhoenix 
just a few short weeks ago. This government released its 
hot-spotting program to help high-risk and high-use hospital 
users that are not well served by the current system. Laura 
pointed out that she is one of these people. 
 

I’ve been on numerous drugs which qualified for 
exceptional drug status because they were so necessary and 
so expensive. Add this along with the cost of hugely 
numerous emergency room visits, X-rays, ultrasounds, 
colonoscopies, tests, and physician time, I can’t imagine 
the cost I’ve had on this province. 

 
This government should listen to the specialists, save health 
resources, and give a young woman her quality of life back. 
That seems like the common sense and the decent thing to do. 
Laura is in no position to wait any longer. 
 
To the minister: will he listen to the specialists and listen to 
Laura and cover the costs of this desperately needed surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, and the member 
hopefully will forgive me for not remembering what was in The 
StarPhoenix a couple of weeks ago, but this is an issue that I 
will, as I have said before, I will offer today to meet with the 
family, to meet with Laura in this respect. 
 
I think members will know that we have certain criteria for 
when out-of-province coverage is approved and then the next 
step is out-of-country coverage. We’ll work with the specialists 
to determine whether or not all of those options have been 
exhausted before out-of-country is approved. I can’t speak to 
whether or not that has in fact taken place, but certainly through 
what the ministry may know of this issue, what the specialists 
— and of course first-hand from Laura — what they know of 
what has already transpired, I’d be happy to look at the case. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Response to Children’s Advocate Report 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Children’s 
Advocate released a special report today on the tragic death of a 
child in the care of Social Services. His first recommendation is 
that the government develop and implement well-resourced 
early childhood development and poverty reduction strategies. 
And we’ve been calling on this government to take action when 
it comes to a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy. This is 
now the second time in a week that the Children’s Advocate has 
formally called for this. 
 
To the minister: will she finally stop with the excuses and 

finally listen? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We did have a 
chance to speak about the tragedies today, and I understand 
what the child advocate has been saying. I also have had the 
chance to talk to groups like Poverty Costs, and we’ve 
discussed the fact that there’s a 50 per cent reduction in 
percentage of people who live in low income in our province. 
We know that there’s always more to do, Mr. Speaker, but 
that’s between 2006 and 2011, there was a reduction of people 
that are living in low income. Saskatchewan’s actually tied with 
Newfoundland for the second-lowest percentage of people 
living in poverty in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other provinces have strategies and Saskatchewan 
is outperforming all of those other provinces. What we’re trying 
to do is make sure that we put action with our words, Mr. 
Speaker. We want to make sure that we have people that are 
ready to go to school, we have an education system that’s 
available for them, that we are working to support families, Mr. 
Speaker. I know that the issue is something that we tie under 
our growth strategy, Mr. Speaker, and where all the work that 
we’re doing add together to make sure people are pleased to be 
in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate says, and 
I quote, “It is clear that more urgency must be placed on the 
need to move forward on child welfare reform.” He makes a 
total of 18 recommendations. To the minister: will this 
government be implementing all of those recommendations, 
and can we expect to see more urgency on child welfare 
reform? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. We just had an opportunity to talk about the report that 
Bob Pringle brought forward, and I accepted the findings, all 18 
findings that were brought forward. In fact we have the Yorkton 
Tribal Council is with us and the representative from the FSIN 
that know that when we talk together about what we should be 
doing in this province to ensure that our children are safe, it’s 
our common goal. Mr. Speaker, we don’t want tragedies like 
this, and we know that it’s going to take partnerships to ensure 
that we can work together and look at all the issues. 
 
We have things like the child and family agenda, the Hub and 
the COR [centre of responsibility], even things like the social 
impact bond where we can start doing things different, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course our goal is to do things differently, and we 
do accept the findings. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice Committee. 



5420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2014 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Justice 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 139, The Election Amendment Act, 
2014 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
this bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
139, The Election Amendment Act, 2014 and that the bill be 
now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 139 — The Election Amendment Act, 2014 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 139, The Election 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 402 through 406. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 402 to 406. 
 
Members, I am advised that Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor is here for Royal Assent. All please rise. 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 14:35 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several bills which in 
the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 
which bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 108 - The Athletics Commission Act 
Bill No. 106 - The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 
Bill No. 113 - The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur 
les procurations 

Bill No. 114 - The Health Care Directives and Substitute 
Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 
2013 

Bill No. 115 - The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment 
Act, 2013 

Bill No. 101 - The University of Saskatchewan Amendment 
Act, 2013 

Bill No. 118 - The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
Bill No. 119 - The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 
modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 

Bill No. 120 - The Lobbyists Act 
Bill No. 100 - The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013 
Bill No. 116 - The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 

(No. 2) 
Bill No. 117 - The Municipalities Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modification 
corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 122 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2013 
modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation 
des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

Bill No. 112 - The Accounting Profession Act 
Bill No. 129 - The Executive Government Administration Act 
Bill No. 130 - The Executive Government Administration 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 
2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Executive Government 
Administration Act 

Bill No. 123 - The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 
(No. 2) 

Bill No. 124 - The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013/Loi de 
2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 
2013 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 127 - The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 
2013 

Bill No. 125 - The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 



May 14, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5421 

Bill No. 132 - The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment 
Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 133 - The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2014/Loi 
de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du 
Banc de la Reine 

Bill No. 98 - The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les 
garderies d’enfants 

Bill No. 128 - The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 
2013 

Bill No. 136 - The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 
2014 

Bill No. 99 - The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment 
Act, 2013 

Bill No. 134 - The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 
2014 

Bill No. 135 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2014 
Bill No. 139 - The Election Amendment Act, 2014 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 140 -  The Appropriation Act, 2014 (No. 1) 
 
to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:41.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:42.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5409 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5409 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5409 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5409 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5409 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5410 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5410 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5410 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5410 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5410 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5410 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5410 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5411 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5411 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5411 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5411 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5411 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5411 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5411 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5412 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5412 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5412 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5412 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5412 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Alumni Award Winners Donate to Electrical Engineering Technology Program 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5413 
 Honouring Aboriginal and First Nations Veterans 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5413 
 Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5413 
 A Million Acts of Friendship Donation to Regina Humane Society 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5414 
 Fundraising by Kinsmen Club of Saskatoon 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5414 
 Voices of Nature Event 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5414 
 New Democratic Party Policy 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5414 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 University of Saskatchewan Review Process 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5415 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5415 
 Coverage for Surgery 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5418 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5418 
 Response to Children’s Advocate Report 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5419 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5419 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5420 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 139 — The Election Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5420 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5420 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5420 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


