
























































Hansard: November 24, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 17B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2014, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6017 
 November 24, 2014 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. I 
recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I am pleased to rejoin the debate after a great supper and, 
Mr. Speaker, the bill that we were speaking about before we 
broke for supper was of course Bill 162 which is an Act to . . . 
The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act. 
 
And as I was saying at the outset, Mr. Speaker, as I looked at 
the bill itself there was a lot of questions we had, and I was 
articulating the fact that we were very, very interested as an 
opposition to know who had proposed the bill to the 
government. Because obviously on this side of the Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, we know that sometimes the government has a 
lack of imagination and a lot of times their legislative agenda is 
boring unless they get direction from some other source. And 
that’s one of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, we’re asking the 
origins of this particular bill. 
 
The original Act is not as updated as one would expect, but this 
new Act that’s coming forward, as I mentioned, for a quick 
summary for those who may have missed this afternoon, the bill 
makes it clear and makes it easier for those who are owed 
money to collect on these debts. The government introduced 
The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act two years ago, and it 
is now introducing amendments that makes it easier for debts to 
be collected. It allows wages now to be garnisheed for a longer 
period of time, from one year to two years, and the bill 
simplifies the process for seizing a bank account, Mr. Speaker. 
Section 27 makes it easier for sheriffs to seize land being sold 
by those owing money, and section 30 creates a director of 
sheriffs appointment by the minister, who will develop the new 
forms for the Act and of course takes all other responsibilities to 
be determined by the minister. 
 
So that’s kind of a quick snapshot of what the bill’s all about. 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government 
actually issued a press release, and I want to read it in for the 
record because the press release really belies my point in terms 
of how they try and hide some of these things. And the press 
release reads as follows: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan is moving to enhance 
the province’s debt collection law. These amendments will 
strengthen the present system and improve the seizure and 
sale of assets [Mr. Speaker]. 
 
Proclaimed more than two years ago, The Enforcement of 
Money Judgments Act streamlined the process for a person 
to collect money from another person, increasing the 
chances of . . . [success] on a court judgment. It was the 

first major update to the legislation in over five decades. 
 
So one of the things I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, it’s been 
five decades since this Act has been looked at, and one would 
assume that the Act would be more responsive to the current 
circumstances that many young families find themselves in. 
And obviously as a result of looking at the press release, Mr. 
Speaker, once again we see, as a result of the government’s 
inability to govern correctly, we’re seeing that they have to 
come back to a number of Acts later, a couple years later, to 
make improvements, to make rule changes. And that’s one of 
the reasons and the purposes that we, as the opposition, have to 
make sure that we scrutinize these bills. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s really important to 
explain to some of the people that may be watching, the 
purpose of the Assembly is to see what the government’s 
agenda is in terms of introducing new laws and new bills. And 
the bill that we’re discussing today, Bill 162, really deals with 
people that are owed money and how the government wishes to 
position those that are owed money to be able to collect that 
money sooner and quicker. They’re taking away a lot of what I 
think is probably proper form and proper process to allow those 
that owe money to be able to see what their rights are, what 
their options are, what their circumstances might involve, and 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, give them an equal footing as to how 
they could become part of the solution as opposed to being 
guilty as charged right from the start according to this Act, and 
thereby they don’t have the opportunity to explain their 
situations properly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the bill itself as I mentioned talks about 
garnisheeing salaries and seizing of property. Now we hope that 
the judicial system is fair and accountable and transparent, 
which we know it always is and always should be, but we 
wonder some days as to what kind of Act or Acts that the 
Saskatchewan Party government puts in front of them as laws. 
 
And many time the judges in the courts follow what is the 
penalty prescribed in law as per the bills that are being 
introduced in this Assembly. So many times judges and those in 
the legal profession might not like a certain Act. They might not 
. . . might think it may be punitive in nature. They might not 
like . . . It may be extreme in terms of what, how they’re trying 
to deal with the problem. And I suspect that sometimes if we 
look at, get opinions from some of the legal firms in the 
province, that they look at this bill and one would automatically 
instinctively think, well where is the debtor’s rights? Where is 
the person that owes money, where’s their opportunity to argue 
the cost of a sheriff’s bill or the cost of a sheriff’s office bill or 
that proper process has been followed? These are some of the 
questions that we have to ask on this particular bill because 
there’s all kinds of ramifications for this particular bill when 
you see how the government has conferred certain powers to, 
not only the sheriff, but to their offices as well. 
 
So the minister has a lot of leeway. The minister has a lot of 
control of the rules and regulations. The minister can direct a 
sheriff what to do. Like there’s a lot of . . . It just reeks of 
political interference potential, Mr. Speaker. And this is the 
reason why we have to be very careful, and the people of 
Saskatchewan know exactly what are our concerns about this 



6018 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

particular bill. 
 
Now I know a lot of people in the province of Saskatchewan 
purchase a lot of things from different countries, and naturally 
the States are our natural trading partner. We have a lot of 
exchange of goods and services across the border. And many 
times as you may know there are people that get themselves 
involved with contracts or purchasing of goods and services 
from the States, and then they get into this arrangement. Now 
how does this bill affect that arrangement in the sense that if 
you are getting product from the States and all of a sudden the 
product stops coming to your doorstep but the bills keep 
arriving, and then obviously since you’ve signed some 
documentation somewhere and then you don’t pay for the 
product that you’re not receiving, how does that affect this 
particular bill? Or do you have an opportunity for the sheriff to 
hear your side of the argument? So it’s really important, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it’s interprovincial or inter-country, how the 
people that are owing this debt are treated. 
 
That’s one of the most important lessons, you know, that we 
ought to learn. Because if you follow the proper process, then 
you should have the right to be able to defend yourself. But 
what it doesn’t . . . It doesn’t show any of that information here 
as to how somebody could appeal a ruling by the sheriff’s office 
or even appeal a ruling by the judge. Because, Mr. Speaker, as I 
mentioned, there are so many different deals that are going on 
out there that it’s very difficult to see who signed what 
documentation, what was the agreement, and what were the 
terms of the agreement, product versus the cost of the product, 
and making sure that the person buying the product gets the 
product and the person that’s supplying the product gets paid. 
 
And generally some of these arrangements don’t cause too 
many problems, but there are problems out there. I know a 
number of cases where families are getting billed on a regular 
basis as a result of them signing up for a product from a 
different province or a different country, and in this case the US 
[United States], and they never get their product. And yet the 
bill keeps coming through the mail and keeps collecting 
interest, and suddenly these families are really in some dire 
straits. So I think some of those issues have to be explained, and 
some of the process on how you protect yourself against claims 
that may not be yours to deal with. So I think it’s important that 
process be understood as well. 
 
So all throughout this particular bill, we see a lot of issues that 
need to be addressed, a lot of problems that we need to try and 
anticipate, a lot of questions that we have, we have to kind of 
get answers for. And I know that all my colleagues are going to 
have an opportunity to look at this bill, but at the outset we’re 
just shocked at the bill itself in terms of how many powers are 
being conferred to the office of the sheriff and how many 
powers that the minister has in determining how these bills will 
be collected and how they will be assessed against some of the 
people being impacted by this bill. 
 
So this issue and this particular bill is rife with problems and 
challenges from our perspective that really puts those that owe 
money at a distinct disadvantage versus those that are owed 
money. So we have to make sure that the process is fair. 
 
We spoke about the number of different avenues that some of 

the working families and children suffer through, and it’s 
obviously something that we are very close to as we listen to 
many of the stories and we talk about some of the elders’ care. 
And this is a good example of how some of the elders 
themselves are subjected to abuse and are also subjected to 
fraud. And they end up paying a lot of money to different 
people that are trying to take advantage of them and their 
goodwill, and sometimes they don’t understand some of the 
deals that they’re getting into.  
 
What are some of their options to fight back? And this is one of 
the things that’s really, really important as we look at the whole 
issue of the health care system and how we treat our seniors. 
And we know that in the news, there’s been many occasions 
and many times where a lot of the seniors have come to the 
media and have complained about the fact that they have been 
defrauded. And they keep getting these bills and they never get 
their product or they never get any kind of service, and yet they 
have to keep continuing paying for these bills. 
 
Where are their rights? Where’s their opportunity for their 
defence? Where is their support when on many avenues that 
they have indeed been defrauded and they unknowingly signed 
documentation? And one can’t blame a senior citizen, you 
know, for that because many times, you know, they certainly 
get confused. They get convinced. And, Mr. Speaker, we know 
a lot of evidence. We see a lot of evidence and we see a lot of 
cases of different elders being abused, being taken advantage 
of, and certainly being coerced into signing certain agreement 
that they have no idea that they’re signing. 
 
These are some of things that we think, from our perspective, is 
very, very important that we pay attention to and raise the issue, 
raise the issue with the government, because not all the time 
that people cannot pay back these bills are they, you know, 
they’re not always the bad people in this, you know, in this 
arrangement. They have to have the opportunity to defend 
themselves. And all of a sudden when this bill starts talking 
about garnisheeing of salaries and seizure of assets, it really 
begins to . . . one begins to question where the Sask Party’s 
priorities are. 
 
So all in all, on this Bill 162, as I mentioned, we have a lot of 
questions. We’re going to debate this bill vigorously. We’re 
going to continue arguing the point. And, Mr. Speaker, we still 
don’t know who’s advocating for this bill from the Sask Party 
perspective. We have no idea who the interest behind the Sask 
Party government is, but we would encourage them to forward 
that answer to us so we know what the self-interest of these 
individuals or this individual is. And, Mr. Speaker, once we 
know who it is, then we need to make sure the people of 
Saskatchewan hear that loud and clear that they’re the ones who 
are asking for the measures being pointed out in Bill 162. 
 
So we have a few more comments on that, then I’m wrapping 
up this particular bill. But again I would point out to people if 
they have any concerns on this bill, any advice for the 
opposition, any particular examples, any particular examples, 
we would certainly be pleased to get that information from the 
general public. Anybody in the legal profession that do have 
some concerns, we would also ask them to come forward and 
give us some advice and show us some of the weaknesses of 
this bill because we know that there are many. 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6019 

So one of the most important things to point out today is that 
we’ve got to have good, thorough debate on this. We’ve got to 
expose the Saskatchewan Party government to the public, that 
they’re proposing these deals. And we need to know who is 
pushing their buttons or pulling their strings on that side to 
make sure some of the measures in this bill that are hard hitting 
get used to their advantage against the many people of 
Saskatchewan that are struggling to make ends meet and many 
seniors that may sign some of the agreements that they’ve 
signed with no recourse and no support for them, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s not fair at all. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this 
particular bill, so I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 
162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[19:15] 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 159 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 159 — The 
Family Farm Credit Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise on this bill, No. 159, An Act to repeal The 
Family Farm Credit Act. It’s a short Act, but it’s one of a lot of 
interest, and I think people tuning in tonight may find this of 
interest. I mean it’s one of the ones that in fact, it basically says, 
and I’ll read the gist of it, “The Family Farm Credit Act is 
repealed.” But there’s a lot more to it than that, and I think that 
when we have some time to really think about and reflect on 
The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act, its history, its intent, we 
have a lot to say of it. 
 
You know, and I know the members opposite think of this as a 
bit of a holy ground, that only they can talk about the family 
farm, but I can tell you that I come from a family farm. We 
have a very proud history out in Mortlach where my brother 
still farms the family farm. It’s been in the family for over 100 
years, and we have a great connection. You know, they say, Mr. 
Speaker, that you can take the kid off the farm, but you can’t 
take the farm out of the kid. 
 
And so it’s always interesting to take a look back at The Family 
Farm Credit Act. And I’ll just take a minute, and I’d like to read 
what it is that the intent, the purpose of the Act at the time was. 
And I have a question for the minister. Has this really changed? 

The purpose of the Act, An Act to provide Assistance to 
Farmers in the Establishment and Development of Family 
Farms as Economic Farm Units, we’ll talk about this over the 
next little while, about what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And while I represent downtown Saskatoon, probably one of 
the most urban ridings that we have in the province, we still are 
and we still believe and we still feel this strong connection to 
the family farm. But in many ways it is changing, and I’ll talk a 
little bit about that. 
 
But the purpose of the Act and the title of the Act is An Act to 
provide Assistance to Farmers in the Establishment and 
Development of Family Farms as Economic Farm Units. 
 

The purpose of this Act is to make long term credit 
available to farmers to assist in the establishment and 
development of family farms as economic farm units and 
in the transfer of family farms from members of one 
generation to members of a later generation and to assist in 
the enlargement or conversion of family farms that are 
uneconomic farm units into economic farm units. 

 
And so it has a lot to it actually. It’s about the intergenerational 
transfer, but it’s also, how do we assist in making family farms 
that were, in the ’70s, uneconomic into economic farm units? 
And that can be either enlarge them — help them become 
bigger in size — or convert them into some other purpose that 
would be more appropriate. 
 
So I think this is important. But you know, when I look at the 
Act, and when I look at and I’ll talk about the minister’s 
comments, I think about this government that takes a lot of 
pride in being one from the country. And clearly they have the 
seats in rural Saskatchewan, but if this is the best work they can 
do in the year before the election . . . This is the only piece of 
legislation they have for agriculture. And that is what is on the 
table right now: the only piece of legislation that deals with 
agriculture and all the issues that are happening out in rural 
Saskatchewan and farms that are facing all sorts of issues. I 
know we hear this in the House, that they’ll talk about issues 
that we should be raising, but here we have only one piece of 
legislation that’s one line long, and that is to repeal The Family 
Farm Credit Act. 
 
That’s the best they can come up with? That’s the very best this 
government can come up for rural Saskatchewan when it comes 
to agricultural policy? Is that what’s happening over in the 
agricultural ministry right now, this one piece of legislation? Is 
this the deal that they’ve come up with, one piece of 
legislation? 
 
Many members spoke. Many members from their side and I 
know from our side talked about agricultural issues. And I’ve 
got to tell you, our critic, our critic has raised issues about rural 
Saskatchewan agriculture. And they can laugh because they 
think they own it, they own it. 
 
But I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, if this is the best they can 
do, this is the very best that they can do, one piece of legislation 
that’s not even . . . It’s three lines long when you have the short 
title, then you say repealed, and when it comes into force. 
That’s the whole thing of agricultural policy for the 



6020 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

Saskatchewan Party in the year before an election? In the year 
before an election, this is their piece of legislation? 
 
We have talked a lot about how their legislative agenda is pretty 
thin, but the thinnest, the very thinnest, the very thinnest is in 
agriculture. And I would like to see and I hope that we see in 
the days ahead, because we are in that session, the time of the 
session when they are supposed to be bringing forward their 
best ideas so that we can talk about it and talk to the 
stakeholders . . . But if this is all they have, if this is all they 
have for agriculture, it’s a pretty sad day. 
 
I’d like to take a minute, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the 
minister’s speech. And he rose on November 18th, just a few 
days ago, and he talked about The Family Farm Credit Repeal 
Act. And all he says is it “. . . needs to be repealed. This Act has 
long since become redundant. The Family Farm Credit Act was 
enacted in February of 1979.” 
 
He talks about the long-term credit being “. . . available for the 
establishment and development of family farms,” and the 
purpose of intergenerational transfer. He talks about the 
Co-operative Trust Company of Canada and its role in this, and 
how this had been raised by the Ministry of Finance in April of 
2012 and again December 2013 that they were not aware of any 
present securities or anything really happening. 
 
So they consulted with agencies. I would be curious to know 
what those agencies were and what were the circumstances. 
Apparently there were no issues identified, so I’m not sure if 
they just talked solely about the credit, the loan aspect of it. Or 
did they talk about the intergenerational transfer aspect of it? I 
think that’s an important piece to be talking about. Did they talk 
about that at all with this group that they consulted with? That 
would be of interest. 
 
Did they talk about how they can make farming more 
economic? Actually this is an interesting one because, you 
know, farming in the last few years has been doing well, so 
maybe they’ve just taken it and said that there’s no need 
anymore to talk about this any further. But I know that there are 
always challenges, and if it’s the role of government and if this 
side is saying, if the government side is saying that it’s basically 
done, that would be of interest. 
 
So I would be curious to know, who did they consult with? 
What were the purposes of the consultations? How did it go? 
What were some of the issues raised, and was anything left on 
the floor because they really didn’t want to talk about that? 
 
He did give credit. He did talk about the Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development had administered 
this Act, and then there was a period of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs took over this. Then it went to Justice and 
then back to Agriculture in 2007 and ’08, and the last payments 
were in ’94. 
 
Interestingly though when I look at the Act, I see that there 
were amendments, and I think about when those amendments 
happened. They were in ’88-89, ’89-90. And of course if we 
remember those times, those were not great times in terms of 
. . . The interest rates I think were still fairly high, and it was 
still a challenge for pretty much everybody to be talking about 

credit and making sure that loans were being paid off and that 
type of thing. 
 
Again in 2004, and I think that was the time when we had the 
look at the farm land ownership legislation and all of that, so 
whether there were changes then. And again apparently it 
looked like just even earlier there were still more amendments. 
So I don’t know if the Act was so dormant, but we were still, 
the government was still amending it or amending the 
regulations that go along with it. 
 
You know, he does talk about the purpose, “. . . that this 
redundant Act be repealed from the records of the legislature. 
As far as is possible, records should be kept clear of 
redundancies.” Therefore he moves that the repeal Act be read a 
second time. And fair enough. 
 
But I think that I would have liked him to say . . . What have 
they done in place of this legislation? What are we talking about 
in terms of intergenerational transfer? What are we talking 
about in terms of making sure farms are economical and that 
type of thing? What’s happening in rural Saskatchewan? I think 
that this is the floor; this is the place to talk about those kind of 
things. And if the best that they can really say is that everything 
is okay, there’s not going to be any legislation, really for this 
government I think that prides itself on its connection with rural 
Saskatchewan, that when they have no legislation to speak of 
other than this one piece, that we’ll have lots of questions about 
that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you’re aware that this year is 
the International Year of Family Farming. This is an article that, 
when I was doing a bit of research on this . . . This is from 
Yorkton, Yorkton This Week, and the writer, “Agriculture This 
Week,” Calvin Daniels I think really raises some interesting 
thoughts and really poses some things that I think we should be 
thinking about. 
 
Because in rural Saskatchewan, we look back on the history of 
rural Saskatchewan and the changes that have happened, 
whether we talk about the one-room schoolhouse and the fact 
that basically if you had 12 children from four different 
families, you were able to have one school, and so schoolhouses 
were springing up all over the place. And of course with the 
development of better transportation, the fact that people 
expected more from their schools, schools began to consolidate. 
Rural electrification: what a change that happened in rural 
Saskatchewan. All of those things. 
 
Really Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan goes through a lot of 
changes, and we’re seeing that now with the size of family 
farms. And what does that mean? What does that look like? 
And as I said to you, Mr. Speaker, I grew up on a family farm. 
Actually we had a family farm, but we were one of the town 
kids. So we were one of that generation where we lived in town, 
but we still had the family farm just a few miles out of town. 
 
Things change. Things change, but is it always for the better? 
Sometimes should we be looking back at how we make sure the 
intergenerational transfer can happen? It’s happened for three 
generations in our family, but will it happen for a fourth? We’re 
not sure, and that will be something that will be of interest as 
we watch over the next few years as my brother becomes older 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6021 

and starts to think about other things that he’d like to do. What 
happens then? 
 
So this was an interesting column, and I’d like to talk about it 
because it really does fit into the idea of economic farm units 
and about intergenerational transfer. And he goes, and I quote: 
 

It is not something I suspect most in Saskatchewan are 
aware of, but the United Nations has declared 2014 the 
International Year of Family Farming. 
 
There is obviously a chasm forming in farming, with the 
so-called corporate farm on one side, and the so-called 
family farm on the other. 
 
The problem, of course, is clearly defining which side of 
the chasm any particular farm falls. 

 
And I think that’s true as we see how people make their farms 
economic, how it works for any particular family and in the 
products they produce, what works better, what kind of 
economic unit works best for them. So it’s all about definition, 
and it’s all about how we make things work in our 
communities. 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

It is simple enough if a multinational firm holds title to a 
farm to toss it on the corporate side, the side which carries 
with it the shadow of doom for many people these days. 
 
If the farm is small, and owned by Bill and Margaret who 
farmed it for 40 years, it’s a family farm, and in the 
spin-doctored world we live in, that makes what they do 
somehow better than the corporate-held farm down the 
road. 

 
And that’s sort of . . . that happen a lot, doesn’t it, where we 
have these fond memories, these sentimental memories of 
farming. 
 
[19:30] 
 
But somehow we’ve got to come to terms with what is a family 
farm, what is a corporate farm, and we’ve got to call a spade a 
spade. I know we would like to hang on to those past ideas or 
values we’ve had about family farms, but are we really talking 
about the same beast? And I think that we have a lot of thoughts 
on that. 
 
And he asks: 
 

But what happens when a family farm grows, and Uncle 
Stan and his two sons take a share of the operation, and the 
dentist Phil who married Bill and Margaret’s only daughter 
buys in. He’ll never ride a combine, but he can invest and 
have a say in that fashion. 

 
So the only solution to keep everyone’s investments and 
returns straight, does the farm then become corporate? 
 
It gets even more difficult when you look at something like 
the hog sector where not so long ago communities on the 

Canadian Prairies built barns. 
 
And so you go, talk about farm investors or corporate farmers, 
and is there a difference? 
 
So on the international level, and I quote: 
 

On an international basis, it is easier to grasp why the 
United Nations holds interest in the idea of family farms. 
 
In many countries of the world, it is still very small farm 
holdings operated by a single family unit which produce 
the food. 
 
Following the UN proclamation of the year, the Directorate 
General for Agriculture and Rural Development of the 
European Commission organized the international 
conference [organized this conference] “Family farming: A 
dialogue towards more sustainable and resilient farming in 
Europe and the world.” 

 
And so he goes on, talks about that there are 500 million family 
farmers all over the world feeding humanity, making up 80 per 
cent of all farms, although a nice, succinct definition of the 
family farm is missing. So that it’s one that we wrestle with, 
isn’t it, Mr. Speaker? You know, 500 million family farmers all 
over the world feeding humanity, making up 80 per cent of all 
the farms. “That said, small farms and the idea of 
family-operated generally seems to go hand-in-hand.” And so 
the trend in North America is to massive farms while the ones 
in Europe and the rest of the world are much smaller in terms of 
farm size. 
 
He talks about the European Union average farm size is about 
14 hectares and about 70 per cent are under 5 hectares and only 
3 per cent are larger than 100 hectares. So if you think about 
that compared to North America, that’s a huge, huge difference. 
 
So it’s interesting how family farms evolve, and you know, 
rural areas in Saskatchewan, you may see them growing larger. 
And actually there’s some census stats that I will get to in a 
minute talking about how the size of family farms are growing 
here in Saskatchewan, but there’s a niche of farms that are 
staying quite small because they found other ways to be 
innovative and meet the needs of agriculture production. And I 
think that’s very important. 
 
So it talks about, and it’s interesting that the writer, Calvin 
Daniels, talks about many innovations which move farming 
forward came from those on small holdings. And he talks about 
“Seager Wheeler made huge strides in breeding wheat in 
Saskatchewan in the early 1900s, and [he] was a homesteader.” 
And this is so true. “Farming by its nature breeds innovation.” 
There are hurdles to be overcome “and at times there are no 
available options or the money to purchase them if they existed, 
so farmers have learned to be inventors.” So he talks about 
these kind of things and I think this is, this is really, really 
important. 
 
And so you know, he talks about: 
 

And this is where the debate about family farms always 
muddies for me. There seems an assumption because the 



6022 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

owner isn’t getting his hands dirty seeding the crop that he 
will automatically not care about the long-term viability of 
the farm. 
 
And hand-in-hand [with that], whoever is hired to do the 
work will care little for the farm either. 

 
And he talks about how that’s a questionable assumption to 
make, and I think that’s fair. 
 
I think he raises a really important point about what we think 
about the family farm. I think in many ways the family farm 
holds a very romantic, sentimental feeling for many of us 
because so many of us grew up on the farm, are connected to 
the farm. 
 
You know, in our case there was a family of eight, but the farm 
wasn’t large enough for eight of us to stay there and to make a 
living. So seven of us moved on. Seven of us went on to do all 
sorts of work, whether it’s in social work or whether it’s in 
mining, uranium mining in fact, whether it’s in my work as a 
teacher first and now as a politician, whether you’re a carpenter, 
whether you’re a nurse. So many people from Saskatchewan 
farms have moved on but still feel very connected to the family 
farm. 
 
But we understand the nature of change, that things have 
changed. Now in our case, our case, interestingly, interestingly, 
you know, my brother runs an organic farm and very proud of 
it, and has been for about 15, 20 years now and is doing very 
well, feeling very connected with his work as a farmer, in terms 
of marketing, looking after the land. And he’s doing very well. 
He’s been very fortunate that way. He’s been very fortunate that 
way. And so in terms of making the farm economic, it’s been 
very, very good. 
 
But the question will arise about the intergenerational transfer. 
This is something I would’ve liked to have heard more from the 
minister in terms of. 
 
So if he’s repealing this, fair enough. Legislation every once in 
a while needs to be repealed, and we move on to something 
else. But what takes its place? Those key issues that were 
present in the ’70s about the cost of running a farm, the 
economics of running a farm, the cost of borrowing, all of that 
were a big issue in the ’70s. The size of the farm was also 
changing, and that’s a big issue, but also the intergenerational 
transfer. 
 
So in that Calvin Daniels goes on and closes, says: 
 

In the end there is no doubt small holdings farms operated 
by a single family remain important to localized food 
production in most countries of the world. 
 
But for large grain exporting countries like Canada, those 
small farms have been disappearing since the end of the 
First World War, and when a trend is so long entrenched, it 
is for a reason. 
 
Bigger has been found to be better here, and while I 
applaud the UN for keeping talk of family farms around 
the world at the forefront, we have likely outgrown that 

side of farming. 
 
And so I’m wondering, is this where this government really is 
at, at the end of the family farm? And the minister wasn’t clear 
on that, and it would be interesting to have that discussion. And 
I’m sure when we get to questions, that will be the discussion. 
 
And you know, I looked . . . There was an article in The Globe 
and Mail, “Do corporate buyouts signal the end of the family 
farm?” And he talks about how this is really becoming more 
and more the thing. And we’ll talk a little bit about this in terms 
of some of the things that are happening, but it seems to be, 
with the price of land, that this is becoming more and more the 
issue and a thing that’s happening. 
 
It starts out “Larry Spratt,” and I’ll quote: 
 

Larry Spratt was combining with his father on their grain 
farm near Melfort, Sask. last November when a car pulled 
up along a nearby highway. 
 
Out jumped Wally Johnston, a former Ontario farmer and 
now a vice-president at Bonnefield Financial, a 
Toronto-based investment firm. Mr. Johnston waved the 
Spratts over for a chat. “He said he was touring around 
Saskatchewan trying to meet farmers, and we talked to him 
for a while,” Mr. Spratt recalls. 

 
Mr. Johnston explained that Bonnefield was looking to buy 
farmland for investors and then lease it back to farmers to 
operate. The Spratts had heard that pitch before. They 
knew several farmers who had signed up with other 
investment companies and land prices in the area had been 
soaring as a result. Some farms were going for as much as 
$1,200 an acre, more than double the price in other parts of 
the province. 

 
Now this is from 2010, and we’ll talk in a few minutes about 
what it seems the price of farm land is here now. And it’s an 
interesting dilemma that we have such good farm land, but 
because in some ways it’s affordable, it’s become an interest to 
other people around the world. 
 
It goes on to talk about: 
 

Similar deals are being struck around the world in what has 
become an unprecedented rush by global investment funds 
to buy farmland. By some estimates these funds have sunk 
has much as $20 billion (U.S.) into these acquisitions. Last 
year alone they bought 111 million acres of farmland, a 
tenfold increase from previous years. 

 
It goes on to talk about how: 
 

Saskatchewan has become one of the new frontiers in this 
global trend. The province has some of the most 
productive, and least expensive, farmland in the world. But 
restrictive ownership rules have largely kept out foreigners, 
pension funds and publicly traded companies. [But] 
pressure is mounting inside and outside Canada to change 
the rules and open up the province. 

 
And now we, you know, and we’ve had the discussion about the 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6023 

Canadian pension fund, CPP [Canada Pension Plan] buying 
farm land and what happens with that. And so we have some 
. . . This is an interesting discussion here. It goes on to talk 
about: 
 

Today, investment funds at places as diverse as the 
Mormon Church, ManuLife Financial Corp. and the Dallas 
police department are pouring billions of dollars into 
farmland. In Canada, the CPP Investment Board is looking 
at investing in farmland and four companies are already 
snapping up thousands of acres . . . 

 
And we know that in fact CPP has bought farm land, I believe, 
in Saskatchewan. So it goes on and to talk about what’s 
happening with farm land. And so it’s of interest that we see 
this bill before us. In the minister’s speech, it didn’t really talk 
about what’s happening in the world. It says it’s redundant. 
We’re going to get it off the books. It sounds a bit like the 
statutes Act that I was talking about last week. And so we have 
some questions here about this, you know. 
 
But as I was saying, that it is interesting when we talk about the 
size of farms in Saskatchewan. And this is from 2011, and so it 
is about three years out of date, but the 2000 census of 
agriculture recorded that there were 36,952 Saskatchewan 
census farms as of May 10th, 2011, a decline of 16.6 per cent 
from 44,329 census farms as of May 15th, 2006. So this 
government has seen a decline of almost 17 per cent of farms in 
Saskatchewan: farm units, economic units. And we know that 
many of these are actually getting bigger. And so we don’t 
know what the number is today. 
 
And maybe the minister, when we go into committee at some 
point, will tell us what the number of farms were in 2014. But 
we know it declined from 44,329, May 15th, 2006, to 36,952 in 
2011. And that’s 16.6 per cent. We know of the 37,000 farms, 
about 16,600 were larger than 1,120 acres, and we know that 
about 6,700 were less than 240 acres. And so you can see how 
the numbers are breaking out. And it’s quite interesting here 
that actually the size of farms that decreased the most were the 
larger ones, the ones that were 1,600 acres or more to 2,200 
acres. That had a big decrease. That was 23.4 per cent. So it 
seemed that you had to be really large or . . . The next size 
down, a quarter of those were snapped up. The number of farms 
that were in the 760 to 2,239 acres decreased by 23.4 per cent, 
almost a quarter — so that’s something else. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Whereas the large farms, the very large farms, and there’s, 
according to the census, 8,357 of them, and that would be ones 
with more than 14 quarters or more than 2,239 acres, increased 
slightly. But of course when that happens, you know, it’s a 
matter of numbers, isn’t it, Mr. Speaker? Because it takes a lot 
to make a big farm much bigger because they’re already big. 
When they’re gobbling up, when they’re gobbling up the big 
ones, they have to really gobble up a lot to make themselves 
bigger. It’s like the whale issue, right? How much bigger can 
you make a whale, right? 
 
But you know, I do find it interesting, I do find it interesting 
that on the chart, the chart really demonstrates that the ones that 
were smaller were the ones that were not seeing the huge 

changes, and obviously because there are not that many of them 
anymore. 
 
But this is something, this is something that will . . . And I don’t 
know if people are aware of this, that there’s actually, that there 
is at least a 17 per cent change. Now it would be interesting to 
see what the latest stats are. And of course this is something that 
happens every five years. And of course I don’t know whether 
this is something that the Ministry of Agriculture does or is it 
something that StatsCan does. And if it’s StatsCan, we won’t 
know whether or how accurate these stats are because of course 
with the whole slashing of staff at StatsCan, whether that will 
impact on these statistics at all. But it will be interesting to 
know, if this continues to be the trend, that we’ll actually see 
the number of farms decrease in such staggering numbers. The 
size of farms will get larger, but the number of farm units are 
actually going down in quite significant. 
 
Now we had talked about in that earlier story about the price of 
farm land. And I think it’d be of interest to people at home to 
talk about what is happening here in Saskatchewan with the fact 
that while the farms are disappearing, that actually in many 
ways the price of farm land is increasing and now from my 
understanding is levelling off. But we understand that in May, 
and this is from a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 
news story in May, that farm land values shot up in 
Saskatchewan between January 1st of 2013 and December 31st 
of the same year. And while nationally farm land prices went up 
by 22 per cent, and that’s a significant increase, 22 per cent, that 
in Saskatchewan it was nearly 30 per cent, 28.5 per cent in that 
one year alone. And Farm Credit Canada told CBC news that 
it’s actually the largest increase they’ve seen since they’ve been 
doing their study for the past 20 years. 
 
And so it’s really something to see that in that one year that you 
could see such a significant increase. And as I was saying 
earlier that, you know, the reason that Saskatchewan is looking 
more and more like the place to invest is because the land is so 
good, but it was so much more affordable. But this is really the 
changes that we’re seeing. 
 
Now apparently what happened in the spring were some of the 
changes in some of the regulations that happened, and one of 
the regulations then allowed for non-Saskatchewan residents 
and institutional buyers such as investment groups or funds like 
the Canada Pension Plan. As I was saying, in that Globe and 
Mail article from 2010, this was the issue that was starting to 
rise was that large groups or corporations were looking for 
places to invest and to buy, such as CPP, and this is something 
that they saw. 
 
Now some people were saying they were going to see some 
levelling off, that that was a bit of a shock, but the prices would 
level off. And you know, another factor as the marketplace 
stabilized, of course, was the commodity prices dropping off. 
But anyways, they did go up and people were taking advantage 
of it. And there’s numerous stories about, you know, farmers 
would say that this is the time, if they were thinking of retiring, 
that they should retire. 
 
Then we had the story on October 1st, just a couple of months 
ago, that “Despite prices rising as much as 10 per cent . . . [so it 
was almost 30 per cent in 2013 and then 10 per cent in this 



6024 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

year] farmland is still a deal compared to the rest of Canada” — 
in many ways, I might add, Mr. Speaker. “Farmland [now] in 
Saskatchewan is listed for around $1,800 per acre in the 
northwest and up to $2,200 an acre in the central west region, 
according to Re/Max Market Trends Farm Edition 2014 . . .” 
 
Then they were talking about, you know, land in southern 
Alberta. Apparently tile drained land sold for as much as 
$10,000 per acre, which represents a 20 per cent increase there 
over the past year. 
 
It goes on and some of the people in the article talk about how 
now that “You are not seeing people coming in and buying 
large tracts of land. They are only buying a few quarter sections 
instead of the many quarter sections.” But the sections are 
moving along. 
 
But he talks about how we have doubled, at least in price, in the 
last five or six years. “A thousand dollars an acre was big 
money five years ago.” And this is Wally Lorenz, and that’s no 
stranger to us, Mr. Speaker. But now he’s working for Re/Max 
of Battlefords. But he goes on, and I quote, “We have at least 
doubled (in price) over the last five or six years. A thousand 
dollars an acre was big money five years ago. Now there is 
some selling for $2,200 to $2,400 (per acre).” 
 
So it’s something to say and this is something that we have to 
think about in terms of how does that relate to the original 
intent of the bill, The Family Farm Credit Act. And you know, 
in the ’70s, when I think about some of the legislation that was 
produced during that period of time, some of it was so 
innovative, so visionary when we talk about the fact that, you 
know, Sask Housing was developed at that time to meet the 
needs of a growing population in Saskatchewan. And here was 
one to talk about how the farms were facing real challenge. 
 
As I said in terms of The Family Farm Credit Act, was to make 
long-term credit available to farmers and to establish the 
development of family farms, you know, as economic farm 
units, and in the transfer of family farms from members of one 
generation to members of a later generation and to assist in the 
enlargement or conversion of family farms that are uneconomic 
farm units into economic farm units. So even in this Act, it 
recognized that family farms were growing, and they continued 
to grow. And that’s the reality. 
 
And as I was talking about the article by Calvin Daniels, you 
know, and he does describe the chasm between those with 
sentimental recollections of, you know, family farm and a home 
on every half section, and in many ways that has not become 
the way of production in Saskatchewan. It’s not the way that so 
many are used to now. And while that can be the way in other 
parts of the country or other parts of the world . . . And as the 
article quoted, there’s some 500 million family farmers or 
family farm units in the world, feeding the world. 
 
I think that we would have really liked to have heard more. We 
would have liked to have heard a lot more from the minister 
about the issues that The Family Farm Credit Act set out to 
address. It set out to address intergenerational transfer. It set out 
to address how do you make uneconomic units into economic 
units and how do you address the cost of borrowing. Now it 
may be right now that the issue of cost of borrowing is not an 

issue and of course, you know, we often hear that we are 
fortunate that the cost of borrowing is reasonable. In fact, some 
would argue that we’re living in very fortunate times because 
the interest rates are so low. But how long will they be in that 
position? We don’t know. 
 
And people are even, in talking about what the impact of some 
of the change is, and I would think this government is wrestling 
with this at treasury board and their mid-term reports: what is 
the impact of a lower Canadian dollar, a lower price for 
commodities? What is that impact for Saskatchewan? What 
does it mean for Saskatchewan farmers? Will we see interest 
rates go up? 
 
And it seems weekly or biweekly we often hear people, the 
financial folks, have a debate about this. Some will say that 
interest rates are bound to go up at some point, but we’ve been 
fortunate for the last several years to see interest rates remain 
very low. But if that were to change, then things may have to 
. . . We may be back looking at a farm credit Act. 
 
And I don’t know whether the government would call it a 
family farm credit Act, whether they’ve decided that they’ve 
come down on the corporate farm side. I would hope that 
there’s always a place for family farms here in Saskatchewan. I 
think that, you know, it’s interesting that so much of 
Saskatchewan and, as I said, there’s so many people who feel 
deeply connected, deeply rooted in family farms. While they 
may not be the farmer, they may not be the person who gets 
their hands dirty, but they do feel connected. 
 
Whether it’s the weather . . . We all are paying attention to 
seeing how the combines are doing in the fields. We all watch 
that. We all feel concerned about when seeding is late. It’s just 
something that is part of the Saskatchewan psyche, and I think 
it’s an important thing that we . . . You know, it’s part of our 
heritage for so many of us. 
 
So when we have these kind of discussions and, as I said, when 
we see this kind of legislation but the fact of the matter is that 
this is the only piece of legislation from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, we start to get concerned. Is this all that the 
ministry and the minister can come up with? Is this the extent of 
their vision, that they want to just repeal an Act and that’s it, 
that’s done? 
 
You know, and I know and when we listen to throne speeches 
we know many on the other side, many people on the other 
side, many members on the other side rightfully spoke about 
agricultural challenges, rightfully spoke about that. But I don’t 
know if they were expecting that this would be the extent, the 
extent of their legislation, the extent of their agenda for 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. And when I look at it, it certainly 
is pretty thin and it doesn’t give a lot of insight into the thinking 
of this government. 
 
And of course while the minister, his speech, you know, 
compared to the length of the bill was quite lengthy, but really, 
really didn’t talk about the intergenerational transfer and didn’t 
really talk about what happens when you find yourself wanting 
assistance to make your farm more economic . . . Now there are 
different ways of making that happen. Not all of it has to be 
legislation. But at least in the speech, the government may have 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6025 

taken an opportunity to say, these are the things that are 
meaning that the original Act set out as a challenge, the three 
things: costs of borrowing, intergenerational transfer, and how 
to make uneconomic farm units into economic farm units. He 
didn’t really address those other two, and so I know that there 
will be questions about that. 
 
[20:00] 
 
And we will be hoping that while this government is preparing 
for an election, that you would think they would have more to 
say about agriculture than this Act to repeal The Family Farm 
Credit Act because, I’ve got to tell you, people think and expect 
more from any government, from any government. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, if this had been . . . If we had presented only one bill 
in the last year before an election and this was the extent of that 
bill, I think these folks over here would have a lot to say about 
that. They would have a lot to say about that. So I think they 
need to think about where . . . This is the best we can come up 
with? This is the very best? 
 
You know, and we’re going to hear in just a few minutes about 
the statutes bill. Again you know, when we were talking about 
the kind of legislation that shows direction, shows vision, and 
we’re getting this kind of legislation at this time of year, this is 
the kind of stuff that really can be brought out in the spring 
when . . . In many ways it’s not controversial because, you 
know, as the minister did talk about the fact that it hasn’t been 
fully utilized since ’94, even though interestingly, as I pointed 
out, there has been several amendments it looks like to the 
regulations. And the last one was in fact this year, but I don’t 
know what that amendment was because it looks like it was in 
the regulations. 
 
We have some questions about that. We have deep, deep 
concerns about that, because clearly a government that prides 
itself on agriculture, and this is the extent . . . I’m not just 
holding the title page here, Mr. Speaker. I’m holding the whole 
bill in my hand. You know, I may be walking on thin ice 
because I know I’m not supposed to be using a prop, but in this 
case the prop is the legislation. The extent of . . . This whole bill 
is the extent of this government’s agricultural agenda in many 
ways, and that is a sad thing. That is a sad thing. 
 
So I really would hope that in the next few days we’re going to 
see much more legislation or something from the Minister of 
Agriculture. Because I know he can get on his high horse and 
talk about how he’s from the farm and he knows what’s what. 
And you know, I give him credit. He appears to be a successful 
farmer. But I’ve got to tell you there’s a lot of people that are 
depending on the wisdom of this government. 
 
What we know, though, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately that number 
is shrinking, isn’t it. Because it shrunk from 44,329 farms in 
2006 to just under 37,000 farms. So there’s fewer and fewer 
farms out there that are depending on this government for 
leadership because they’re getting bigger. But still, they’re our 
people and they do have a responsibility. 
 
Now I know that we have many bills in front of us that we want 
to debate tonight and I know many people will want to get up 
and speak about this. And I really will want to hear what the 
critic has to say about this because I think this is a big deal, Mr. 

Speaker, that if this is the best the government can do at this 
time of year . . . It’s had all spring and fall to come forward 
with legislation around agriculture, and this is the harvest. This 
is all we got. This is sort of like “Jack and the Beanstalk.” This 
is what I came home with. This is all I got. This is all I got is 
this one page, this one page. The Minister of Agriculture shows 
up with one page. I don’t know. I don’t know. There’s got to be 
more. There’s got to be more. There’s got to be more. 
 
With all the stuff that’s happening out in rural Saskatchewan on 
the farms, there’s got to be more. There’s got to be more. 
There’s got to be more. You know, when you talk about rail 
lines and the trains and all of that, and I know the government 
will get up on its high horse and say, we know . . . We’re there. 
We’re there. And this, I just got to say, if the government’s 
staking its credit or its reputation on this one piece of 
legislation, it’s a pretty thin reputation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I know that there will be many 
people who will want to get up and speak on other bills, but 
with this Bill No. 159, An Act to repeal The Family Farm 
Credit Act, I would move adjournment of that bill. 
 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 153 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 153 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
enter the debate about Bill No. 153, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2014. It’s a fairly substantial bill in terms of 
size, Mr. Speaker. It’s about a 27-page bill. It’s interesting 
though. It’s fairly straightforward in what it sets out to do. As 
the minister points out that The Statute Law Amendment Act 
makes “amendments to over 100 Acts to update outdated 
language, ensure gender-neutral language is used, and correct 
grammatical and reference errors.” So I’ll speak a little bit 
about that in a moment, Mr. Speaker, and about some of the 
things, the language that the bill does in fact change. 
 
The minister goes on to point out that the bill, it’s fairly 
straightforward but it “amends four Acts to remove the term 
lunatic and another eight Acts to remove reference to mental 
incapacity or incompetence in favour of lacks capacity.” 
 
And with respect to technological advances, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s also, the minister points out that what “we previously 
referred to as telephone or facsimile transmission, electronic 
mail and Internet website are now commonly referred to as fax, 



6026 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

email, and website.” So this bill will change those things and it 
will update that terminology in 18 Acts. 
 
And it will “also amend over 40 Acts to repeal the terms 
chairman and vice-chairman in favour of gender-neutral 
chairperson and vice-chairperson.” And I’ll speak in a few 
minutes, Mr. Speaker. I have quite strong feelings about the 
need for gender-neutral language, Mr. Speaker. And that’s been 
something that’s evolved over my time when I was a reporter. I 
was a little less . . . I had less concern about it, but there’s been 
some things in my life that made me realize that language does 
really have a huge role to play in how we see things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This bill also repeals and replaces “words that have a variety of 
spellings, such as extra-provincial . . . safe keeping, judgment, 
and pipe line,” working towards more consistency. 
 
And the minister points out that this will assist in more accurate 
electronic searches of Saskatchewan’s legislation. And then 
after this bill, Mr. Speaker, there is a complementary bill with 
French language. 
 
So I think some of the things that again, that I’d like to talk 
about, Mr. Speaker, is something very important. I was a 
reporter a very long time ago for about 12 years, Mr. Speaker. 
In my early days as a reporter, I never thought that 
gender-neutral language was very important. I actually used to 
think people were being kind of silly when they would push that 
issue, Mr. Speaker. But it was actually as I . . . when I became a 
mother, Mr. Speaker, and became an at-home mother, and I 
started to notice as an at-home mother I always got my hackles 
up when people would refer to working mothers and at-home 
mothers. And I would contend, and I’ve said this before in this 
legislature, that anyone who opts out of paid labour and who 
stays home with children is in fact also a working mother. And I 
think language sends a message to us about how we view the 
world and the how the world views us sometimes. 
 
So that was . . . When I started thinking about that a little bit 
was when I, in fact, was in the position of . . . I felt 
marginalized as an at-home mother in that kind of language that 
was being used with choices that I had made, Mr. Speaker, at 
that particular time in my life. But I also had the opportunity, 
when I went back to school and did a social work degree and 
took a critical social work class and learned a little bit more 
about language and how important it is in shaping how we 
perceive people. 
 
So I think about this bill, and it’s interesting. It’s removing the 
words lunatic, insane, mentally incompetent, and they become 
lack capacity or lacking capacity, in bills. And I have a few 
things to say about the definition of capacity, but before getting 
there I think that this is a very good move, Mr. Speaker, or a 
very . . . It’s not just about political correctness. It’s about again 
the message that we send to people about who they are and how 
we view the world. 
 
My colleague from Saskatoon Centre, a few years ago when I 
had first become an MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], had a private member’s bill on removing the 
R-word, an incredibly offensive word to those who have 
intellectual or cognitive disabilities, Mr. Speaker, and a word 

that I think many people still toss out without any regard to how 
hurtful it can be. And again, language says a lot about how 
people perceive us or how we perceive things. So as my 
colleague from Saskatoon Centre brought forward this private 
member’s bill . . . And I believe the government took it on. I 
don’t think they passed his bill directly, but my memory is a 
little faded on that, but I’m pretty sure the government decided 
to pursue that after he had brought that forward and to remove 
the R-word from our legislation. 
 
But it’s not just in legislation. It has to be removed from all 
contexts. Like I said, I hear that word quite frequently in 
dialogue, and people don’t . . . It’s not that people are mean or 
trying to be negative or disparaging, but it was a common word 
that people used and didn’t really think about how hurtful it 
could be. So when I think, particularly when I think about the 
word lunatic, insane, or mentally incompetent . . .  
 
I think about my own family, Mr. Speaker — and I know all of 
you know here, and maybe people who might be watching this 
don’t realize this — but I lost a nephew a year and a half ago to 
bipolar disorder. Beautiful, handsome, brilliant, incredible 
athlete. As my sister-in-law described him, my nephew, Jordan, 
was more of everything and felt more of everything. 
 
Subsequently, mental illness was really quite difficult. I mean it 
always is, Mr. Speaker, but there is a huge stigma to mental 
illness in this province and in this country and in North America 
in general. And despite the fact that many people, they say . . . 
I’ve heard different statistics. One in four, one in five people are 
touched by mental illness, Mr. Speaker. And huge stigma. So 
changing language, I think, is absolutely imperative. 
 
Actually it’s interesting. There’s a great article here, actually I 
read it just last week, on Huffington Post and shared it on my 
Facebook page. And the article is, “What if People Treated 
Physical Illness Like Mental Illness,” and it’s by Lindsay 
Holmes. Lindsay goes on to write that: 
 

It’s no secret there’s a serious stigma attached to mental 
illness. According to the CDC [or Centre for Disease 
Control], only 25 per cent of people with mental health 
issues feel that other people are compassionate and 
sympathetic toward them. It’s a shameful statistic when 
one in four people have been touched by some form of 
mental illness. 

 
And the author goes on to write that: 
 

Experts say that part of the problem when it comes to 
criticizing someone’s mental health is a lack of empathy 
and knowledge about the ailments. Yet despite the 
staggering evidence and rhetoric aimed at helping people 
understand, many people still don’t get that being 
diagnosed with a mental illness isn’t something that’s in 
their control — just like having the flu, or food poisoning, 
or cancer isn’t in their control. 

 
So it’s interesting, actually, the best part of this article, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

In an effort to reframe the conversation, artist Robot Hugs 
created a comic that displays what it would be like if we 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6027 

discussed physical illnesses in the same way we do mental 
illnesses. 

 
I can’t use a prop, Mr. Speaker, but I’m going to describe some 
of these pictures to you. And I would direct anybody who’s 
interested to check out my Facebook page, my latest post. I 
think that this is a really important article to share, and it’s kind 
of cute but it sends a really serious message. 
 
There’s a cartoon of an individual who clearly is suffering from 
a very upset stomach, lying under a blanket and not feeling very 
well. And someone . . . This is under helpful advice, Mr. 
Speaker: “I get that you have food poisoning and all but you 
have to at least make an effort.” And another, in another picture, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s, “You just need to change your frame of mind, 
then you’ll feel better.” And it’s an individual who has lost his 
hand, Mr. Speaker. But this is how people with mental illness 
feel when someone comes and tells them that it’s just, you’ve 
just got to do something different, instead of accepting that it 
really is something out of their control. 
 
There’s another one with someone who is very ill, who’s got 
the stomach flu and is leaning over a toilet. And the question 
that this cartoon asks is, “Have you tried, you know, not having 
the flu?” In another incident or in another cartoon, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s an individual giving themselves an injection, perhaps 
someone who’s got diabetes —someone like that could think 
about this as a possibility — and what the caption is, “I don’t 
think it’s healthy that you have to take medication every day 
just to feel normal. Don’t you worry that it’s changing you from 
who you really are?” 
 
So these are all things that people with mental illness face on a 
regular basis, Mr. Speaker, the misinformed idea that you have 
total control over your mental health. It’s no different than 
physical health. 
 
[20:15] 
 
There’s a couple more that I’d like to tell you about. There’s 
another cartoon character who obviously is injured, and his 
helpful colleague says to him, “It’s not like you’re even trying.” 
And in the final cartoon, Mr. Speaker, someone lying in an ICU 
[intensive care unit] with an IV [intravenous] bag attached to 
them, and it says, “Well lying in bed obviously isn’t helping 
you. You need to try something else.” 
 
So I think this is one of the best articles that I’ve read about 
mental health in a very long time, Mr. Speaker. And I know that 
some of the comments . . . People have shared this article. They 
feel that same way. If you’ve ever been faced with mental 
illness, you know that there’s all kinds of helpful advice out 
there from people who think that you could just do something 
differently. 
 
So I think when we talk about language and Bill 153 changing 
lunatic, insane, and mentally incompetent to lacks capacity or 
lacking capacity, I think is a very good way to go, but it’s 
interesting. Again having been a former reporter, there’s an 
article from December 3rd, 2012, “Congress could remove 
lunatic from US law.” Apparently this was something that was 
going on in the States as well, but I have to . . . I’m going to 
make some editorial comment here. The lead, which is the first 

sentence in a newspaper story, it says: 
 

It’s not like Congress has anything important on their 
plates worth tackling before the end of the term, but just in 
case, they’re tackling the pressing issue of offensive 
terminology in the U.S. Code: the House is taking a look at 
the 21st Century Language Act, S. 2367, which removes 
the word “lunatic” from U.S. law. 

 
So that’s the lead. And I have to say that reporters can have a 
habit of being a little snarky or saying things . . . sometimes 
have a slightly darker sense of humour at times. But yes, maybe 
it wasn’t the most pressing. There are many issues that 
Congress was dealing with, but when it comes to working on 
addressing stigma, I think that it is important to take these 
measures when it comes to legislation, and send a message. The 
Government of Saskatchewan is sending a message saying that 
it’s not acceptable, that we need to reframe that language and 
think of people with mental health challenges differently, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In the same news story, this bill passed the Senate in May and 
was sponsored by a Democrat from North Dakota and a 
Republican from Idaho “. . . to reflect the 21st-century 
understanding of mental illness and disease, and that the 
continued use of this pejorative term has no place in the U.S. 
Code.” So I would agree that the government making this move 
is a very positive step, not dissimilar from my colleague from 
Saskatoon Centre who advocated to have the R-word removed 
from legislation. 
 
But I think the one question that I’d have, and it’s maybe 
outlined in some of the other bills, is the definition of capacity 
or lacking capacity, what exactly that means in the bill. That’s 
not outlined at all in the bill, and I’d be interested and it’ll be 
interesting in committee actually to have that discussion to find 
out what that looks like, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that is 
fraught in of itself. 
 
I know I’ve talked to people who have had adult children with 
either mental health challenges or acquired brain injuries who 
know some of the challenges and struggles when it comes to 
making sure that their children have services, their adult 
children have the services and the care that they need. And it 
can be incredibly fraught, in terms of protecting the adult’s 
privacy, for the health community, or ensuring that that 
individual gets the care that they need. So I would like some 
further clarification on what lacks capacity or lacking capacity 
means, Mr. Speaker. I think those are important things. 
 
Again language does matter, and we do have to pay attention to 
how we use it and what we say because those send messages to 
everybody around us, so again I’m pleased that the government 
is making some of these changes. As I said, chairman becomes 
chairperson. I’m all about gender-neutral language, Mr. 
Speaker, now at this point in my life. It’s been a bit of an 
evolution for me. 
 
I think some of the interesting things, the little debates that we 
could have or discussions, again, having been a former reporter, 
we used to use something called the CP [Canadian Press] 
Stylebook and there was always debates about . . . So the 
Stylebook is what newspapers generally used to decide how 



6028 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

you’d spell neighbour or . . . Would it be o-u-r? The same with 
labour. Forget the dictionary. You rely on the CP Stylebook. 
 
And it’s interesting. The word in this bill, judgment, 
j-u-d-g-m-e-n-t becomes j-u-d-g-e-m-e-n-t, Mr. Speaker. So that 
is an interesting thing that this is where the government chooses 
to focus. But actually when it comes to language too, I was, 
when I was a reporter I was also a copy editor and I’m a bit of a 
stickler for language. There’s certain things in grammar that 
really bother me. Dangling prepositions are one of the big ones, 
Mr. Speaker. I have a hard time with dangling prepositions. But 
I can remember reading a book called Grammar Snobs Are 
Great Big Meanies and the gist of the book was about how 
language changes and evolves over time and how sometimes 
those of us who are grammar snobs should get with the times 
and accept that those changes happen and that common usage is 
not a bad thing sometimes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I was just looking up here. It was interesting to see where 
the jury falls on the word judgment, Mr. Speaker. And it was 
just, if you google judgment versus judgement, the different 
spellings, it’s quite interesting actually because there is not a 
definitive, there is not a definitive where this falls down, Mr. 
Speaker. So I think that that’s an interesting thing that the 
government has decided to pursue this. Again I do know, like I 
said the CP Stylebook, we always used to fall back on the CP 
Stylebook. So maybe I’m not quite sure why the government 
has moved to change the word judgment, but I think one of the 
comments the minister made was to use it consistently 
throughout. So they had to pick one, I guess, and go with it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Technological changes are an interesting thing that 
governments have to grapple with and legislation has to grapple 
with. I think many people wouldn’t even know what fax stood 
for, Mr. Speaker. I had to stop and think for a minute, but fax 
came from the word facsimile. 
 
So the reality is times change and bills have to be updated. And 
for the most part, I think these are not earth-shaking changes by 
any means, Mr. Speaker. And I’m particularly pleased around 
the changes around language for those who are lacking 
capacity, Mr. Speaker, who formerly would have been referred 
to as lunatic, insane, or mentally incompetent. 
 
Yes, I think that’s . . . You know, I just want to talk a little bit 
more about mental illness, Mr. Speaker, and that need to fight 
stigma. And I don’t think you can talk about mental illness in 
Canada at all these days without talking about Clara Hughes, 
the former Olympian, who was a six-time Olympic medallist in 
both cycling and speed skating. 
 
And this past year, Clara Hughes has been very vocal and very 
open about her struggle with depression, Mr. Speaker. And this 
past spring, she rode 11 000 kilometres over 110 days to raise 
the issue and awareness around mental illness. So I’m glad we 
are talking about it more, Mr. Speaker. But I think that you 
can’t talk about mental illness in Canada without talking about 
the good work that she’s doing and raising the profile of mental 
illness. 
 
But I think that my colleagues will have things to say about this 
bill as well, and perhaps when we get to committee, we’ll have 

an opportunity to talk about Bill 153 around the words lacks 
capacity and what exactly capacity means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, tonight I’d like to move to adjourn debate for Bill 
153. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 153, The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 154 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 154 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant 
le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I jumped the gun 
on that here. I’m pleased again to enter into the discussion 
about Bill No. 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 
This is a complementary bill. The minister noted that, when 
introducing the English bill, Saskatchewan’s last general statute 
revision occurred in 1978, which I didn’t talk about, Mr. 
Speaker, in the previous bill. 
 
1978 is a long time ago. I was eight years old, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
not eight years old anymore. That was a very long time ago and 
I think it was more than overdue in terms of looking at some of 
the language that needed to be changed. 
 
So this particular bill will amend . . . My colleagues had 
encouraged me to speak in French but honestly despite my . . . I 
do have some capacity to speak in French but my confidence 
level is lacking, monsieur le Président. My confidence is 
lacking so I think I’ll stick to English for this one. 
 
So what this bill will do, it amends 12 bilingual Acts to make 
amendments to update outdated language, ensure consistent 
spelling, and correct grammatical and reference errors such as 
updating spelling of safekeeping, pipelines, subject matter, 
insofar, and extraprovincial. So it does exactly the same thing 
as the previous bill, Mr. Speaker, but in French. So it also 
replaces the telephone transmission, telecopier, facsimile, and 
electronic mail with fax and email, and will replace “be of 
unsound mind” with “lack capacity.” 
 
So my comments for the previous bill stand. I think moving to 
gender-neutral language where we can is a good move and I 
think we always have to remember to choose our words 
carefully, Mr. Speaker, because the words that we use send a 
message about what we think and what others perceive of us, 
Mr. Speaker, and of what we perceive the general world to be. 
Language is really, really important. 
 
So with respect to Bill No. 154, I think also that term around 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6029 

lacks capacity, I would like to have some sense of what the 
definition of lacks capacity is. And perhaps the minister in 
committee will talk about it, where it might be defined in 
another bill. But I think that that is an important piece to have a 
better understanding, of which to have a better understanding, 
Mr. Speaker. I almost used a dangling preposition, of, at the end 
of my sentence but I caught it, Mr. Speaker. Anyway to that 
effect I know I have colleagues who will also speak to Bill No. 
154 and will have some questions in committee. So with that, I 
would like to move adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 155 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 155 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en 
matière de soins de santé be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 
on Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and Substitute 
Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014, going over I guess 
some of the change and the reason my government is 
introducing the change. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about that it’s going to go from English 
and also have our official second language, French, will be in 
this bill. They basically, as you go through it, for those that 
would go through the bill, will have an opportunity to look at 
the bill and have it in French, as our second official language, 
and that’s important. 
 
But I want to talk a little bit about I guess my own family and 
some of the stuff. And I think about my grandfather who was a 
Second World War vet who spoke, again we’ll say French, 
Michif language. It’s French; it’s Cree. And sometimes some of 
the communities, when I go back and think about that . . . He 
was a very proud Métis, very proud of his language he spoke. 
But when I think about some of the stories he told, you know, 
when sitting around when I was a little boy, talking about . . . 
and watching my grandparents and my parents who both spoke 
Michif or French in their way. 
 
Yet you know, some of my colleagues and the member from 
Athabasca, if you listen to some of his Cree, he talks about that 
it’s the Michif. And some of them speak the Michif language. 
It’s Cree and French. It’s kind of jointed, blended in. And you 
know, some of them speak very well. 
 
[20:30] 
 
I’ve listened to some of them that actually instruct on the 

Michif language and talk about that, and I know the member 
does. And I’m very proud, and we know those that speak the 
language are very proud. Anytime you can have a second 
language other than English, it’s something that we’re proud of. 
And it’s not just French; it’s, like I said, Cree, Dene. There’s 
many different languages that people speak. But when we look 
at the bill and all that it’s going to do, it’s going to talk about 
the French and turning it over. 
 
So when I think about my grandfather, you know, like I said, he 
was a veteran. He was a very proud man. He was wounded 
when he was serving our country, like many of the veterans that 
serve were wounded. And I remember him telling us the story 
about when he was first wounded, and he talked about that. 
Then finally after a time he got transferred. He got transferred 
to Winnipeg to where they would send the type of injuries that 
my grandfather had. He was shot pretty bad and wounded in the 
leg, and it was pretty bad and pretty serious. So anyway, he was 
there for physio and everything else. 
 
But it was interesting. He talked about a priest. One day he was 
talking, and this priest came in and he looked at him kind of 
funny. He said he looked different. And he said . . . So he 
spoke. In his mind, he spoke to him, this priest. And it was 
amazing. He spoke Michif to him. And my grandfather was 
pretty . . . So they just got into it, and I remember him talking 
about it. It just made him feel . . . He felt good like at home and 
that type of thing to speak the language. But he didn’t hide from 
it, which was kind of nice. And I talk about that, and I 
remember my grandfather and his language, like I said, he 
spoke. 
 
So just talking about that, my grandparents, my aunts and 
uncles, some of them are in education as their careers, you 
know, principal. They work in different capacities. But they 
speak French. You know, some will say the Michif language. 
But having said that, it’s some of those ties to the language, and 
it’s important. 
 
It’s important for whether . . . and I’ve said this: language is so 
crucial and important to our young generation. And you know, 
when I think about it, sometimes my parents and grandparents 
for their grandkids spoke the language, and we didn’t get the 
opportunity to speak the Michif and French, as I say. And you 
know, some of them, they would talk about, it was their way of 
kind of I guess having those conversations. I wish today, like so 
many that are losing, young people who are losing their 
language, whether I think about whether it’s Cree, Dene . . . 
There are other languages that are out there. 
 
But going back and thinking about this bill that’s coming into 
effect, and I’m going to get a chance to talk about that, the bill 
itself where we have the change coming in. We know that the 
change will be having an official second language that will 
come into this bill, and it’s going to give the French people an 
opportunity and those that speak, as it is our second language. 
 
And I know, I think we’re going to have a few questions. And 
people and I am wondering the change on this bill versus other 
bills that will come forward, and there must be a reason. And I 
know in committee we can ask questions, and I’m kind of 
interested myself to see, why is this bill being changed? There 
might be others, and I think the minister refers to some of the 



6030 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

other bills. But which bills, and why will certain ones trigger to 
have our official second language? Will they all be coming 
through at some point? Like I don’t know. And I know there’s 
questions, and we’ll want to ask those questions in committee. 
 
And who requested? I’m curious. Like was it the francophones 
who have requested that some of this legislation . . . Or is it 
because of the Supreme Court challenge? And I know there is 
some talk about that, that it’s making it our official language as 
French as a second language. And is that the reason why this 
bill is coming into effect and taking over and making the 
changes so not only is it in English but it’s in French? So I’m 
wondering, and I know we’ll have lots of questions about it in 
committee. I’m just curious. 
 
It gives a person a chance, and we’ve got some friends within 
the francophone school division, and I’m curious to, you know, 
I’m going to call one of them and just ask them, was it 
something that you guys have requested? Is it something that 
. . . And I don’t know if the Minister of Justice, you know, is 
saying there’s certain ones that trigger where we have to have 
legislation in the official second language. Or will they all be 
coming forward? I don’t know that, and I guess it’s going to be 
interesting to find out. Maybe in committee we’ll find out and 
do a little bit of background research to find out, you know, 
what exactly and why the change. 
 
And it’s good. I mean I’m happy for the francophones and for 
those who want to have legislation that’s being introduced in 
their language to understand it. 
 
And sometimes some of the provisions in here are pretty serious 
when you look at having somebody, when it comes to health, to 
be able to act as I guess your decision maker, when you’re 
appointing someone as a guardian, someone to make those 
careful decisions for you. You want to make sure they’re 
understanding the legislation, the requirements in here that, you 
know, explain to them what their role is, what their role isn’t, 
and who has the power to make these decisions when it comes 
down to health care and those decisions that will affect them, 
whether they need to go for some type of medical treatment, 
whether it’s having somebody have those decisions on your 
medical treatment, whether it’s a doctor, whether it’s been 
somebody who’s been appointed over . . . an adult. Is it an 
adult? Is it a child? Is it a senior where you appoint someone as 
your I guess decision maker to make sure that your wishes are 
. . . you know, when you share with someone that you’re going 
to turn it over. 
 
And there is different provisions in here, you know, whether it’s 
a trustee, whether a power of attorney. They’re different. In this 
one we’re talking about medical, and you’re referring to 
decisions that I guess caregivers will make for you. 
 
And I guess the power is to be clear that they understand. 
Whether it’s in English, or if their official language is French, 
this provides for that clarification to make sure that they 
understand this bill. And as you go through the bill as I did, 
comparing them, as they go from one page to the next, you have 
English, but you also have it in French, exactly the alternate 
page, to explain to them. So if someone is French speaking, 
they have that. 
 

And this provision in here, it’s going to give certain powers. 
And you want to be clear because there will be . . . You could 
end up being held and be brought before a judge because you’re 
not taking the proper case and doing what you’ve been asked to 
do in the care that you’ve been asked, decisions you’ve been 
asked to make for someone who’s living in a health care, 
whether it’s long-term care, whether there are treatment is 
needed for this individual. You might have been appointed as a 
guardian, but you have to make sure that you’re doing and that 
you understand the role that you’ve been asked to do when it 
comes to taking care of an individual. 
 
And we’re talking something about medical decisions and 
treatment that could cost someone their life, could be a pretty 
serious decision. But at the end of the day, those individuals 
need to rely on someone that’s a caregiver, whether it’s proxy 
that they are providing for an individual. 
 
Now this bill goes through all the different areas in English, but 
again like I said, now it’s been put in French. It’s giving the 
opportunity for those that speak the official language an 
opportunity to look at the bill, understand it, and to make sure 
they understand the consequences if they don’t act and they 
don’t do what’s in legislation to protect the individual and make 
those decisions when it comes to health care treatment that 
individuals need, and that you understand clearly, that you 
understand the obligation on yourself legally. And I said the 
provision talks about that. So in this provision it makes it very 
clear for the individual in English. Now it makes it in our 
official language. It makes clear for those individuals. 
 
Now having said that, I mean I know my colleagues, and we’ll 
have lots of questions in committee. And I know I have some 
questions I would like to ask, you know, and clarification. How 
many other bills will be coming into effect that will be 
changed? Maybe there’s more of them. Like I don’t know, but 
I’m curious to find out. And in committee we’re going to have 
an opportunity to ask some of the those questions. 
 
And you know, like I said, I know some of the second 
languages, even in La Ronge. And I think about the French 
immersion program that they have in our community, very 
important opportunity in our high school, our elementary 
school, for those parents that want to have their children taught 
our official second language of French that is provided in our 
local school in the North in a school division. 
 
And I remember being on the school division, parents wanting 
that. And not only at the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] or K 
to 6, but they wanted it into the high school as well. And you 
know, parents lobbied and they asked the board of education to 
make sure that . . . They were proud of their language and they 
wanted their children to be taught in the language that maybe 
they spoke at home; maybe they didn’t. Maybe they wanted 
their children to have a second language so that if they’re 
planning for jobs, it gives them an opportunity at the, you 
know, not only English, but having a second language, French 
being the official language of Canada, not only the province. 
This gave family members and it gave community members an 
opportunity, like I said, not only at the K to 6 but also in the 
high school as they moved it up. 
 
And we’ve seen the success in grade 7, grade 8, grade 9, 10, 11, 



November 24, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 6031 

and it moved on. And there are many students, you know, that 
went through our school division in La Ronge and area, when I 
think about the French immersion program, that have done very 
well. They have gone on, being very successful having that 
language. When you talk to some of them and listening to some 
of them talk in our community, they’re very comfortable in the 
language. You don’t see, you know, they’re very comfortable. 
Whether it’s . . . We see some of our community members who 
are proud of the Cree. These individuals are proud of the French 
language that they speak and they do a service as ambassadors 
leaving our community and going out when they go to 
university, or they get employed with the Government of 
Canada. And some of them have had that opportunity and 
they’ve moved on. So having the language and having French, 
like I said, as a second language, has been a huge asset to them, 
an ability for them. 
 
So here we have again, like I’ve said, an opportunity here. And 
we will have more questions to ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 
this but at this point I have no further questions. I know in 
committee we will have some questions and some inquiring 
minds would like to know why. And maybe there’s other 
legislation that will come forward to have the official second 
language being recognized in legislation like this. So it’s a 
move and I think in a good way and a positive way for the 
second language. 
 
So at this point I am prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 155. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 155, The Health Care 
Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 156 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 156 — The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 
on Bill 156, The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 
Care Decision Makers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. If 
you look at the provision, of course, it talked about the previous 
Act. And this consequential amendment is actually changing 
and has to . . . It triggers obviously four areas that need to come 
in compliance with the Act being changed and the official 
language. And at this point there’s four of them that it will 
cause consequential amendments to be made to those four Acts 
and by this Act. So what it does, it does the consequential 
amendments. And I talked about the language and changing 
over. So at this point I have no further comments on Bill 156, 
The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care 
Decision Makers Consequential Amendments, 2014. I adjourn 

debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 156, The Health Care 
Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 157 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 157 — The 
Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into debate here this evening as it relates to 
Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue Gift Act that’s been brought 
forward by government. Certainly the Act itself and the 
objectives laid out by the minister, the objectives are to bring 
about the possibility of transplant in a more timely way. That in 
itself is important and making sure that there’s, you know, 
options there for Saskatchewan families. That’s important as 
well. 
 
[20:45] 
 
The question then remains as to whether or not what’s being 
proposed by government is the best way to achieve that. And 
it’s going to be interesting moving forward on this piece here to 
certainly consider what’s being proposed by government 
directly with health and medical professionals in Saskatchewan, 
in Canada, around the world to ensure that we’re connecting 
directly to Saskatchewan families to understand where they 
stand on the purchase of organs which is being proposed by 
government, and making sure that they’ve had time to consider 
some of the ethical questions involved in that as well. 
 
And certainly it’s our role as an official opposition to work 
directly with the stakeholders, who I should say, on a 
disappointed front, far too often by this government aren’t 
properly consulted. But it will be our responsibility to certainly 
do that consulting. And importantly, we’ll be listening to 
Saskatchewan families and from that we’ll certainly have some 
further questions for the minister. 
 
The minister’s comments . . . You know, there’s a significant 
change in proposing the purchase of organs. The statements by 
the minister to date actually have been very brief, very brief and 
very broad. And so there’s going to definitely require some 
specificity to what’s being proposed as well as examples as to 
where else this system is in place, what are some of the 
potential consequences here in Saskatchewan from a national 
and international global perspective with a purchasing system. 
Who else is doing this, and what has their experience been? 
 
But certainly I think that when you’re talking about organ 



6032 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2014 

purchase, it’s not something that can simply be brushed off as a 
simple bill. So certainly the goal that those requiring organs, 
whether that be kidney, liver, or whether it be corneas, which 
are discussed by the minister, and making sure that there’s more 
options and that there’s a timely response, is something that’s 
certainly really important to the official opposition. And making 
sure that we have the specialists and the resources in place to 
support those transplants is something that certainly we’ll be 
focusing on, and looking at all the other options that may be in 
place. And this is an area for which we’ll draw, as I say, from 
the medical community, the medical profession, and from 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
And you know, we have, you know, some examples of 
management of blood here in Saskatchewan, a system that 
works quite well, one that I know could be supported better. I 
think of even myself. I could do a much better job of being a 
more regular donor than I am. But we should certainly be doing 
that. So those are the aspects for us to focus on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as I say, you know, the discussion and the change to 
purchase organs is something that is of relative significance, 
one that, you know, certainly we’ll be listening to 
Saskatchewan people on, the medical profession, and making 
sure that this is the right step and the best way forward for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
As I say, on far too many fronts that government rams forward 
with changes or legislation without consultation and actually 
listening to Saskatchewan people and without consulting those 
who know best on the ground in stakeholder groups. And so 
we’ll defer further comments at this point in time. We’ll look 
forward to following up with the minister with some more 
specific questions and certainly ensuring that we receive from 
him more clarity as to what this plan is all about. But at this 
point in time this evening, I move adjournment of Bill No. 157. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview on his feet? 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the motion 
to adjourn the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Eastview has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 20:50.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6017 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6019 
 Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6025 
 Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6028 
 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6029 
 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6031 
 Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6031 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


