




















































Hansard: October 22, 2014


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 66A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2014, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Vacant  Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5447 

 October 22, 2014 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Vacancy in Lloydminster Constituency 

 

The Speaker: — It is my duty to inform the Assembly of the 

following vacancy in the representation: in the constituency of 

Lloydminster, due to the resignation of Mr. Tim McMillan. 

 

I am advised that Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor is here 

for prorogation. Please rise. 

 

PROROGATION 

 

[At 10:02 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. Her Honour was 

then pleased to deliver the following speech.] 

 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Last October I presented to you my government’s vision of the 

third session of the twenty-seventh legislature of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As this session draws to a close, I can confidently say that my 

government continues to move forward with “Meeting the 

Challenges of Growth,” the title of the 2013 Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

The growth Saskatchewan has achieved over the last several 

years is a source of pride for all residents in our province. 

Saskatchewan’s population is now well over 1.1 million people, 

and our province remains on track to meeting the target of 1.2 

million people set out in the Saskatchewan Plan for Growth. 

People from across the country and around the world are 

flocking to our province to share in our success and to help 

build Saskatchewan for future generations. More of our young 

people are staying in our province. Former residents are 

returning to Saskatchewan. 

 

For 22 consecutive months, Saskatchewan has had the lowest 

unemployment rate of any province in Canada, and our wages 

are growing at one of the fastest rates nationwide. Goods 

stamped “Made in Saskatchewan” are in high demand, and our 

province leads the nation in year-over-year export growth. 

 

Saskatchewan has what the world needs. Food, fuel, and 

fertilizer are still our province’s staples, but we are also 

showing major successes in exporting consumer goods, with 

year-over-year exports rising by 58 per cent to $192 million. 

 

The growing economy, balanced budgets, and sound financial 

management have earned Saskatchewan a AAA credit rating 

from Moody’s financial rating agency in New York. As a result 

of this upgrade, Saskatchewan now enjoys the highest possible 

rating from both Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s. 

In this session, my government took further steps to meet the 

challenges of growth. 

 

$887 million was invested in infrastructure projects, including: 

 

 $405.2 million for transportation infrastructure, including 

$118 million for highway upgrades; 

 

 $103 million for K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 

schools and education capital projects, including a P3 

partnership that would see nine new joint-use schools built 

in Saskatoon, Regina, Martensville, and Warman and 

$46.4 million for the construction of ten ongoing major 

school projects; and 

 

 $95 million for health care projects, which included 

long-term care centres, hospitals, and maintenance and 

equipment capital. 

 

My government believes in growth, not for the sake of growth, 

but as a means to improve the quality of life for all 

Saskatchewan citizens. Growth is a sustainable way to pay for 

the programs which are vital to our most vulnerable citizens. 

Steady growth means better health care, higher quality 

education for our children, and the ability to assist our parents 

and grandparents as they grow older. 

 

Again this year, my government increased support benefits for 

the Saskatchewan Assured Income for Disability program and 

the Seniors’ Income Plan. More than 12,700 people will receive 

increased monthly benefits through the Saskatchewan Assured 

Income for Disability program. The Seniors’ Income Plan 

benefit is now $260 a month, up $170 a month, or 189 per cent, 

since 2008. Caring for those who have helped build our 

province is at the core of my government’s values. 

 

My government also respects and reinforces the importance of 

rural communities and the role they have played in 

Saskatchewan’s development. This year, my government 

invested $5.2 million to expand the rural doctor locum pool. 

The rural family physician recruitment incentive program is 

receiving an additional $435,000 in funding this year, bringing 

total funding to $685,000. 

 

The future of our province is dependent on the success of our 

children, and investing in the education of our children begins 

even before they reach kindergarten. This year’s budget 

provides $25.5 million, an increase of more than 5 per cent over 

last year, for 15 new pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs. This 

will bring the total number of pre-K programs across 

Saskatchewan to 316. 

 

During this session, my government made some important 

legislative and regulatory changes including: 

 

 The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, which modernized 

rules regarding the registration and use of vehicles of 

unusual size, weight, or operating characteristics; 

 

 The Mental Health Services Act, which clarifies the roles, 

responsibilities, and powers of certain individuals, with the 

goal of providing a more expedited and effective service; 



5448 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2014 

 The Lobbyists Act, which continues my government’s 

record of openness and transparency by making the 

lobbying activities of private corporations and paid 

lobbyists public; 

 

 The Personal Care Homes Act, which addresses the 

tracking of deficiencies and inspections, improves risk 

assessment processes, and allows for the public reporting 

of information from personal care home inspections; and 

 

 The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act, which has enhanced 

opportunities for applied research as well as the granting 

of degrees in accordance with The Degree Authorization 

Act. 

 

These are just a few of the many highlights of the past 

legislative session. 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty to 

discharge you from further attendance of the third session of the 

twenty-seventh legislature. In relieving you of your duties, I 

wish to congratulate you on the work you have completed over 

the past year and to commend you for the diligent and 

empathetic manner in which you have approached your duties. 

 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker and members of the 

Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour 

the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until later today, the 22nd day of October 2014 at 

2 p.m. The Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 

 

[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:12.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Vacancy in Lloydminster Constituency 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5447 

PROROGATION 

  Her Honour ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5447 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5448 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


