
























































Hansard: November 17, 2014


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 13A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2014, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5857 
 November 17, 2014 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 160, 
The Lloydminster Constituency By-election Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to move Bill 
No. 160. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 160 — The Lloydminster Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move first reading of this bill at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
first reading of Bill No. 160, The Lloydminster Constituency 
By-election Act be now introduced and read the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
When will this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
deal with all stages of this bill immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to deal with all stages of this bill immediately. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 160 — The Lloydminster Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that Bill 160, The Lloydminster Constituency 
By-election Act be now read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Government House Leader that Bill No. 

160, The Lloydminster Constituency By-election Act be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 160, The Lloydminster Constituency 
By-election Act be committed to Committee of the Whole on 
Bills and the said bill to be considered in the Committee of the 
Whole on Bills immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole. 
 
Clerk: — Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for Committee of the 
Whole. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 160 — The Lloydminster Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
The Chair: — The item of business before the committee is 
Bill No. 160, The Lloydminster Constituency By-election Act. 
Clause 1, short title: is clause 1 agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 160, The Lloydminster Constituency 
By-election Act. I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
move that the committee report the bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee report Bill No. 160, The Lloydminster 
Constituency By-election Act without amendment. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 



5858 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Chair, I move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 160, The Lloydminster 
Constituency By-election Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a third time? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 160 — The Lloydminster Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 160, The 
Lloydminster Constituency By-election Act be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — At the next sitting of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
I am advised that Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor is here 
for Royal Assent. Please rise. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 13:40 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bill.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed a bill which in the 
name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour, unto which 
bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the title of the bill is as follows: 
 
Bill No. 160 - The Lloydminster Constituency By-election Act. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this bill. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 13:42.] 
 
The Speaker: — Pray be seated. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to introduce a motion to recess. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave for a motion to recess. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that we do recess at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved a 
motion to recess at the present time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands recessed to the 
call of the Chair. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 13:43 until 13:59.] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — Order. The House is now reconvened. I 
hereby inform the Assembly that, pursuant to an Act of this 
Legislative Assembly respecting a by-election in the 
constituency of Lloydminster which was assented to today, 
November 17, 2014, Ms. Colleen Young is authorized to take 
her seat as a member for the constituency of Lloydminster. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to 
present to you Ms. Colleen Young, member for the constituency 
of Lloydminster, who has taken the oath and signed the roll and 
now claims the right to take her seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Ms. Young, I want to welcome you to the 
Legislative Assembly. And I hope that your time here will be 
one that serves to be a record of honour to yourself and your 
constituents. Let the hon. member take her seat. Congratulations 
and welcome. 
 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5859 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you some special guests that we 
have in the gallery today, in the west gallery. With us are 
representatives from our Main Street Saskatchewan 
demonstration communities as well as 11 new communities 
announced earlier this morning. And when I announce your 
community, maybe give us a wave on behalf of your 
communities. 
 
With us today are Swift Current, Melfort, Regina, Spiritwood, 
Watrous, Moose Jaw, Kerrobert, Nipawin, Humboldt, 
Langenburg, and Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you may have heard, Main Street Saskatchewan 
has had numerous successes since it was first introduced to our 
province in 2011. The program has seen new businesses opened 
and new jobs created. It’s resulted in improvements to historic 
streetscapes and buildings and has helped to strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s economy. These successes encourage pride 
within participating communities, and they continue to support 
our growing province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the success of this program would not be possible 
without the hard-working community members who strive to 
improve the historic districts within their communities. These 
individuals receive tools and training from our Main Street 
officials and use them to enhance the quality of life enjoyed in 
their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see numerous representatives from 
our Main Street Saskatchewan program with us here today, as 
well as Wolseley. Can you give us a wave, Wolseley? Thank 
you. In recognition of the Main Street Saskatchewan program 
and the individuals involved in enhancing their historic 
downtown and commercial districts, I ask that all members 
please join me in welcoming these special guests to their 
legislature. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the members some special guests who 
we have sitting in the gallery here as well today. 
Multiculturalism recognizes our diverse communities and 
celebrates them. For decades, the Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan has been a strong voice for the value of a 
multicultural society. It was my pleasure to attend both, this 
past weekend, the multicultural forum and the multicultural 

celebration, Saturday and Sunday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining us again this year in recognition of 
Saskatchewan Multiculturalism Week, is Rhonda Rosenberg, 
the executive director of the Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan. As many of the members know, Rhonda has 
been a long-time advocate for multiculturalism. With Rhonda 
today, from the multicultural Saskatchewan board of directors, 
is Neeraj Saroj and Barb Dedi, as well as the Multicultural 
Council of Saskatchewan communications coordinator, Justin 
Waldrop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year marks the 40th anniversary of 
Saskatchewan passing multiculturalism legislation to support 
and celebrate our unique communities. I enjoyed taking part in 
the multiculturalism forum and the event at the MacKenzie Art 
Gallery this past weekend in celebration of this significant 
anniversary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recognition of Saskatchewan Multiculturalism 
Week, I ask that all members please join me in welcoming these 
special guests to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to take a moment to 
join with the minister in welcoming all these individuals to their 
Legislative Assembly. Certainly Main Street Saskatchewan is a 
program that these communities have benefited from and will 
benefit from.  
 
And any of us who grew up in a town or city in Saskatchewan 
know how important and vital the main street is to a 
community. And so that we’re protecting historic main streets 
and allowing people to develop a further pride of place is 
something that’s very significant. We want to congratulate these 
communities on the hard work it takes to be admitted to the 
program, I know there’s a lot of work involved, and the 
commitment to their main streets. So on behalf of the official 
opposition, we’d like to welcome all the mainstreeters here to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would also 
like to extend a warm welcome to the folks from the 
Multicultural Council. We know how important diversity is to 
represent our people in Saskatchewan in that diversity. As we 
know, our provincial motto is “from many peoples, strength,” 
Mr. Speaker. And the hard work of folks like Rhonda, Barb, 
Saroj, and Justin, we’re very happy to have them here in the 
Legislative Assembly for their celebration. And 45 years is not 
insignificant, Mr. Speaker. And I think all of us understand the 
importance of a diverse and vibrant society, and that’s what 
these folks are working hard. So on behalf again of the official 
opposition, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take a 
moment here to introduce to you my special guests who are 
here with me today on this special occasion: my sister Irene and 
her husband, Jim Burns from Saskatoon; my sister Linda and 



5860 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

her husband, Vern Kawaleski from here in Regina. And earlier 
with me today were also my good friends, Vic and Pat Kushner 
from Regina as well. Please join me in welcoming them here to 
this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 
to introduce the inspiration behind Regina’s Oxford House 
Society Inc., Mr. Blair Pope. Blair, can you give us a wave? 
Thank you. 
 
Last Thursday we celebrated the opening of another Oxford 
House in Regina, the fourth in the past four years. These houses 
do fill an important gap that can sometimes exist in the 
addictions recovery process. By providing supportive 
alcohol- and drug-free living environment, we can reduce the 
chance of relapse in individuals who have recently completed 
an addictions program. 
 
Each individual’s success is determined by their own efforts. 
And Blair does understand that safe, affordable housing is 
essential to rehabilitative process allowing the necessary time to 
transition back in the community. I ask everyone here today to 
join me in thanking Blair for his selfless contribution to keeping 
Regina and Saskatchewan strong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition, I 
would also like to welcome Blair to the Assembly. The type of 
work that he has done over many years, but specifically in the 
last number of years, is really important for the criminal justice 
system but more importantly for the whole community. Because 
if people can find a safe place to live, it makes a huge difference 
in how they can turn their lives around. So, Mr. Speaker, we 
thank him and all of the people who have worked with him in 
this particular project. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to 
represent and introduce a couple of citizens from Saskatoon 
Greystone. I’m delighted to help welcome Manolis and 
Genevieve Barlas to their Assembly. They’re citizens of 
Saskatoon Greystone. They’re leaders of a very 
community-minded, entrepreneurial family. Many of us have 
enjoyed the meals at Manos, among other places that they offer 
proprietorship to. 
 
As well we know how important their role is within Saskatoon 
and far beyond that. They have been supporters of and 
participants in the Brain Tumour Foundation of Canada and 
especially the Saskatoon Spring Sprint. And so I’m delighted to 
ask everyone in this Assembly to join me in welcoming the 
Barlas family to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and to all the members a group of grade 12 students from 

Johnson Collegiate. They’re here with their teacher, Mr. 
McKillop. They’re learning social studies. And I hope I have a 
chance to talk to them after routine proceedings today. All 
members, please help me welcome them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly like to 
make an introduction here today. I see there’s a number of 
delegations down for the Main Street Saskatchewan 
introduction today, and I recognize some faces from Melfort 
and Nipawin. And I think Spiritwood wasn’t able to make it 
here today. 
 
But I’d like to introduce the mayor of my home community, 
Mr. George Tomporowski. He’s the mayor of Shellbrook, has 
been the mayor there for a number of years, and provided some 
excellent leadership. And I think he may find himself in the 
situation where no one is going to run against him for the next 
number of years. So I would hope that he would continue to be 
the mayor for a number of years into the future. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d ask all members of this Assembly to welcome 
George to his Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today with a petition that calls for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts with the Saskatchewan government. 
 
We know that in September this year, the government walked 
away from a new 48-unit, low-income affordable housing 
project here in Regina, allowing a private developer to instead 
take control of and then rent the units at full market price. When 
asked to explain how this government could allow such a thing 
to happen, the Minister of Social Services, and I quote, “You’re 
assuming that there’s these desperate homeless people” — 
showing how disconnected this government is from the realities 
within our communities. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our province 
and to immediately reverse its policy of now allowing 
private developers with whom the government has close 
relationships to default on fixed-price contracts for 
affordable housing projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise to present petitions as it relates to the unsafe conditions 
created by that government on Dewdney Avenue. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5861 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by concerned residents from across 
Regina, including right on Dewdney Avenue. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of better health care in Saskatchewan. The 
petitioners have raised a number of issues that they want to 
bring to the attention of the Assembly. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Requests that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the provincial 
government to recognize health care is getting worse under 
its watch and begin fixing the basics by listening to health 
care workers, patients, and their families; properly 
maintaining hospitals and care facilities; and focusing its 
resources on front-line care instead of spending millions on 
its lean pet project. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is submitted by folks from my constituency. I 
so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Welcome to the Member for Lloydminster 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, I want to welcome the new member representing the 
constituency of Lloydminster. For most of us, our first day in 
the Assembly was a day shared with several other brand new 
members at the start of a brand new Legislative Assembly. 
Most of us didn’t join midway through a session immediately 
after a whirlwind by-election campaign. 
 
[14:15] 
 
So I want to extend a particularly hearty welcome to the new 
member. Having served for over 20 years on the Lloydminster 
Public School Board, most of that time as board Chair, as well 
as serving in the senate of the University of Saskatchewan, I’m 
sure that the member’s lengthy record of public service will 
bode well for her in adjusting to her new role. And I’m 
especially hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that her experience as a mother 
of eight children will help keep some of those rowdy 
government members in line, although I think that might be 

wishful thinking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again on behalf of the official opposition, I say a 
very sincere welcome to the new member. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Battlefords Cowboy Harvest Parade 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, some time 
ago I rose to recognize the Battlefords Quarter Horse Club for 
organizing a very successful Terry Fox Ride. Today I rise to 
highlight yet another worthwhile fundraising event organized 
by this community-minded group. 
 
That event was the Cowboy Harvest Parade which was held in 
October in the town of Battleford. The club has hosted this 
parade for the last seven years and now co-hosts the event with 
the Battlefords food bank. Funds raised by participants in this 
parade and from the auction afterwards are used to fill hampers 
and make Christmas just a little more special for some needy 
families in The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this year’s parade we had approximately 50 
riders and we raised $6,500, which brings the total to 
approximately $40,000 since the parade began. Main Street in 
Battleford was lined with spectators who enjoyed the parade, 
which was made up of only horses, riders, and wagons, as no 
motorized vehicles are allowed. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Battlefords 
Quarter Horse Club for giving me the honour of being this 
year’s parade marshal and lead the parade. Very special thanks 
goes out to Shirley Smith and her committee for all of their hard 
work in organizing this event. We should also thank the many 
sponsors who donated merchandise for the auction, and the 
food bank staff for providing an excellent chili meal after the 
parade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
with me in thanking and congratulating the Battlefords Quarter 
Horse Club on another very successful Cowboy Harvest Parade. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Pleasant Hill School Centenary 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This September I was 
honoured to join Pleasant Hill Community School in 
celebrating its 100th anniversary. In September 1914 the first 
students arrived at Pleasant Hill School. The original school 
was a two-room schoolhouse and the current school building 
was opened for students in 1929. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an honour to take part in the centennial year 
celebration and welcome back powwow on September 10th. As 
always, the powwow was a beautiful, powerful event. As well 
as the powwow, the school, in coordination with the school 
division’s First Nations, Inuit, and Métis education unit, hosted 
school tours and a special program. The students also got to 
take part in a fun-packed day of activities. 
 



5862 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

Pleasant Hill School offers great programming such as Cree 
language classes, Métis jigging, and powwow dance troops, but 
renovations are long overdue. Mr. Speaker, the school needs 
$11 million in renovations to stay functional. Rachel 
Homeniuk, the Pleasant Hill administrative assistant of 15 
years, is one of many with concerns for the school’s future. She 
says, and I quote, “They’re building new schools in new areas 
but I hope they don’t forget the old ones. We have a lot to offer 
at our school.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating Pleasant Hill School on 100 years, and that we 
ensure the people of our older neighbourhoods are also not 
forgotten as the city continues to grow. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

Saskatoon Volunteer Honoured by B’nai Brith 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is perhaps due to Saskatchewan’s frontier legacy that we have 
grown to be a province and a people minded toward community 
involvement. In our lives, each of us has been impacted by the 
efforts of our province’s faithful volunteers who devote their 
resources and time to help those in need. 
 
While every one of these admirable individuals deserves 
recognition, today I stand to recognize one in particular. Last 
Wednesday I, alongside the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for Saskatoon Greystone, had the pleasure of 
attending the 59th Annual Silver Plate Dinner in Saskatoon 
hosted by the B’nai Brith, an international Jewish charitable 
organization. 
 
Each year B’nai Brith honours a member of the local 
community with their prestigious We Are Proud of You Award, 
for exemplary yet unrecognized volunteer service. It’s my 
pleasure to announce that this year’s recipient was Saskatoon’s 
Paul Jaspar. 
 
Paul’s history of involvement is as long as it is diverse, ranging 
from the Jeux de Canada Games to the Juno Awards to service 
to the University of Saskatchewan and many others. His 
reaction upon being recognized speaks to his commitment, 
saying only that he has taken away from volunteering much 
more than he has given. 
 
While it is perhaps not possible to acknowledge the work of 
every volunteer in this province, I am pleased for the 
opportunity to rise today and extend thanks to at least one, 
especially to an individual who has offered so much to the 
people of Saskatchewan and one who I am proud to call a 
friend. 
 
On behalf of all our constituents, I ask members to join me in 
extending a well-deserved congratulations to Mr. Jaspar. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Multicultural Week 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Today I rise in the 
House to announce the proclamation of Multicultural Week in 
Saskatchewan from November 15th to 23rd. This week is made 
possible by the continued partnership between the Multicultural 
Council of Saskatchewan and the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
This year in particular is special because it celebrates the 40th 
anniversary of The Saskatchewan Multicultural Act. 
Saskatchewan was the first province in Canada to enact 
legislation in support of our cultural communities, something 
that we should all be very proud of. This Act promotes the 
value of cultural diversity to the province, including various 
First Nations cultures, Métis, generations of settlers, refugees, 
as well as new immigrants to the province. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
events such as this that truly speak to our provincial motto, 
“from many peoples, strength.” 
 
Multicultural Week kicked off this past Saturday with a public 
forum at the First Nations University of Canada. 
Acknowledging multiculturalism reflects on compassion, 
capacity, and desire to welcome newcomers to our province and 
then create an inclusive society. Weeks such as this also help us 
understand how we as a province gain from being inclusive and 
gaining different perspectives from people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in acknowledging 
and celebrating Multicultural Week here in Saskatchewan, as 
well as the mosaic that we have become. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Northern Saskatchewan Football League 
Ends Second Season 

 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize the Northern Saskatchewan Football League. The 
league’s teams are high-school-based and include both boys and 
girls who play football while completing their high school 
education. The inaugural season was played last year and the 
second season concluded this November 1st with a 
championship game played in Prince Albert. Sponsorship from 
Cameco and the Northern Lights School Division made it 
possible for the players to take to the field in new equipment 
and jerseys. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year the league consisted of nine teams in two 
divisions playing six-man football. The east division consisted 
of the Lac La Ronge Indian Band Huskies, Sandy Bay 
T-Wolves, Cumberland House Islanders, and the Creighton 
Kodiaks. The west division consisted of the La Loche Lakers, 
Buffalo Narrows Eagles, Beauval Voyageurs, Pinehouse 
Lakers, and the Green Lake Spirits. 
 
Three of these teams, Creighton, Lac La Ronge, and Green 
Lake joined the league for the first time this season. Creighton 
made it to the final in their first season and Pinehouse had the 
opportunity to defend their championship from last season. 
Both teams carried a 4 and 0 regular season record into the 
playoffs. In the end, Creighton won the Ralph Pilz 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5863 

Championship Trophy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Creighton Kodiaks on their championship season and to thank 
all the players, coaches, parents, referees, administrators who 
made the Northern Saskatchewan Football League season 
another great success. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Lloydminster Sends Message 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday Lloydminster 
voters elected a new MLA. The new Sask Party member for 
Lloydminster received 64 per cent of the vote, more than double 
the number of votes for the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
candidate. 
 
It’s often said that by-elections are an opportunity to send the 
government a message. I believe the voters of Lloydminster did 
just that. There is more work to do and our government is on 
the right track, but they want an MLA who will give 
Lloydminster a strong voice in this government. Lloydminster 
voters said, we want an MLA who is part of the solution on this 
side of the House, not a part of the problem that exists on that 
side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the results were in, the NDP leader blamed 
the poor result on the Premier calling a snap by-election. That’s 
quite something because the NDP House Leader had called the 
Premier to hold, as quick as possible, a by-election, and the 
NDP leader said he was pleasantly surprised at the early call. 
Mr. Speaker, first the NDP called for an early by-election, and 
then they used it as an excuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the voters of Lloydminster also sent the NDP a 
message. They expect more than just complaints and excuses. 
They expect more than just the same old Lingenfelter tactics 
that failed so miserably in the last election. I wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, did the Opposition Leader get the message? We’re 
about to find out. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Shelter for Homeless People 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Jerry Peequaquat was just 42 
years old. He was homeless since being cut off social 
assistance, so he was using a broken-down semi-trailer on the 
500 block of Avenue K South in Saskatoon as his shelter. On 
Friday night with the temperature at minus 28 degrees with the 
wind chill, Jerry died in that makeshift shelter. Mr. Speaker, 
this is absolutely heartbreaking. 
 
My question is for the Deputy Premier: will he call an inquest 
into the circumstances that led to this tragic death, including the 
government’s decision to cut Jerry Peequaquat off social 
assistance despite the fact that he was desperate and homeless? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a 
heart-wrenching situation that happened to this gentleman. And 
I can’t discuss the specific facts of his case of whether or not he 
was on assistance, but I can caution the NDP to check facts first 
before they try to mislead anyone into thinking something that 
isn’t necessarily true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have the cold-weather strategy. There 
should be no one homeless in Saskatchewan in our cold months. 
There’s a number of emergency numbers in which we 
encourage anyone who knows of someone who is homeless to 
please contact those numbers, and there will be shelter found 
for those people. We have a number of great community-based 
organizations that work very hard on our cold-weather strategy 
to provide shelter. 
 
The Speaker: — As I cautioned the member, one of the 
members last week about using the term misleading, I would 
caution the minister as well. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are very important. And 
that’s why I believe it is necessary and appropriate to have a 
formal coroner’s inquest that would investigate the 
circumstances leading to Jerry Peequaquat’s death. That in itself 
is important to get to the bottom of all those facts, but it would 
also be important because it would allow recommendations to 
be made in order to prevent similar deaths in the future. And 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s necessary, and I absolutely 
urge the government to call for that inquest. 
 
I know from conversations that I had with people over the 
weekend, Mr. Speaker, that many are concerned about how 
many people like Jerry are in the same or a similar situation and 
how many have been cut off from social assistance, Mr. 
Speaker, despite being in a very desperate and homeless state. 
So my specific question is to the Deputy Premier: does the 
government have any information, Mr. Speaker, on how many 
others are in this situation right now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again I want to stress 
that no one should be homeless through our cold winter months. 
The emergency shelters that we have, we have increased 
funding to ensure their viability, as well as we have doubled the 
number of spaces available for emergency shelters in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have an emergency number 
that anyone can call, as well as mobile crisis has services 24 
hours a day. We encourage the public, should they know of 
someone who is living in a homeless situation through the 
winter months, to please call those numbers and make our 
community-based organizations aware of this individual and 
help will be sent to them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we have 
a sense of how many people are in this situation because we 
know that it is Jerry’s nephew who made the comment, as 
reported in the media, that he was homeless after being cut off 
of social assistance. And so for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I think 
an inquest would be appropriate, and it would be helpful to 



5864 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

understand Jerry’s situation but also to understand the situation 
of so many others. 
 
And we’ve been pushing on this government to adopt a 
housing-first strategy which recognizes that homeless people 
are more responsive to intervention and support after they are in 
a home. So a housing-first approach provides chronically 
homeless people with access to permanent housing, intensive 
case management, and the wraparound supports. And that’s 
exactly the kind of supports, Mr. Speaker, that Jerry Peequaquat 
needed but instead, according to his nephew, Mr. Speaker, he 
was cut off of social assistance.  
 
So my question is to the Deputy Premier: when will this 
government finally implement a province-wide housing-first 
strategy to help some of the most vulnerable citizens in our 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we have 
stated in this House before, we have invested more money in 
housing than the previous government did by many, many times 
more than the previous government. We have invested 475 
million to develop over 8,300 units. 
 
We do recognize more needs to be done, and we will be looking 
at this through the poverty strategy. We do have a housing 
strategy, Mr. Speaker. We will be coming forward with a 
disability strategy very soon. We are working on an addictions 
and mental illness strategy, Mr. Speaker. We have violence 
against women strategy. And we are working then with the 
stakeholders and the people who are actually on the ground on 
the poverty strategy. And there may be a suggestion of a 
wraparound service for individuals. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Provision of Social and Affordable Housing  
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The latest numbers 
from this government show over 920 people waiting for social 
and affordable housing, including over 200 seniors. And these 
numbers are just for the larger housing authorities, and that’s 
not counting all the smaller housing authorities in 
Saskatchewan. My question is to the minister: how many 
people in total are currently on wait-lists for social and 
affordable housing in our province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have 
that detailed number at my fingertips here in the House. I’ll 
provide the number. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that at least 532 
people are waiting for social housing in our province. Two 
hundred and one seniors are waiting for social housing. One 
hundred and eight people are waiting for affordable housing. 

But that’s just the number of people who are actually on waiting 
lists. That doesn’t include many others, including those that are 
desperately homeless in our province.  
 
My question is to the minister: does this government have a 
rough estimate of how many people are in desperate need of 
social and affordable housing in our province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there’s been a number of 
initiatives that this government’s undertaken in housing to 
increase the amount of housing that’s available to families and 
to individuals. That work has come out of the great work that 
was done to have a housing strategy, Mr. Speaker, and that 
strategy is working. The vacancy rates around our province are 
now coming to a more healthy level, unlike when the NDP were 
in power and vacancy rates fell to less than 1 per cent and they 
did absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for families in 2011, on average province-wide 
there were 63 people waiting to get new social housing. These 
people waited five months before they got a home. Now in 
2014 we’ve decreased the amount of people on this list by 47 
per cent and decreased the amount of time that they wait by 56 
per cent. Mr. Speaker, for seniors in 2011 to now, quite frankly, 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen the waiting list decrease by 74 per 
cent and their wait time by 65 per cent. There’s more work that 
needs to be done, Mr. Speaker, but we are moving in the right 
direction. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sandra Brown runs 
the Métis Housing Group in Lloydminster and she says and I 
quote: 
 

Up until the Saskatchewan Party was elected, 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation was a leader, and 
innovative across this country. The Saskatchewan Party 
has diminished the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to 
the point where they are almost ineffective. 

 
To the minister: how can this government justify diminishing 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to a point where those who 
are on the front lines say it’s almost ineffective? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting 
that that member stands up and asks housing questions when he 
sat in cabinet when the NDP were in government and did 
absolutely nothing for housing when vacancy rates were less 
than 1 per cent in some of our major centres around the 
province. How does he explain that? How does the member 
from Athabasca explain it? Because he was at the cabinet table 
as well when they were sitting in the land of Nod according to 
the article at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Lloydminster since 2007 the province invested 
and committed to the development of 31 affordable housing 
units, Mr. Speaker. Do you know how many the NDP built in 
your Lloydminster in seven years, their final seven years? Ten. 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5865 

We’ve increased it by 300 per cent. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Building Costs for New Schools 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s P3 
[public-private partnership], rent-a-school scheme just keeps 
sounding worse and worse. Late last week the Education 
minister revealed that the government is off-loading costs, 
significant costs, to develop new schools to municipalities. Yet 
again this government is neglecting its responsibilities and 
forcing municipalities and local property tax payers, families, to 
pay extra.  
 
To the Education minister: how is it fair to local communities 
and families to put them in a position where they either have to 
pay extra or they don’t get the school that they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question. Mr. Speaker, we are at a time in our province where 
we are seeing unprecedented growth. We’ve seen now large 
increases in enrolment. And, Mr. Speaker, since we have 
formed government, we have built 40 new schools including 
nine joint-use schools for our fastest growing communities. In 
addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we have 25 major renovations and 
additions either under way or completed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the municipalities and their elected 
officials. We value and respect the relationship we have with 
our municipal partners. And we look forward to continuing to 
working with them to providing great schools with great 
teachers for our great students in our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go on and just point out some of 
these things that these schools have that will be of benefit to 
municipal taxpayers. These things will have — and these are all 
of the joint-use schools — meeting rooms, multi-purpose 
rooms, after-hours space, playgrounds, child care, etc. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is yet another example 
of that government failing to hold up its end of the bargain. 
Municipalities are already strained, and Saskatchewan families 
are already squeezed by the rising cost of living and the 
increased property taxes. 
 
Municipalities should not be responsible for building schools. 
The provincial government should be, Mr. Speaker. To the 
minister: why can’t this government get the job done on 
building the schools we need? Why does it need to force extra 
costs onto municipalities and families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the 40 new schools is 
certainly an indication that the province is building new 
schools. This is as opposed to the record of the members 
opposite that closed 176 schools. You don’t have an issue with 
municipalities when you close 176 schools. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point something out. The 
issue that the member opposite is talking about is the providing 
of municipal reserve land. Mr. Speaker, municipal reserve is 
land provided by the developer, not the municipality, at no cost. 
The province has, in addition to that, provided funding in 
recognition of the use of municipal reserve. The funding was 
provided to each municipality based on the city of Regina’s 
suggested cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP left us a $1.2 billion school infrastructure 
deficit. In order to meet the needs of our growing communities 
and ensure the cost-effective method for our taxpayers, these 
schools are being planned on municipal reserve land provided 
by the developers at no cost to the municipality. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, families in communities 
that have crowded, rundown classrooms and not enough 
classrooms shouldn’t have to pay more than everybody else to 
get enough class space for their kids. A community that needs a 
school should get a school, period, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
and the Education minister shouldn’t be giving these 
communities an ultimatum either to pay extra or don’t get the 
school.  
 
To the minister: will he live up to his responsibility as 
Education minister, reverse this decision, and stop forcing 
municipalities and Saskatchewan families to pay extra for the 
schools they deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the arrangement that we 
made with the municipalities, that we would pay $1 million for 
the cost of servicing — which I understand it’s not an issue to 
them — if we wanted to reverse the decision and not give them 
the additional $1.015 million per lot, if that’s what the members 
opposite want us to do, is not give them any money and strictly 
go by what the Act says, I suppose the members could put that 
forward as part of their election platform. We’re not going to. 
We’ve agreed to provide each of the municipalities with in 
excess of $1 million per lot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read from The Planning and 
Development Act. It states that a public reserve or a municipal 
reserve is only to be used for such things, and I quote, public 
parks, public buildings, and school purposes. That’s what 
municipal reserve is for. That’s what this land is for. That’s 
what we’ve done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the difference between this side of the House and 
that side of the House is that they planned for a decline in 
enrolment. We plan for a rise in enrolment, and we’re going to 
continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Health Facility Tours 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Last week the Health minister wrongly 
claimed that the John Black North American tours cost just 



5866 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

$200,000 per year. But that is not even close to the truth. 
According to John Black’s closely guarded price schedule 
which we’ve managed to obtain, this government is spending 
$173,500 for every single North American tour. And that’s just 
for John Black to act as the tour guide. It doesn’t include travel 
and accommodation expenses or staff replacement costs. 
 
To the minister: will he now admit that he was wrong last week 
and that this government is spending nearly $200,000 every 
time John Black takes health care workers on a US [United 
States] field trip? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, North American tours are a 
part of the services that we have contracted with John Black and 
Associates. Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members of the House 
and the public that the final year of the contract, we’ve reduced 
the price by $2.6 million. We’ve made some other changes, to 
the point now where this nearly four-year contract will cost the 
taxpayers of this province $35.5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but to date, the savings have far and away 
exceeded that dollar amount when you look at all the lean 
savings that we’ve seen in the system — nearly $57 million 
since the ministry has embarked upon lean. Mr. Speaker, these 
are savings that we can redirect back into front-line care. That 
sees a province, Mr. Speaker, that is actually increasing bed 
numbers, that is actually building new facilities and increasing 
front-line staff at a time where that isn’t the case in every single 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The Premier’s director of communications 
told reporters last week that the tours “cost far less than the 
$200,000 per tour.” But that’s not what John Black’s own price 
schedule shows. An email we’ve obtained from the head of the 
provincial kaizen promotion office shows that John Black rakes 
in over $173,500 for every single field trip. Again to the 
minister: why won’t he just admit that this government is 
paying John Black nearly $200,000 every time he takes 
Saskatchewan health care workers on US field trips? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
have an opportunity over the last number of years to see 
front-line staff in this province learn from high-performing 
health systems across North America and other industries that 
do use lean. Certainly there is a cost to get entry into those 
different organizations, Mr. Speaker. That is a part of the lean 
certification that we are doing which is going to see this 
province save dollars in the long run, Mr. Speaker, and has 
other provinces looking at what Saskatchewan is doing, Mr. 
Speaker, for them to see what lean is meaning to Saskatchewan, 
what it’s meaning to improving health care in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This is what the minister argued repeatedly 

last week as to why taxpayers need to pay John Black nearly 
$200,000 for every US field trip because “He does open the 
doors to those facilities that we wouldn’t otherwise have access 
to.” But here’s what the CEO [chief executive officer] and the 
executive director of the provincial kaizen promotion office 
have to say: “Quick view of Autoliv, VMMC, and Seattle 
Children’s websites indicate opportunity to independently 
organize trips. Not sure why JBA is required.” 
 
To the minister: why are taxpayers paying nearly $200,000 to 
John Black for every single field trip when even the provincial 
kaizen promotion office recognizes that John Black is not 
required? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
we look to take on the, Mr. Speaker, as we look to take on, Mr. 
Speaker, the transition for lean when we are outside of the JBA 
[John Black and Associates] contract, Mr. Speaker, there are 
opportunities for us through organizations like Virginia Mason 
that there is a cost for us to, in order for us to take part in their 
lean journey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members opposite that the top 10 
hospitals in United States, as rated by US news magazine, all 10 
of them do use lean, and in fact 7 out of the 10 have their own 
lean training program or academy, including the Mayo quality 
academy, Mr. Speaker, which we’ll now have access through 
that program. And there are other organizations that we now 
have access to through our relationship with JBA. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I am not convinced that this 
province or this government should be sending nearly 900 
health care workers on US field trips with John Black. But if the 
government is going to do it, Mr. Speaker, if they’re intent and 
determined to go down that path, they don’t need to be paying 
John Black nearly $200,000 for each and every field trip. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not only the Leader of the Opposition 
and health care workers who say it doesn’t make sense. The 
Health Quality Council, Mr. Speaker, says that it’s not even 
required. Here’s what the top brass at the provincial kaizen 
promotion office says: they say that it’s possible to 
independently organize these events. Back, Mr. Speaker, on 
June 27th, they said, “Not sure why JBA is required.” 
 
Well and then we just heard the minister here again in question 
period say that it’s necessary to pay to gain access, Mr. 
Speaker. That is contrary to what websites say. It is contrary to 
what the lean kaizen promotion office says for the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the minister: when he said to reporters last week 
that it was necessary to pay, did he know, did he know that it’s 
actually not necessary to pay John Black to get access, or is this 
all news to him right now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5867 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
organizations that we’re working with is Virginia Mason. This 
is an organization that has done some work around, some good 
work around quality improvement and a stop-the-line safety 
alert system which, Mr. Speaker, even the Minister of Health in 
the UK [United Kingdom] visited earlier this year and 
announced that they were going to do a stop-the-line safety alert 
project, which we’ve now done in Saskatoon, we’ve launched 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll answer the question to the Leader of the 
Opposition. This is Virginia Mason’s website. It’s advanced 
lean training. It goes through what the training program calls 
for, and there is a cost associated per person that we send down. 
This is one organization that we’re using, but there is a cost per 
person. Mr. Speaker, this is a part of the lean certification 
training that we do want to provide so that we can exit the 
contract in June and be able to stand this up on its own without 
JBA. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, last week in the Assembly, last 
week in the rotunda, and again today, Mr. Speaker, we have the 
Minister of Health saying that it is necessary to pay John Black 
nearly $200,000 for every ridiculous field trip of the John Black 
tour through North America. We have, Mr. Speaker, an email 
from the lean kaizen provincial promotion office from June 
27th to the Ministry of Health. The minister is well aware of 
this, Mr. Speaker. The email says, “Not sure why JBA is 
required.” It’s right here in the document, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the minister: last week and today, when he’s 
saying that John Black is required, that is clearly not the case, 
coming from information directed to his very own ministry. 
Does this minister believe that it’s necessary to pay John Black 
nearly $200,000 for every ridiculous field trip down to the 
States? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’m just going off 
the Virginia Mason Institute’s advanced lean training website, 
Mr. Speaker, where it identifies . . . And this is one of the 
portions of the trip that we would have sent people on. It talks 
about the study of lean implementation, detailed training, and 
the tools that were used by Virginia Mason: hands-on, in-class 
exercises, Mr. Speaker. And there is a cost associated which we 
pay through JBA to enrol people into this course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much is it? Is it 200,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — No. In fact it’s $6,500 per person, so it 
would depend on the number of people that we send down. But, 
Mr. Speaker, this is the work that we’ve contracted through 
JBA. They’ve identified these opportunities, and those are the 
ones that we’re sending front-line staff on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, from the very own document that 
was received through Health Quality Council lean kaizen 
promotion office, here’s a line: “Quick view of Autoliv, 

VMMC, and Seattle Children’s websites indicate opportunity to 
independently organize trips. Not sure why JBA is required.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Health Quality Council, the kaizen promotion 
office says it’s not necessary to waste the money and to pad 
John Black’s pockets. But for some bizarre reason, this 
government is intent on just shovelling more and more millions 
into the bank account of John Black, all at the same time as they 
ignore the concerns here in the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they knew in late June that they didn’t need 
to pay this money to John Black, yet this minister, this 
government plows ahead in mid-July, re-signs the contract with 
John Black. Now if they were intent on plowing ahead and 
signing the contract, Mr. Speaker, I have problems with that, 
but they could of at least listened to ministry officials, listened 
to the kaizen promotion office, and cut out the John Black 
world tour, North American kaizen field trips at 200,000 bucks 
a pop. 
 
Why didn’t the minister, why didn’t this government use some 
common sense, actually save some money, and actually put it 
where it counts on the front lines? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it you want to talk about 
putting the patient first in this province, one doesn’t need to 
look at the NDP record. The record of the NDP in the last five 
years as a government: 173 fewer physicians, 455 fewer nurses, 
155 fewer pharmacists, 95 fewer physiotherapists. Mr. Speaker, 
1999, when wait-lists were the longest that they were in this 
country in Saskatchewan, they made a promise to cut surgical 
wait times by 30 per cent. In the four years after the 1999 
election, Mr. Speaker, wait times didn’t drop by 30 per cent. 
They went up 61 per cent. That’s . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I’ve had a chance to go through the 
record of the NDP. Here’s what we’ve been able to do with a 
lower increase in dollar amounts: 423 more doctors in 
Saskatchewan, a 24 per cent increase; 2,600 more nurses of all 
designations; and a 99 per cent decrease in the number of 
people waiting for surgeries longer than 18 months — 
something the members opposite should apologize and be 
ashamed of their record in this province. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 

New Communities in Main Street Saskatchewan Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to share with you an exciting announcement I made earlier 
today. Following the success of our four demonstration 
communities, Main Street Saskatchewan has accepted 11 new 
communities into the program. The cities of Melfort and Swift 
Current have been accepted into the program at the accredited 



5868 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

level and will receive all supports and services offered by the 
program. 
 
Nine communities have been accepted at the affiliate level and 
will receive some of the supports and services offered by the 
Main Street program. These communities include the town of 
Spiritwood, city of Regina, town of Watrous, town of 
Kerrobert, town of Nipawin, city of Humboldt, city of Moose 
Jaw, town of Shellbrook, town of Langenburg. 
 
These communities join Prince Albert, Maple Creek, Indian 
Head, and Wolseley, who entered the program in 2011 and have 
already seen successes such as the exterior restoration of Maple 
Creek’s Commercial Hotel, facade improvements to Indian 
Head’s Night Hawk Theatre, the installation of new windows in 
Wolseley’s Perley Block, and exterior upgrades to Prince 
Albert’s RNF Ventures building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have representatives from these 
new communities with us here today, and I ask that the House 
join me in welcoming them to the Main Street Saskatchewan 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, historic downtowns and commercial districts are 
important to our growing province. They support economic 
development, encourage both tourism and cultural initiatives, 
and provide citizens with places they can be proud of. Mr. 
Speaker, over the past three years our government has 
supported the Main Street Saskatchewan program with 
investments of more than $1.65 million. Such investments 
helped to create 22 new businesses and 66 new jobs. They’ve 
seen $4.9 million committed to historic building and streetscape 
improvements, and $6.5 million in property acquisitions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the addition of these 11 new communities, I 
look forward to seeing more of our historic downtown and 
commercial districts developed through the Main Street 
Saskatchewan program. This program will help keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
thanks to the hon. minister for providing his comments to me in 
advance of his announcement today. Certainly this is something 
I think all of these communities can be very proud of. I’ve had 
the good fortune of visiting I think all of them but one, and I 
know that these communities are vibrant and working hard to 
maintain their community spirit. And certainly a program like 
this is something that will help them continue to do the good 
work that they do. 
 
Having grown up in a smaller community, Mr. Speaker, I know 
how important the main street is to the life of a community. 
And certainly the local folks who put in countless hours of 
volunteering, dedicating themselves to the lifeblood of their 
community and to that community spirit, deserve the utmost 
recognition. 
 
And certainly these 11 new communities that have been 
accepted into the program are good examples of what can be 
done when people work together. And that truly is the 

Saskatchewan spirit I think that we all are familiar with and 
proud of when we think about our own home communities and 
the people that we represent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just really want to congratulate all these 
folks for doing the hard work that they needed to do to get 
accepted into this program. I know they are inspiring to many 
other communities in Saskatchewan. And certainly we’ll see the 
results of the investment in this program through the hard work 
that these individuals will be doing from here on in. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, we’d like again to 
congratulate the 11 communities that have been entered into the 
program, and certainly the four communities that have already 
demonstrated success, great success, with this kind of support. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and we look forward to 
seeing more commitment from these individual communities. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 

Regulatory Approval for Medical Isotopes 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
inform the Legislative Assembly that Canadian Light Source 
has received regulatory approval for production and shipment 
of molybdenum-99 isotopes. These medical isotopes will be 
used to perform critical life-saving tests on people throughout 
Canada. 
 
This facility, located in Saskatoon, is the first of its kind in the 
world, and produces medical isotopes by using powerful X-rays 
as opposed to the traditional way. This announcement puts 
Saskatchewan and the Canadian Light Source in the forefront in 
the area of innovation. 
 
We’re pleased to see that our government’s $2 million 
commitment in funding for this project will have lasting 
benefits for medicine and open up even more opportunities for 
isotope technology commercialization worldwide. The medical 
isotopes project shows Saskatchewan’s commitment to being a 
world leader in the application of technologies by developing a 
safe and effective means of producing molybdenum-99 without 
the need for uranium. This breakthrough reduces our 
dependence on reactors such as the one in Chalk River. This 
truly is a remarkable achievement and soon scientists from 
around the world will be coming to Saskatchewan to see how it 
works. Once again Saskatchewan is claiming its spot as a world 
leader in innovation, research, and development. 
 
Medical isotopes play a key role in modern-day medicine. Each 
week about 20,000 patients in Canada rely on them to help 
diagnose serious medical issues. This innovation will have 
far-reaching effects, and many people from across Canada and 
around the world will benefit from them. This project was made 
possible by funding from Natural Resources Canada’s isotope 
technology acceleration program and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, with its partner, Prairie Isotope Production 
Enterprise. By 2016 this facility will be the leading supplier to 
health care institutions across Western Canada and northern 
Ontario. I ask all members to congratulate the Canadian Light 
Source on this remarkable achievement as they bring much 
needed isotopes to people across Canada. 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5869 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 
the minister for the ministerial statement in advance. This really 
is a remarkable achievement and this is really good news. And 
certainly we want to thank all partners, all involved, and 
certainly the Canadian Light Source synchrotron on this really 
remarkable achievement that highlights the ingenuity, the 
research and development capacity of many, and is a really 
special innovation project both for our province, for the 
synchrotron itself, but for people across Canada in being able to 
receive the medical improvements that can be brought here. So 
this is a really good project. We’re pleased to celebrate this 
success, and we thank all partners for their involvement. It’s 
noteworthy that not long ago investments were made in the 
synchrotron. I know it was referenced many times as Canada’s 
or in fact the world’s greatest science experiment at the time, 
and certainly these sorts of dividends are impressive and 
valuable to all. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 159, 
The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act, 2014 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved first 
reading of Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
[15:00] 
 

Bill No. 608 — The Fairness for Saskatchewan Businesses 
in Government Procurement Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 608, The 
Fairness for Saskatchewan Businesses in Government 
Procurement Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 
first reading of Bill No. 608, The Fairness for Saskatchewan 
Businesses in Government Procurement Act. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, today I rise to move second reading of a bill to 
amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 
 
The SPP [Saskatchewan Pension Plan] provides a unique 
retirement savings vehicle for individuals with little or no 
access to occupational pension plans or other retirement savings 
arrangements. It is the only plan of its kind in Canada offering 
members professional investment management at institutional 
costs. 
 
Since 1986 the Saskatchewan Pension Plan has grown to over 
33,000 members and has $401 million under trusteeship. The 
plan is an integral part of the retirement savings plans of the 
people of Saskatchewan. The plan also offers members 
important benefits such as affordability. You can be a member 
of the plan regardless of your earnings. This is attractive for 
people with irregular or seasonal earnings such as students, 
part-time workers, or people who are self-employed. 
 
Simple: the Saskatchewan Pension Plan takes pride in being 
easy to join and understand. Paperwork is kept to a minimum. 
As well administrators of the plan are always available and 
happy to answer any questions members may have. They are 
willing to assist with any aspect of the plan. Consistent: the 
plan’s philosophy is to invest cautiously over the long term. 
This is an attractive approach for many people but especially for 
those with little or no investment experience. The plan is also 
voluntary. You are never obligated to contribute. Flexible: you 
can make a contribution at any time during the plan year. 
Portable: it is always your plan regardless of where you live or 
what you do. Professionally managed: investments are handled 
by a professional investment firm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments included in this Act will update 
the language to reflect current circumstances and bring it into 
line with best practices contained in other government pension 
plans. The Act has been in place since 1986, and this is the first 
comprehensive update since that time. 
 
The amendments will repeal Bill 82, The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan Amendment Act, 2013. This Act was given Royal Assent 



5870 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

on May 15, 2013 but was not proclaimed. For clarity, the 
provisions of that bill are incorporated into these amendments. 
The provisions from Bill 82 predominantly dealt with the 
legislative changes that would be required for SPP to accept 
transfers in from Saskatchewan-based locked-in pension plans 
and locked-in retirement accounts, LIRAs, by bringing SPP in 
line with provincial pension benefits legislation. 
 
In particular, the amendments include an update to survivor 
benefits so that married members must name their spouse as 
beneficiary of their account unless the spouse waives that right. 
Also retiring members who are married and who choose an SPP 
annuity at retirement will have to choose a joint and last 
survivor 60 per cent annuity unless the spouse waives that right. 
The proposed amendments are in line with provisions in The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Act. 
 
The Act also clarifies the language around the board’s authority 
to offer prescribed pension benefits to members. This language 
simply clarifies the duties of the board. Any new pension 
benefit would still need to be set in regulation. 
 
Currently retiring members may purchase an annuity from SPP 
or transfer to a guaranteed life annuity, a locked-in retirement 
account, or a prescribed registered retirement income fund at 
another financial institution. If other options become available 
in the marketplace, the board could recommend regulations be 
amended to include the new product. 
 
The amendments introduce the term “specialty fund,” which is 
similar wording to that included in other government pension 
plans and will allow the board to introduce unitization, which is 
a standard in the mutual fund industry. 
 
Another amendment will allow funds payable to a member of 
the SPP to be transferred to the General Revenue Fund in the 
event that the member cannot be located. This would only be 
done after all other avenues have been exhausted, and the funds 
would continue to be held in the member’s name. This protocol 
is similar to the process used by other financial institutions 
when clients cannot be located. 
 
Amendments will allow members to object to a marital division 
of their account on certain grounds. The Act has been silent on 
this issue. The amendments modernize the language in the Act 
as well as clarifying the board’s duties and responsibilities. 
These are not expanded beyond current practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 
2014. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I’m pleased on behalf of the opposition to stand today and 
give initial comments on Bill No. 158, which is An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. And, Mr. Speaker, 
what’s really important I think at the outset is that there is 
certainly a lot of folks that pay close attention to . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to request leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take a 
minute to introduce guests in the gallery behind me, which is 
the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . west gallery — thank you — 
and in particular Mr. Trevor Peterson from Assiniboia and his 
mom. 
 
Trevor is an amazing individual in the Assiniboia community, 
which is close to my home community of Lafleche, and he’s a 
teacher there. He’s very involved in his community and he’s 
also stepping up to the plate politically. He will be representing 
the NDP in the federal election coming up for Cypress Hills 
Grasslands. And we know that Trevor is fully committed to the 
issues that are important to him like rural issues, health care, 
and certainly the plight of people living in poverty, and the 
environment. 
 
So there’s a number of things that he’s very eloquent on and 
passionate about, and we know he’s going to represent well in 
the upcoming election. But we just want to take a moment to 
welcome Trevor and his mom to his Legislative Assembly 
today. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2014 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again as I said at the outset, there’s a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan that pay very close attention to the pension plans 
and the pension plans throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. So 
it’s important that we take a long, hard look at this particular 
pension plan and some of the amendments made as a result of 
this bill, Bill 158. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what a lot of people in Saskatchewan have 
been certainly asking for, and I think at times they, like myself, 
need to have more explanation and more information I guess as 
it relates to pension plans. 
 
And a lot of people in northern Saskatchewan . . . I realized 
throughout time that a lot of our elders, and I’ll give you a good 
example in my home community, that a lot of elders live on a 
very small fixed income. I think a lot of them have the basic old 
age security pension plan. I think it’s about $550. And 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5871 

depending on their circumstances and their income from the 
CPP, the Canada Pension Plan, they sometimes have such a low 
amount that they have to apply for a supplementary pension 
plan that is attached to the old age security plan. And what 
happens, Mr. Speaker, is many of the elders in my home 
community sometimes are forced to live on 11 or $1,300 a 
month, which is really a very tough and trying time for them. 
 
So what I try and do, you know, as an MLA, is to talk to a lot of 
the senior citizens when I am visiting with them to see what 
issues that they had in their previous years that didn’t allow 
them to get set up for a pension plan. Because obviously when 
they worked when they were younger, they got some of their 
benefits back through the CPP. But by and large, many people 
throughout the province — and I find a lot of evidence of that in 
my home community — that when it comes to pension plans, a 
lot of northern and Aboriginal seniors really didn’t have a lot of 
information on pension plans when they were younger. The net 
effect is, Mr. Speaker, is now that they’ve reached the age of 65 
and over, that they’re finding that the meagre amount that they 
get from old age really has a dramatic, drastic effect on their 
ability to look after themselves and of course to run a 
household. 
 
So a lot of times these elders that I’m involved with, when I talk 
to them about pension plans, they often tell me, make sure you 
explain to young people how the pension plan works or how an 
RRSP [registered retirement savings plan] works or how 
savings work, Mr. Speaker. Because in the early years, these 
elders, they certainly worked hard. They lived off the land. 
They raised their kids. They gave them great love and great 
discipline, and the list goes on as to the qualities that they 
afforded their children. 
 
But what the elders, a lot of elders didn’t do, Mr. Speaker, is 
they didn’t financially plan for their old age. And at that time it 
was tough enough to put food on the table, to make sure the 
kids were warm and dressed properly. And, Mr. Speaker, many 
of the elders in my particular area, they’re in a transition mode 
from the economy of the ’50s and the ’40s to the economy of 
the ’80s and ’90s, and it was not their fault that they didn’t 
understand the pension plan system or not their fault that they 
didn’t properly financially plan for their older years. And the 
net effect, Mr. Speaker, is that they are now finding the pinch, 
unable to be able to afford their home and some of the other 
bills that they have. 
 
So I want to say when it comes to the pension plan issues and 
some of the points raised by the minister and some of the 
amendments that the Saskatchewan Party government want to 
do, we obviously want to pay very close attention to this as an 
opposition. Because as my elders taught me from back home, 
yes we may have made the mistakes in not properly financing 
our future, but we want to make sure that the young people do 
not make the same mistakes. So we often tell the young people 
in our constituency, pay very close attention to your pension 
plan. Pay close attention to your RRSPs. Pay close attention to 
how you’re going to build up a savings fund for the time when 
you turn 60 or 65, because retirement is something that we 
ought to plan for. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, we find that there’s a lot of younger 
people as a result working for companies like Areva, like 

Cameco, like the provincial government, like the federal 
government and some private firms, that they’re able to be in 
the process of setting up a pension plan. And this is something I 
think that more and more young people are paying attention to. 
Because as I’ve indicated before, the elders that are living on a 
meagre 12 or $1,300 a month today understood that they didn’t 
put the money away when they were younger because they 
couldn’t afford it, but they don’t want to see the young people 
make the same mistakes. 
 
So pension plans overall are something that we have to pay very 
close attention to, and we tell all the young working men and 
women to pay very close attention when they work for a 
company, whether they have a pension plan in place, a health 
benefit and all these sort of options, and that they should really 
research those options and make sure that they incorporate that 
in their overall financial plan for their later years. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now one of the things that Bill 158 speaks about is to amend 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, as the minister alluded to earlier, 
that this particular plan itself, he used the word inclusive so 
people could be involved with that in terms of being part of the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
I understood the wording he used was simple and very 
straightforward in terms of understanding what you’re 
contributing to. It’s consistent in terms of the practices being 
employed by other pension plans of this sort. He talks about it 
being flexible, a flexible plan, Mr. Speaker, where they’re not 
obliged to contribute. And they certainly . . . I believe what he 
said is that they can exit when they want, and it’s portable. 
 
These are some of the languages that the minister has attached 
to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and these are the qualities I 
think a lot of people are looking for when they want to invest in 
the pension plan and have it professionally managed. So 
everything from being inclusive to being consistent and to being 
portable, these are some of the terminology and the wording 
that I think a lot of younger people will want to pay close 
attention to. And of course we would also encourage that. 
 
So the bill itself, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan bill talks about 
some of the qualities that many pension plans have, and we see 
that same language here. And this is the important part, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan ought to be 
consistent with some of the more successful pension plans that 
are out there, and watch how the best practices of other pension 
plans are benefiting many of their members. 
 
And this is something I think is also really important. The 
minister talked about updating the language in the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, which I think is really important. 
And I go back to the notion of being consistent in terms of their 
practice to other similar pension plans throughout the country. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they also talked about the provisions from 
Bill 82 where they want to make sure that some of the 
provisions that are made in Bill 82 are included in this 
particular plan. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to now go back to 
Bill 82 to make sure that some of the information that they have 
presented in Bill 82 are similar to what is being proposed in this 



5872 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

particular bill, Bill 158. 
 
The minister also talked about a specialty fund where they’re 
. . . it’s allowing for the unitization of your funds, talking 
certainly about when you talk about mutual funds overall. And 
these are some of the languages and some of the issues that we 
have to take every step and every opportunity to learn. What is 
exactly meant by unitization? What is the mutual fund market? 
What’s that all about? And, Mr. Speaker, how does that benefit 
the participants in this particular Saskatchewan Pension Plan? 
 
This is the information that is critical. A lot of younger people 
need to know what exactly is required, what is exactly is meant 
by unitization. Mr. Speaker, the Finance people are 
recommending language such as the . . . [inaudible] . . . annuity, 
LIRA. These are some of the wording I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s really, really important that we pay close attention to, 
what exactly is being proposed. And this is where I often will 
make the point that many people throughout Saskatchewan 
need to have this particular financial literacy in terms of 
understanding what the pension plan looks like, what it could 
offer, what are the components of it, what are the best practices, 
how it’s being managed. The list goes on and on and on as to 
what we need to do to understand pensions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that there’s a lot of professional financial planners out 
there that are consistently going to updates and in training 
programs to better hone their skills and their knowledge so they 
can turn around and give that advice to the average layperson, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s really important because they 
are the professionals. But the average consumer, the person that 
will contribute to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, I think we 
need to make an effort to certainly explain to the public overall 
some of the terminology used in the pension plan so they’re 
better able to understand this particular aspect. So I think it’s 
something that is really, really important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the changes on the bill itself, Bill 158, it 
talked about section 3 where there are changes made to the 
definition of the spouse to a more modern definition. And these 
are some of again the terminologies, never mind the financial 
terminology, but now in this day and age that you have to really 
pay attention to the phrase definition of a spouse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also know that section 5 allows cabinet to 
expand the plan’s offerings and allow retirees to keep their 
money in the plan and collect if they choose. And that’s one of 
the points that we also raised on the flexibility issue. And this is 
something that we have to pay very close attention to, because 
often I tell people back home, if you want to understand a 
complex issue — pension plans are complex — then look at the 
people that are involved with the pension. Usually be the people 
that have retired from civil service or people that have been 
professional people or managers all their life. See what they’re 
doing. Talk to them. Learn from them as well. 
 
I think it’s a really, really important key when you want to 
expand your knowledge about pension plans to approach the 
right people and ask a bunch of questions. And that’s why I 
think it’s important under the Saskatchewan Pension Plan that 
there is the ability for the average person to ask questions as to 
how they can participate, what information that is required of 
them, and any other information that they feel is relevant before 

they join into the pension plan, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
So we have to ask the questions. Who asked for some of these 
changes? Which is really important. Which group asked for the 
changes under The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act? Why did 
they ask for those changes? Who’s the benefactor of some of 
those changes? And while there may be a straightforward 
communication issue such as the definition of a spouse, as I 
mentioned a bit earlier, but is there any kind of financial benefit 
to a certain, particular group of people and we don’t know that 
at the outset? 
 
These are changes being brought forward. And I think it’s 
really, really important that we ask the questions: who brought 
these changes forward, and who benefits from these changes? 
And is there any disproportionate negative effect on a certain 
group of people? We would like to know that information as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again we would strongly encourage people to look at the 
wide variety of pension plans that are out there and to do a good 
analysis. I guess the best thing, I would encourage people out 
there, just talk to a financial planner. They make a lot of this 
work easier, and you can understand it greater. 
 
But it’s important that you begin to try and understand how the 
pension plan system works earlier in your life, because really 
it’ll affect you in a positive way as you age. Because you’ve 
had all this knowledge and you’re able to apply it strategically 
when it comes to putting money away, whether it’s an RRSP or 
whether it’s through your contribution to the CPP or whether 
it’s your contribution to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan or to 
the public employees pension plan, whatever plan is out there. 
 
There are so many plans out there. There are so many different 
options in the marketplace that it becomes very confusing and 
conflicting as to where you’d like to put your money. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this is one of the aspects I think is really important 
when it comes to the pension plan, is to make sure that you take 
the time to understand it. Look at the different options that are 
out there, the best practices. Where’s the best place to invest 
your money? How could you do a complement of RRSPs, 
RESPs [registered education savings plan], which are for 
education purposes, whether you are PEPP [public employees 
pension plan] member or whether you’re an SGEU 
[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union] 
member? 
 
It becomes very confusing at times, and there’s all these options 
out there, but you must make the effort. And people out there, 
young and old, must make the effort to try and understand how 
the pension plans work so they can best design a plan for 
themselves, so they’re able to retire with an adequate amount of 
money in their later years. 
 
So this is the important part of these particular bills. It’s a 
complex world when we look at pension plans, very complex. 
It’s very interactive, yet it’s very competitive as well. 
 
So we look at the cost. Is there any liability to the taxpayer in 
this instance? Again, who was consulted and who is at risk? So 
these are some of the things that we look at when we talk about 
Bill 158. 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5873 

We have got to encourage people young and old to really pay a 
lot of attention to the pension plans throughout Saskatchewan 
and throughout Canada as a whole. But in particular we’ve got 
to make sure that they pay close attention to the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan because, as the minister alluded to, there are 
options for many people to engage themselves in this plan. And 
there may be a lot of merit for them to join this plan, but 
they’ve got to do the research on their own or seek advice or get 
professional advice from the different many financial planners 
out there that could give you very sound advice on how to 
prepare for their retiring years, for your retiring years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the other issues on this particular 
bill: many of the clauses, I pointed out earlier, deal with Bill 82 
which has passed third reading but was never proclaimed. Now 
it goes through this Assembly and you have your first and your 
second and your third reading and after third reading, after it’s 
been passed through the Assembly under third reading, then it’s 
all up to the government to proclaim the particular Act. And 
what we notice on Bill 82, which has many of these changes on 
this particular bill, that they never did proclaim that bill 
previously. 
 
Now obviously the government’s not doing their homework 
properly because why propose a bill, why propose the bill, go 
through all the steps in the legislative agenda, and then later on 
not proclaim it? Now many people that were expecting the 
changes in the previous bill, Bill 82, when those changes were 
put through the Legislative Assembly, they assumed that it was 
going to be proclaimed and that it soon become law. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing that it hasn’t been proclaimed, 
and the question we’re going to ask is, why has it not been 
proclaimed? And obviously there’s some shortcomings on Bill 
82. There may have been some oversight on some major issues 
on Bill 82 and all of a sudden the government didn’t proclaim 
it. They had ample opportunity to do all the research. They had 
ample opportunity to go out and do the consultation. And 
obviously Bill 82 not being proclaimed would tell us that there 
is a problem in Bill 82 that this government didn’t anticipate or 
didn’t do their homework, so now they’re back, again back to 
the drawing board. And what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, on this 
particular bill, Bill 158, they’re now putting some of those 
provisions that they had previously under Bill 82. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen is the underperformance by 
this government. We’ve seen evidence over the years of how 
they just can’t seem to get things right, Mr. Speaker. And Bill 
158 is another example of how they have to recycle a previous 
bill, and that bill being Bill 82, put it in under this particular bill 
under a new heading, and now try and get it right this time. And 
that’s why in opposition we ask the questions, we ask the 
people that are engaged, are these guys doing the right thing? 
Are the Saskatchewan Party government doing the right thing? 
And who did they consult? Who did they consult? And, Mr. 
Speaker, who’s the net benefactor of some of the changes that 
they made in any of the Acts that they propose? 
 
So what we see from our vantage point, Mr. Speaker, is 
obviously this government has underperformed. Somebody 
dropped the ball on Bill 82. They got it through the Assembly 
because they are 48 members and now, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
finding out that they couldn’t get Bill 48 because they missed a 

bunch of their homework. And obviously they couldn’t 
proclaim it because it wasn’t complete, so now they turn around 
and next legislative agenda, here we are again. The official 
opposition is saying, can you get this particular bill right? 
Because obviously you’re bringing it back under a different 
title, under a different number, and you never got your 
homework done. 
 
So from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, once again this is 
evidence of an underperforming government that simply has 
lost their way, doesn’t know the legislative agenda from how to 
financially manage the future of some of these pension plans, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is another good example why it’s 
important to have the opposition engaged and to make sure we 
send a message to people out there — the financial planners, the 
people in the know, in the banking industry, the chartered 
accountants, people that have a lot of this information. 
 
We’re asking them to review what’s all in the bill, Bill 158, 
which is to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. And 
who are the net benefactors? And how does this bill affect the 
activity of the pension plan so far? And even though the 
wording sounds promising at the outset, when you talk about 
flexibility, when you talk about being very simplistic, when you 
talk about being inclusive, Mr. Speaker, we’re finding out that 
being inclusive of some of the consultations and simplistic and 
inclusive and being inclusive of the people to begin with, what 
we’re finding out, Mr. Speaker, as a result of some of them, the 
changes proposed on the Bill 82, that the government didn’t get 
it figured out from day one. 
 
They couldn’t figure it out then. So they recycled this bill, come 
back as saying to the people of Saskatchewan, oops, we made a 
mistake. We didn’t get this bill done properly. We didn’t do all 
the consultation properly. We may have missed a few key 
provisions in Bill 82. So now we’re going to recycle the bill 
under another name and under another numbered bill, Bill 158. 
And here we are again, Mr. Speaker. Here we are again. 
 
So these are some of the things that we have to ask in this 
particular bill. There are so many, so many options out there for 
pension plans. There are so many players that people have got 
to pay close attention. That was the first initial comment we 
had. 
 
The second thing is, who did this particular government 
consult? And what did they mess up in the original bill, Bill 82? 
What did they mess up so badly that despite going to the 
legislative agenda for three readings of this particular bill, they 
couldn’t proclaim it? Because obviously somebody on that side 
dropped the ball, and we will certainly find that information out 
as we continue going down the path of this particular bill, Bill 
158. 
 
So there is a lot of information that we need to ask, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re going to ask folks out there that have any of 
this particular interest and to give us advice. And obviously 
what we would advise the public out there, whether in Beauval, 
Saskatchewan or in Buffalo Narrows or whether you’re in Swift 
Current or whether you’re in Moose Jaw, the important thing is 
to pay close attention to the pension plan, plans that are out 
there, and to learn as much as you can. Because a well-informed 
public, Mr. Speaker, certainly helps the future of our province 



5874 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

and certainly helps those that are getting on in their years being 
able to survive comfortably as opposed to some of the hard 
lessons that is being learned by many of the elders in my 
community, where old age security and the supplementary 
income from the old age security department is simply not 
enough to cover your rent, your food, your power, your 
medicine, your clothing, your essentials, Mr. Speaker. Many 
elders struggle every single day in the North and we understand 
exactly what they’re going through. So they’re giving us advice, 
to myself and to many young people, pay attention to these 
pension plans because they’ll serve you well in the future. And 
that’s basically one important message that I certainly have. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Bill 82, big mistakes made on that bill by the 
Saskatchewan Party government. Bill 158 is presented to cover 
up those mistakes in the hope they can get it right this time, and 
we pray they can get it right this time, Mr. Speaker. But we 
need to make sure that they’re not making any more mistakes 
because Bill 158 is a classic example of a government that’s 
been underperforming and underachieving, despite having 
record revenues over the last seven years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s one of the important lessons that we’ve learned in 
opposition, is that the Saskatchewan Party government simply 
can’t get it right. They make many, many mistakes and they 
come back to the drawing board on many occasions. And Bill 
158 is a classic example of how they’ve messed something up, 
couldn’t proclaim their last Act because they didn’t do their 
homework, and now here we are once again recycling a bill 
under a different name because the Saskatchewan Party 
government couldn’t get the job done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues have a lot more 
information and are much more astute in the pension plan 
debate and issues than I am. I’m looking forward to some of 
their comments. But at the outset, as the official opposition, 
we’re encouraging people to again pay attention to the pension 
plan issue. Financially plan for your future. Secondly, pay 
attention to bills of these sorts because they do have an impact 
and they do have an effect on people that may want to choose 
the Saskatchewan Pension Plan as a vehicle in which they 
would invest some of their savings. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
one of the key things as a result of this particular Assembly, is 
people out there should be getting the information and should 
be subjected to the information through the television medium 
to ensure that they have some understanding what the pension 
plans are all about. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the opposition will certainly take 
their time to network with people that are in the know and 
amongst our own connections in our own network to find out 
what the changes are in this particular bill and to see if they hurt 
any families in Saskatchewan and to see how the Saskatchewan 
Party messed up the first go-round under Bill 82. And we will 
certainly expose them to that. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill 158, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2014. This bill will make amendments to over 
100 Acts to update outdated language, ensure gender-neutral 
language is used, and correct grammatical and reference errors. 
 
Saskatchewan’s last general statute revision occurred in 1978. 
Since that time, several statute law amendment Acts have been 
introduce to correct errors. As time progresses, certain terms 
fall out of favour, Mr. Speaker. In 2012 an inter-ministerial 
committee with representatives from the ministries of Justice, 
Social Services, and Health provided a report with 
recommendations on potential amendments to legislation 
affecting adults in vulnerable circumstances. One of the 
recommendations was to update antiquated and offensive 
language in Saskatchewan legislation. 
 
This bill amends four Acts to remove the term lunatic and 
another eight Acts to remove reference to mental incapacity or 
incompetence in favour of lacks capacity. Similarly as 
technology advances, terminology used in relation to 
technology also changes. What we previously referred to as 
telephone or facsimile transmission, electronic mail and Internet 
website are now commonly referred to as fax, email, and 
website. This bill will update this terminology in 18 Acts. This 
bill will also amend over 40 Acts to repeal the terms chairman 
and vice-chairman in favour of gender-neutral chairperson and 
vice-chairperson. This bill will also repeal and replace words 
that have a variety of spellings such as extra-provincial, in so 
far, subject matter, safe keeping, judgment, and pipe line to 
work toward more consistency. This will assist in more accurate 
electronic searches of Saskatchewan’s legislation. A second bill 
is also being introduced, Mr. Speaker, to amend the bilingual 
Acts. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I am pleased to stand in my place today to give the initial 
comments on Bill 153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we look through the bill itself, obviously 
there is a number of bills that are being impacted, and the bills 
range in terms of the impact from simple language issues that 
need to have correct spelling, as was indicated, to correct the 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5875 

language, and certainly to correct the gender-neutral designation 
issues that are all throughout some of these Acts. 
 
And some of these Acts are fairly extensive Acts, so we have to 
really . . . What happens in the instance where governments 
come along and they change a bunch of Acts, and as innocuous 
as it may seem at the outset, it’s just to do some spelling errors 
or to correct spelling errors, to correct the proper language, and 
to look at the gender-neutral designation issues? These are some 
of the things that are important to do. That’s obviously making 
sure that Saskatchewan’s Acts are newer, that Saskatchewan 
Acts have the right spelling, that they’re bilingual, and that they 
have, as you mentioned, the correct language. 
 
And some of the language of the older Acts are offensive, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a number of examples throughout my career, 
you know, as an MLA, where you find some of the offensive 
language that do not apply to this day and age. And certainly we 
would want to ensure that we modernize the language. And, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the things that’s really important is that it’s a 
much more respectful environment when you do away with 
spelling or characterization of some of our people in 1920s or 
1910 language because some of the language, as I’ve indicated 
at the outset, that we find that there is quite . . . There is some 
offence in some of the wording in some of the Acts that 
Saskatchewan may have had in their Acts from years and years 
ago. 
 
So looking at this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, we are looking 
through the actual Acts that are being impacted and, as the 
minister alluded to, there are 100 Acts being impacted. We need 
to make sure that we see what these Acts are about. We don’t 
suspect at the outset that changing the designation in terms of 
being gender-neutral is going to be a significant issue, but we 
want to see how the correct spelling, certainly how the correct 
language is being used, and, Mr. Speaker, it does impact 100 
Acts. 
 
And the minister also spoke about the bilingual aspect which is 
important to respect. So under that notion, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to look at this particular bill. Anybody who has any 
advice of the Acts that are being impacted, that . . . You never 
know in some of these Acts that are being amended for spelling 
or for grammar or for language or for gender-neutral 
designation. Somewhere along the line some of these Acts, 
some of these designations may not help. It may hurt. So it’s 
important for us to take the time to go through these Acts and 
certainly see where the changes are and what those changes are, 
and see if the changes are appropriate to each of these Acts. 
 
So on that notion, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 153, 
The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has moved 
adjournment on debate. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 
 

Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 

modifiant le droit législatif 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the Minister 
of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). As noted when introducing 
the English bill, Saskatchewan’s last general statute revision 
occurred in 1978, and since that time several statute law 
amendment Acts have been introduced to correct errors. 
 
This bill will amend 12 bilingual Acts to make amendments to 
update outdated language, ensure consistent spelling, and 
correct grammatical and reference errors, such as updating 
spelling of safekeeping, pipelines, subject-matter, insofar, and 
extraprovincial. It will replace telephone transmission, 
telecopier, facsimile, and electronic mail with fax and email, 
and it will replace “be of unsound mind” with “lack capacity.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I am pleased to move second 
reading of The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Once again as I said on the previous bill, these bills are bills 
that are necessary in terms of the housekeeping aspect of being 
in government. We look at Bill 154, and it’s primarily a 
language matter in which we want to make sure that the bills 
are all bilingual in nature. 
 
So again we’re going to be studying all of the Acts that are 
being impacted. The particular bilingual designation of some of 
these bills don’t involve all 100 of the previous bills I spoke 
about, but obviously this is not an issue that we would hold up 
the Assembly for because obviously we want to encourage 
people and encourage the government to do as much as they can 
to respect the bilingual Act of Canada. And simply converting a 
lot of these particular bills into the bilingual law that’s 
impacting all of us, I don’t think the opposition has too many 
concerns with that. So on that note, I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
(No. 2). 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 
Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les 

directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 



5876 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Health Care 
Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 
2014. 
 
Since the Supreme Court of Canada’s 1988 decision in R. v. 
Mercure, the Government of Saskatchewan has enacted 
approximately 57 bilingual Acts. The translation program is 
designed to meet the needs of Saskatchewan’s francophone 
community. This bill will repeal and replace The Health Care 
Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act 
with a new bilingual Act. There are no changes in substance. 
The consequential English-only bill accompanies this Act to 
amend four Acts that reference the current Act. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’m pleased to move second reading 
of The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care 
Decision Makers Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading on 
Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 
Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
from our perspective, as I mentioned, as the official opposition, 
it is my honour again to stand to give the initial comments on 
some of the bills being proposed by the government. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Bill 155, and I believe the next bill, 156, which is 
really speaking of The Health Care Directives and Substitute 
Health Care Decision Makers Act, Mr. Speaker, we certainly 
don’t want to take away from the fact that some of the 
provisions in this particular Act and some of the intent of this 
particular bill coming forward is really to respect the bilingual 
nature of what governments have to do across the country. And 
Saskatchewan is not immune to that. We obviously want to 
respect the particular law that encouraged us to put all of our 
bills under the French language, which of course is also really 
important, you know, to do. 
 
There are a number of Acts on one bill, Bill 156, Mr. Speaker, 
and Bill 155. Bill 156 makes minor changes to a number of 
Acts in order to update the changes in this particular bill, 155, 
so that the thrust of all the changes in these next two bills, 155 
and 156, are contained in this particular Act. So we have to 
really pay close attention to what the Acts are about and what’s 
the value, Mr. Speaker, of bringing a bill forward. And this 
particular bill really talks about changing some of the Acts as it 
pertains to this issue to convert some of those Acts into French. 
 
But what it does, it gives the opposition, Mr. Speaker, an 
opportunity to understand what the Act really is about, this 
particular Act, when you talk about respecting health care 
directives and substitute health care decision makers. So 
substitute health care decision makers are people that you 
would look at in the event that someone was quite ill. Who 
would you speak to if that person cannot speak for themselves, 
if they’re incapacitated in some way, shape, or form? And 
obviously how would you . . . Who would speak for that person 
that was ill and couldn’t respond on their own? 
 
[15:45] 
 

Well Bill 155 makes a few changes around the rules about 
power of attorney and guardianship if people become ill or they 
lack capacity. Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s really, really important 
is that we want to make sure that families have as much time 
and as much information, as much compassion as possible 
when making some of these decisions. 
 
So this bill has a lot of issues attached to it. We want to make 
sure that we pay attention to the bill itself, not just to the 
provisions in the bill that talks about changing it into the 
bilingual nature to ensure that we conform to the law that 
encourages or demands that governments across the country 
have every Act in a bilingual text. 
 
So I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we pay attention to 
some of these issues. As I said at the outset, there is a lot of 
issues around quality of care when one becomes incapacitated. 
The bill itself has a lot of ramifications to a lot of families out 
there, not just simply translating the bill into French. That’s 
obviously the thrust of what’s happening here but there are a 
few little changes that we have to pay very close attention to. 
 
And again as I mentioned there are some rules around power of 
attorney or guardianship for those people who become too ill or 
lack capacity to make decisions about their care, Mr. Speaker. 
We want to make sure that it’s easier on families, as I said at the 
outset. But who makes these decisions? Who decides for you? 
 
And section 15 of this particular Act differentiates between 
whole-blood and half-blood relatives. And, you know, we’re 
wondering where did this strange, archaic language come from? 
Because obviously we want to make sure that we update the 
language, as I indicated. And to me, I think we need to identify 
what is meant by whole blood or half blood. 
 
It also talks about section 17 which actually delegates health 
decision makers for members of a religious order to their 
superiors if they do not designate a proxy. So, Mr. Speaker, 
these are some of the things that we have to pay very close 
attention because this whole debate around quality of life as one 
ages or one has some very difficult circumstances or becomes 
very ill, like there’s just a wide . . . there’s a myriad of options 
for people in that situation. Family members could make a 
decision. A religious order could make a decision. A health care 
professional, in the event that there isn’t a family available, can 
make a decision. There’s all these different players around 
somebody that’s quite ill, and there’s so many different 
emotions attached to each option that’s available to each 
particular section of people that are identified in the Act that 
could make a decision around somebody’s future care and of 
course somebody’s life. 
 
So it’s important that we pay close attention to not just the 
French provisions but to see what changes are being made in 
some of these Acts, and that’s why it’s important and it’s 
incumbent upon the opposition to pay very close attention. 
Because some of these bills, while they say it’s only a provision 
to update the language, a provision to do the correct 
terminology, a provision to transpose it into French, what we 
find, Mr. Speaker, is from time to time the government tries to 
sneak in one small change here and there that could result in a 
quality-of-care issue. We want to try and catch that. 
 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5877 

And that’s one of the reasons why we have these second 
reading speeches and one of the reasons why I think it’s 
important that we ask the questions at the initial outset and have 
our research team go through this bill page by page, line by line 
to ensure what is being proposed here is what the intent of the 
government is, and that they don’t have a different plan or a 
change of plans when it comes to caring for somebody that’s 
quite ill and who makes the decision about that person’s future 
care and of course their life. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, again we’re paying close attention 
to some of the changes on this particular bill. And I move that 
we adjourn debate on Bill 155, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 
Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Health Care 
Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. 
 
This Act makes consequential amendments to four Acts that 
reference The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 
Care Decision Makers Act, namely: The Adult Guardianship 
and Co-decision-making Act, The Electronic Information and 
Documents Act, The Health Information Protection Act, and 
The Public Guardian and Trustee Act. As The Health Care 
Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act is 
being repealed and replaced with a new bilingual version, each 
of these four Acts mentioned will be updated to reference the 
name of the new Act. There are no changes in substance to any 
of these Acts amended by this bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’m pleased to move second reading 
of The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care 
Decision Makers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 
Care Decision Makers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, and as I pointed 
out in the earlier discussion, that we look at this particular bill, 
and while there isn’t any particular aspect of the bill being 
changed, it really does highlight the need for us to pay attention 

to these particular bills because the provision here is simply to 
do a language change, Mr. Speaker. But what it gives the 
opposition the opportunity to do is — okay, we do have a 
language change being proposed under Bill 156 — we want to 
make sure that there aren’t any other changes. 
 
And there are a few little changes, as I said at the outset, that we 
want to pay a bit of attention to, and of course some of the bills 
really revolve around power of attorney and guardianship when 
people become ill or lack capacity. It also talks a bit about the 
co-decision makers Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So these are issues that we don’t see any particular changes 
being proposed in this particular Act, primarily to convert the 
Act into French from what I can understand. And certainly 
we’re not to argue with the conversion to French. We think that 
is the law and we have to follow the law, of course. But what 
we want to do is make a bit of a . . . It gives us a chance to 
focus on some of the Act itself. 
 
And part of the initial look at the Act itself, we talk about the 
rules around power of attorney, and these are some of the things 
that are really, really important to us, Mr. Speaker, because we 
hear a lot of debate out there in Saskatchewan and throughout 
Canada on this whole right-to-die issue. It’s just, people out 
there are just all caught up with that particular Act, and we see a 
lot of the whole notion around Bill 156, that there may be some 
changes and challenges to how the bill is being drafted. 
 
So these are some of the things you cannot take lightly, as I 
mentioned at the outset. The bill is just primarily a French 
language revision that is necessary, but when you bring a bill 
forward of this sort, it gives the opposition an opportunity to 
look at the bill in detail, to say, okay, while this is a French 
conversion only, we want to make sure that the bill itself is in 
good hands and that there is no major changes attached to them. 
And that’s of course our role as the official opposition. 
 
So there is again the section 15 as indicated, you know, that 
differentiates between whole-blood and half-blood relatives. 
You know, we need to know where that language came from 
and, Mr. Speaker, it is something that we think we have to pay 
attention to.  
 
But by and large, the bill is primarily an effort to convert it into 
French as required by law. Then we will certainly either hold 
the bill up or let it proceed quickly, but at this stage of the bill 
itself, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 156, The Health 
Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and 
Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
 



5878 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014. Mr. 
Speaker, this new legislation will repeal The Human Tissue Gift 
Act, which is outdated. 
 
Unfortunately the current legislation prevents Saskatchewan’s 
health system from being more innovative in finding matches 
for patients waiting for an organ or tissue transplant. We must 
modernize the legislation so that our health system can respond 
quickly to innovations. We owe this to those who face a decline 
in their health while waiting for a transplant. 
 
This legislation will allow the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
to make regulations that establish standards, practices, and 
procedures that improve access to transplantation. With this 
increased flexibility, Saskatchewan’s transplant services can 
better reflect current practices in organ and tissue donations and 
can take advantage of opportunities to improve care for patients. 
 
The need for organ and tissue transplants in Saskatchewan far 
exceeds the number of donors. For the approximately 90 people 
waiting for a kidney transplant, the wait can mean months and 
years of intense, tiring, and time-consuming dialysis treatments 
three times a week. As a result many of these people are unable 
to work full time, if they can work at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the Saskatchewan transplant program’s 
best efforts, too many people wait too long for a transplant. 
Some people on waiting lists can’t live long enough to become 
a transplant recipient. Even with the generosity of live donors 
for some kidney, liver, and lung transplants, the supply still 
does not match the need. 
 
Improving the lives of the more than 90 Saskatchewan people 
who are often waiting for a cornea transplant is just one area 
that could be addressed through regulations that could provide 
greater flexibility of procuring corneas. After careful 
consideration and consultation, regulations could be developed 
under this legislation to give medical teams in Saskatchewan 
the flexibility that now exists in Alberta: the ability to augment 
donations with the purchase of corneas. This has the potential to 
allow some of our citizens to have their sight restored much 
sooner than is currently possible. 
 
We have the opportunity to remove impediments that can delay 
life-saving or life-enhancing treatments for Saskatchewan 
residents whose health has been comprised. For this reason, I 
believe it’s important to bring this legislation to the House 
today. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second 
reading of The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Bill 
157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, this is a really important bill. 
As I had indicated to a number of people, before the Assembly, 

that we go through each of these bills being proposed by the 
government in a three-phase process. First of all they do the 
first reading where they introduce the bill, and of course the 
second reading is where we have our first opportunity to get an 
explanation as to what the bill’s all about and of course the 
official opposition’s initial comment about the particular bill. 
So this particular bill, this is our first opportunity to have some 
public statements made on Bill 157, The Human Tissue Gift 
Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anybody in the Assembly, I 
don’t think anybody within the New Democratic circles 
disagree that we should do all we can to help a fellow person 
out in the event that you’re able to donate organs, either through 
a voluntary measure or through some misfortune where you’ve 
lost your life and you wish to donate some of your body parts to 
other people in Saskatchewan or beyond Saskatchewan that 
may have need of some of your human tissue, so to speak. I 
don’t think anybody is overly concerned about that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think everybody would encourage those that haven’t signed 
their organ donor permission forms that we would encourage 
them to do so because the gift of sight or the gift of a new 
kidney, the gift of improved health is something that I think 
many, many families would like to do as their sacrifice to help 
others. So I think overall, from the compassion perspective, 
when we look at the whole notion of donating human tissue or 
human organs so that others may have better health or a better 
life ahead of them, I think a lot of people in Saskatchewan 
genuinely think, you know, that’s not really a bad concept. 
 
But what we see under Bill 157, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to be 
very careful here that we pay . . . And that’s what is one of the 
reasons why we pay very close attention to these bills. When 
we get the initial explanation of the bill from the minister, you 
know, we want to hear exactly what their intent is with this 
particular bill, and we want to look at the wording and the 
language in the bill, and of course we’re going to ask other 
people for advice on the bill itself. 
 
[16:00] 
 
But one of the things that we find out when the minister talks 
about being more innovative on the human tissue gift process, 
we want to be more exciting, more innovative. There’s so many 
families suffering from this. We believe that some of these 
changes to the rules around Bill 157, around organ donations, is 
that the bill now allows for the purchase of tissues. 
 
Now what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? We need to find that 
out at the outset because the rules aren’t in the Act. The Act 
itself has explanatory notes. What’s going to happen is they’ll 
come later with the regulations attached to this Act, and what 
happens is the regulations are not part of the Act. They’re 
designed by government later on. And what we don’t get an 
opportunity to see are the changes made to the rules around 
some of these Acts. 
 
We can see the Act which is what we’re doing today. But after 
the Act has been proclaimed and, in the heat of summer, it may 
be a whole different set of rules that the government comes 
along and arbitrarily puts in behind this Act, which really 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5879 

changes the nature and the intent of the Act, from our 
perspective. And that’s why it’s important to pay very close 
attention to the rules and regulations around some of these bills, 
just as much as you would to the initial bill when it’s first 
brought forward in the Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we think under Bill 157, this changes the rules 
around the purchase of certain human tissues. And, Mr. 
Speaker, what we don’t want to do is start seeing the process 
begin to unfold where people will be allowed to buy organs 
from other people, as this raises a lot of ethical questions. Is it 
going to allow the queue jumping, Mr. Speaker? These are 
some of the things that we have to ask when we look at this 
particular bill and what the intent of the Sask Party government 
is because this really raises a lot of questions on this particular 
bill. 
 
So obviously the initial questions that we asked: are there 
different other ways to address, better ways to address the 
shortage of organs for transplant, as the minister alluded to? If 
there will now be purchase of tissues made available, will there 
be companies selling those tissues to the highest bidder? You 
know, will corporations be making a profit off people’s body 
parts? We didn’t know these questions, Mr. Speaker. What is 
the intent? What is the agenda? What are the rules surrounding 
the human body, donation of human body parts? We need to 
find out and clarify what those rules are from the outset. 
 
These are some of the things that people of Saskatchewan ought 
to know when we start talking about The Human Tissue Gift 
Act. We aren’t going to discourage people from signing their 
donor card and doing all they can to help other families in the 
event that they can afford to donate an organ or, Mr. Speaker, 
through an unfortunate tragic accident that they wish to do so. 
We would encourage that, Mr. Speaker. But this bill does raise 
a lot of questions that if you’re allowed to buy or allowed to 
purchase tissues, it appears that the Act’s allowing that, so we 
have to ask those questions at the outset. Who would be 
allowed to purchase human tissue? Is it going to be a 
corporation? Is it going to be anybody who has the money? 
Like how will the government be involved in this process? 
These are some of the really, really tough questions that need to 
be asked. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this bill cannot be just presented as itself 
here today, where it doesn’t have any rules or regulations 
attached to it. That is kind of where you’ll find they’ll flesh out 
a lot of their approaches to the rules. And this is why it’s 
important to pay attention to when the government come along 
and proclaim this bill. They’ll have a set of rules attached to it 
and generally, Mr. Speaker, as the Sask Party government likes 
to do, they hide the rules and they unveil the rules in the middle 
of summer when everyone is travelling or when less people are 
paying attention to some of the rules. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
seen that happen time and time again. 
 
So this is a really important matter. It’s a very, very important 
issue. It raises a whole bunch of questions. It has a lot of ethical 
debate attached to it, depending on what kind of rules and 
regulations the Sask Party want to put in. And, Mr. Speaker, 
what you want to do is ensure one thing: is that those that are 
voluntarily donating their organs or tissues to help family 
members, or family does it when somebody is killed in an 

accident or dies from other causes, that if they’re family and 
they wish to donate organs, we applaud that particular effort 
because it will help somebody with their health problems and 
certainly improve their quality of life. And the theory is that 
that is from the compassionate, common sense Saskatchewan 
solution. We would encourage that. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, when you start talking about purchasing 
of tissues, human tissues, that raises a whole bunch of other 
questions. And this is why it’s important that we follow through 
and follow up on what the Act is trying to do and that we follow 
up and follow through on what regulation the Saskatchewan 
Party government puts in place to achieve the objective that 
they’ve outlined in this particular bill. 
 
So we have a lot of questions on this particular Act. We’re glad 
to hear the minister give us an explanation. There’s no question 
that we will be paying attention to this. 
 
And the biggest note that we have is that who have they asked 
and consulted with on this particular bill? Have they talked to 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association? Have they talked to the 
Canadian Medical Association? Have they spoken to families 
that are impacted by this? Are they talking to the health care 
system? I hope it’s not John Black and Company. But are they 
talking to the front-line workers, the surgeons, people that get 
involved with this, the people that are involved with the 
automobile accidents? These are some of the organizations that 
we would like to see if they had any discussion with. 
 
Like where did this notion come from that they’re now going to 
allow purchasing of body parts? We need to find out, Mr. 
Speaker, if that’s their intent. We need to find out who they 
consulted, why these provisions are being brought forward. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what kind of rules and regulations lay in 
waiting as a result of the Sask Party’s hidden agenda, so to 
speak, when it comes to trying to deviate from what is being 
presented through bills versus what they’re implementing for 
the rules and regulations that they are famous for hiding until 
the last minute. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of questions on this particular bill. We’re 
going to pay very, very close attention to this one as it does 
raise a lot of eyebrows. It does raise a lot of concern. There’s a 
lot of ethics attached to this particular bill. So we’re going to 
take our time on this bill and walk through this carefully to 
make sure we come up with a clear position and force that clear 
position from the Sask Party government so we know exactly 
what the intent and directive of this bill is being followed 
through to the letter, Mr. Speaker, because, as I indicated, there 
are some concerns on Bill 157. 
 
So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 157, The 
Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014. I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



5880 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 149 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 149 — The 
Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 
to join debate today on Bill No. 149, The Health Administration 
Amendment Act. Certainly in the legislative agenda brought 
forward by the government, we see things that could be 
described as housekeeping, things that could be more about 
minor renovations, Mr. Speaker, things that are building whole 
new houses unto themselves. And it’s here where I realize I’m 
channelling the Premier from his address to the Sask Party 
convention, so I’ll try to cut that out. 
 
But in terms of what’s being built here with this particular piece 
of legislation, Mr. Speaker, this is in response to the continuing 
evolution of eHealth and using electronic means to contain 
health information. We’ve also seen legislation brought forward 
around vital statistics being transferred to the purview of that 
agency. And so it makes a certain amount of sense that we see a 
piece of legislation today where again keeping up with the 
evolution of how the health information is registered in this 
province, how that might be appropriately transferred from the 
Ministry of Health over to eHealth Saskatchewan. 
 
In his second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, the minister talked 
about, again, just that, wherein the health registration was 
previously a branch within the Ministry of Health, and how the 
program had “. . . worked closely with eHealth to provide 
support for the electronic system that runs the application, the 
online application and renewal process for health cards,” 
quoting from the minister’s second reading speech of 
November 4th, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Again in terms of what’s happening here, this is as it should be, 
properly establishing the ministerial authority under the Act so 
that as this is continued, and as health information, and as again 
with vital statistics, is consolidated under the legislative 
purview of eHealth, that that be done so lawfully and that it be 
properly authorized under the law. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the amendment that we’re 
considering here today, there are two subsections of section 6.5 
of The Health Administration Act that is being considered here 
today are the meat of the legislation. 
 
So as it exists right now, Mr. Speaker, under the current health 
administration Act under the section dealing with cards, section 
6.5, there’s the section 6.5(2):  
 

The minister may, in accordance with this section, issue 
cards to beneficiaries for the purpose of identifying 
persons as beneficiaries. 

 

What this legislation is setting out to do, Mr. Speaker, is to then 
incorporate the proper authority transferring what had been 
under the Ministry of Health over to eHealth. And of course, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of what’s being contemplated here, so 
section 2 of the Bill No. 149 states: 
 

Section 6.5 of The Health Administration Act is amended 
by adding the following subsections after subsection 
(2): 
 

“(2.1) Subject to the approval of the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, the minister may designate all or 
any of the following to exercise the powers and perform 
the functions of the minister described in this section: 

 
(a) a Crown corporation within the meaning of The 
Crown Corporations Act, 1993; 

 
(b) an agency of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
“(2.2) If the minister has designated a Crown 
corporation or an agency of the Government of 
Saskatchewan to exercise the powers and perform the 
functions of the minister pursuant to subsection (2.1): 

 
[it is] (a) unless otherwise directed by the minister, 
any action, power or conclusion to be performed, 
exercised or arrived at by the minister pursuant to this 
section may be performed, exercised or arrived at by 
the Crown corporation or the agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, as the case may be; and 
 
(b) any order directed to the minister pursuant to this 
section shall be directed to the Crown corporation or 
the agency of the Government of Saskatchewan, as the 
case may be”. 

 
So again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of properly establishing the 
legal authority for eHealth to be doing the work that has been 
set out for it by this government and again, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
more about the evolution and the technology and what is 
arguably a natural progression, as I think the minister had 
referred to it. And on the face of it, this would seem to be a 
proposition worth agreeing with, that all the health information 
be consolidated under the purview of eHealth Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it will be interesting to find out, Mr. Speaker — and 
maybe this is a conversation better suited to committee where 
of course you can have a closer questioning or conversation 
with the minister and officials as regards the content and the 
implications of the Act under question — but certainly the way 
that this coincides with the broader question of health 
information privacy, Mr. Speaker, and certainly the way that 
again when things are stored on an electronic basis, again 
maybe that’s not part of the eHealth legislation, but certainly it 
should be around the protocols that are more generally observed 
by this government and should be observed by this government 
as regards the security of health information or private 
information generally for the citizenry. That’s something that 
we’ll be looking for some assurance on. 
 
[16:15] 
 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5881 

We’ll be looking to see how eHealth generally is evolving as an 
entity in and of itself. And we’ve seen, be it with electronic 
health records or with the experience in other jurisdictions with 
large-scale information technology projects — and certainly 
we’ve seen that in different ways here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker — when you’ve got large-scale information technology 
projects, there’s oftentimes a significant opportunity for 
different things to go wrong, not the least of being cost overruns 
in terms of how the initial project was supposed to be taken up, 
but again as well the questions around security of that 
information for the citizenry and what people can expect in 
terms of the health card that they carry in their wallet, Mr. 
Speaker, and how that is secure or not, or what are the different 
challenges that have been contemplated and addressed by this 
government and by an agency such as eHealth, and what is the 
change in that approach as these tranches of information move 
from the Ministry of Health to eHealth Saskatchewan. 
 
So we’ve got a number of questions, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
how this legislation will impact the situation for citizens in this 
province. Again on the face of it, it seems to be a fairly 
straightforward proposition in terms of making sure that you’re 
setting out the appropriate legal authority under the Act for 
eHealth to be the administrator for the health registration 
information in this province, but we’ll have other questions on 
that as this goes along. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 
more consultation that we’ll be undertaking to ensure that we’re 
not just taking the minister’s word for it but also doing that 
work of due diligence and ensuring that we’re having that 
broader conversation with the people of Saskatchewan about 
this evolution in the way that their fundamental information is 
kept, Mr. Speaker, by their government. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 149, The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014. 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 149, The Health Administration Amendment 
Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 144 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 144 — The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m weighing 
in on debate as it relates to Bill No. 144, The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act today, and I’ll keep my comments 
relatively brief here today. Certainly there’s going to be 
important follow-up through this process, through the 
community process, but also with the important stakeholders 
who are providing supports and maintain relationships and have 
that extensive network of relationships but also that first-hand 

knowledge within our communities on how best to strengthen 
and respond to such an unacceptable challenge that so many 
and too many people face, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As it relates to domestic violence, certainly it’s an issue that has 
prevalence and impacts far too many within our communities 
and our community and our province and our country. It’s also 
a time right now that’s sort of there in our national conscience 
and our public conscience because of unacceptable public or, I 
guess, unacceptable actions that have become public with 
high-profile media, a high-profile media individual here in 
Canada recently, but also different sports celebrities that have 
been profiled recently. 
 
And that should allow an appropriate spotlight and attention to 
this, the unacceptable actions of many. But we need to 
recognize as well that these actions aren’t, you know, 
something that are simply there for the national spotlight or 
international discussion. They’re realities, harsh realities, for far 
too many in our communities here in Saskatchewan, here in 
Regina, right across our province.  
 
So any measures that are going to provide better supports, better 
protections, for those that are subjected to domestic violence are 
certainly critically important ones that we would support. And 
how do . . . You know, and recognizing what sort of supports, 
what sort of programs, what sort of measures can be taken to 
drive cultural change that ensure and bring about healthy 
relationships for all, and ensure that all people here in our 
province have the security and protection they deserve is 
critically important and are actions that I’m sure we all would 
like to support. 
 
Without a doubt, far too many people suffer in silence on this 
front, Mr. Speaker. We hear of those cases and those people 
that do speak out. But the reality for many is that the vast 
majority of violent acts, of domestic violence, of interpersonal 
relationship violence don’t get reported, Mr. Speaker, and 
there’s a whole host of reasons that are suggested to support 
why that’s the case. 
 
And these are the types of areas that we need to be focusing in 
on as a province, having the hard and real discussion that we 
need to and driving cultural change to support, certainly 
individuals who are subjected to domestic violence, to receive 
the supports that they deserve, to not be stigmatized and further 
victimized, Mr. Speaker, but also to make sure that we’re 
bringing about changes and driving cultural change that will 
improve the security and safety of all Saskatchewan people in a 
lasting way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I look at the changes that are made here, certainly we’re 
going to be consulting directly with stakeholders to make sure 
that all consequences of these changes have been considered, 
certainly the intended consequences as described by the 
minister but also making sure that we understand any 
unintended consequences and to see if there’s a place for which 
this legislation could be further strengthened, improved, or 
amended. And that’s our job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know when I look at the legislation itself, the aim of it appears 
to be certainly to provide better protection and support and 
response. That’s important. And most of it relates to a 



5882 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

broadening of scope for the ability of intervention and of 
response, and a broader definition of relationships, it would 
appear, Mr. Speaker. These are all important pieces. 
 
And I suspect, if the consultation has been done on this bill as it 
should, will be pieces that certainly we would be supportive of, 
Mr. Speaker. The goals of this bill are important goals, but what 
we need to do at this point in time is make sure that the actual 
practical changes are as strong as they can be, are as impactful 
in a positive way as they can be, and that they don’t have a set 
of unintended consequences that haven’t been considered. 
 
And as I say, this is an important issue that’s present in our 
community, something that certainly requires action. The 
legislation before us is encouraging, but we need to make sure 
that that legislation’s as strong as it can be, that the supports 
that are needed within our community to make sure that victims 
of domestic violence . . . are extended to many more, Mr. 
Speaker, that we, as I say, continue to address social challenges 
around stigma and making sure that there’s avenues and 
supports for those to not only speak out and not be further 
victimized but that they be supported, empowered, and that all 
our understanding . . . or that all the impacts of domestic 
violence are understood. 
 
Certainly the tragic reality is that in too many households, in 
too many relationships, in too many people’s lives, domestic 
violence is a sad and tragic reality, one that has a whole host of 
negative impacts, both on the individual and on a family. And 
it’s certainly the kind of issue where we need to certainly be 
redoubling our effort and making sure we’re reaching out to all 
those engaged in making life better for those that are both 
facing domestic violence but also in changing society to ensure 
there’s better supports for all Saskatchewan people and 
changing society to ensure that domestic violence is something 
that we can reduce and eliminate in many people’s lives across 
our province. 
 
So I guess I just would want to weigh in and say that in general 
I’m pleased to see some legislation on this front. The comments 
put forward by the minister are in general sort of broadening of 
scope to allow for intervention and speaking to a changing 
nature of relationships or making sure that it’s as reflective as it 
can be of modern realities here today. 
 
Our job is now to engage with government and certainly, 
importantly with stakeholders to make sure that this 
legislation’s as comprehensive as it should be, that it’s built out 
of direct consultation with those who know best, and that 
there’s not a host of unintended consequences that are in place. 
And certainly we’ll be entering into this with a full intent of 
supporting legislation that’s good for Saskatchewan people and, 
where possible and if possible, strengthening that legislation, 
recognizing that there’s so much work to be done on this front 
in ensuring better peace, better security, and safety for all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
With that being said, I adjourn debate at this point in time for 
Bill No. 144. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 144, The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 152 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 152 — The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi 
intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having just 
weighed in on the bill that is causing these consequential 
amendments to be brought forward, Bill No. 144, the victims of 
domestic violence, and speaking about how important this issue 
is for Saskatchewan people and for all people, in speaking 
specifically about how critical it is that we get the legislation 
right and ensure the supports and cultural change that’s required 
is going to be supported by both legislative changes but 
government resources and actions as well, I don’t see a whole 
need to focus in too much on the actual consequential 
amendment Act that’s put before us here, Bill No. 152. 
 
But just again it’s critical that we state very clearly how 
unacceptable domestic violence is, a relationship though 
interpersonal relationships in all aspects of society, whether in 
one’s household or whether in the community. We need to 
recognize that far too many people that are victims of violence 
suffer in silence, and we have to do all we can to change that 
culture and provide better protection and safety and security for 
all. 
 
So with that being said, this is an important file to the official 
opposition. It’s one we care about. It’s one that we’re going to 
engage sincerely with those that are working on the ground, 
many stakeholders who provide very good and important 
supports, life-saving supports for many within our community, 
and that we’ll fully engage in this dialogue and make sure that 
we do all we can to improve the lives for our constituents, those 
within our community and our province, Mr. Speaker. With that 
being said, I adjourn discussion of Bill No. 152. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 152, The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 145 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 145 — The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5883 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
wade into the debate today about Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver 
Act. 
 
I’d like to start, Mr. Speaker, by looking at the minister’s 
second reading comments. And he talks about this government, 
this bill will be “. . . enhancing access to justice in the province 
of Saskatchewan.” And, Mr. Speaker, it does in fact look like 
that is the case. Undoubtedly there are many questions that 
we’ll have in committee, and seeing some of the details of this 
bill and how they could have done things even better, Mr. 
Speaker, but there are some very good things in this bill. 
 
I think about some of my constituents who come into my office 
with challenges around tenancy issues with The Residential 
Tenancies Act, Mr. Speaker, or disputes with landlords and 
tenants. And just looking at the website, Mr. Speaker, to appeal 
to the residential tenancy tribunal, it is in fact a $50 fee. And on 
the website it says there’s no fee for a tenant to apply for a 
return of security deposit, but for all other applications is $50. 
The fee is waived for anyone who is on social assistance or 
receives an old age security income supplement. But we know, 
Mr. Speaker, that there are working poor as well, Mr. Speaker, 
those people who work multiple jobs at low wages who still 
would need some financial support in this regard, Mr. Speaker, 
if they want to bring some of their issues forward. 
 
When we go to the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission 
application form, so if you have difficulty or some issues with a 
decision of SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], it is a 
$75 application accompanying the form. And it says in fact that 
the commission can waive the application fee if the fee will 
cause a substantial hardship for the claimant, but that’s not 
defined at all. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, so I think this bill, some of the things this bill sets 
out to do . . . I just have touched on tribunals here. But what this 
bill does is allows for the waiver of administrative fees at courts 
and tribunals for lower income litigants. I think it formalizes the 
process or lays it out a little bit more clearly for people across 
the board, Mr. Speaker.  
 

[So right now] there’s no fee waiver program at small 
claims court . . . [and] although the Court of Appeal will 
accept fee waivers issued for the Court of Queen’s Bench, 
[as the minister points out] there’s no process to obtain a 
new waiver at the Court of Appeal. The Act will allow 
individuals to apply for a fee waiver [now] at all three 
levels of court. 

 
Another important piece about this . . . So the two tribunals that 
are specifically mentioned in the Act are the ones that I’ve just 
talked about: the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission and 
the Office of Residential Tenancies. But they’ve left it open, 
Mr. Speaker, which I think is not a bad move at all, that there 
will be power to subscribe additional tribunals and government 
bodies in the future when they may be appropriate, so leaving it 
open for those unforeseen issues, Mr. Speaker. 

Another important issue here is the Act — I think this goes to 
the whole sort of streamlining or making the process simple 
across tribunals and courts, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Act . . . transfers administration of the fee waiver 
applications from the Saskatchewan Legal Aid 
Commission to individual courts and tribunals. Court and 
tribunal officials will have authority to administer 
application process, [and as the minister points out] will 
have discretionary authority to refer applications to the 
court or tribunal for determination where appropriate. 

 
Another issue that the minister points out that the bill will be 
addressing is: 
 

. . . [ensuring] that eligible individuals as well as courts 
and tribunals are not negatively impacted by 
administrative processes or delays. Eligibility for fee 
waivers will be based on simplified criteria set out in 
regulations [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
So I think another issue that’s important to talk about is the 
when in the process. In the past — and the minister points this 
out, and actually I’ll talk about this a little bit later — but the 
Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan had some 
recommendations as well, which follow these particular 
recommendations . . . Or the government is in fact accepting 
many of the Law Reform Commission’s recommendations. And 
one of them, right now under current rules, a litigant must apply 
for a fee waiver for the Court of Queen’s Bench prior to taking 
any other steps in the proceeding, so you have to come up with 
the money and do that prior to proceeding. So what ends up 
happening is individuals who aren’t able to apply for a fee 
waiver prior to issuing a claim are prevented from receiving a 
fee waiver even if that person doesn’t have the means to pay for 
the court fees. So this Act will remove this rule and allow 
litigants to apply for a fee waiver at any stage of the proceeding. 
 
The minister points out that: 
 

. . . this Act . . . [has been] informed by the work of the 
Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan and the recent 
decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Trial Lawyers 
Association of British Columbia v. Attorney General of 
British Columbia. [And he points out that] The Ministry of 
Justice has also consulted with the Saskatchewan legal 
community and has found widespread support for the 
changes. 

 
So I just want to draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to the 
document that the minister said informed this bill in large 
measure. It was the final report of the Law Reform Commission 
of Saskatchewan, so this government’s own Law Reform 
Commission. It’s entitled Access to Justice — Needy Person 
Certificates and Waiver of Fees, and it came about in May 
2013, Mr. Speaker. I think just drawing your attention to the 
summary of recommendations . . . So it’s great to see that many 
of the recommendations that are in this report are found in the 
bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in terms of the availability of fee waivers, the Law Reform 
Commission recommended that “Needy Person Certificates and 
fee waivers should be available to self-represented litigants.” 



5884 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

That is included in this bill. That “Needy Person Certificates 
and fee waivers should be available at any point in a 
proceeding,” that is changing, Mr. Speaker. “A fee waiver 
program should be established in Small Claims Court.” I’m 
happy to say that this is included in this bill as well. And 
“Administrative tribunals in Saskatchewan that regularly 
adjudicate matters for members of the public should adopt fee 
waiver policies for individuals.” And that, in light of this bill, 
that will have to happen as well. 
 
And, “The fee waiver application policy and process should be 
the same across all Saskatchewan courts and tribunals.” We’ll 
have to ask some questions about that, but it’s being . . . The fee 
waiver application is being left now to the individual court or 
tribunal, Mr. Speaker. But I just want to ensure that what works 
for one tribunal, whether it’s the residential tenancies tribunal 
or the automobile injury appeals tribunal, Mr. Speaker, are 
across the board. 
 
And another part of this is a fee . . . Part 1 of the 
recommendations was that “A fee waiver application should be 
made directly to a court official or officer of a tribunal.” And 
that’s happening. So those are good things. 
 
And I think in some, in the background of the Law Reform 
Commission’s paper, they talk about . . . I’d like to read in the 
introduction: “Access to the courts has been described as “one 
of the foundational pillars protecting the rights and freedoms of 
our citizens.” And that’s quoting Chief Justice Dickson. Or 
pardon me, actually that was the B.C.G.E.U. v. British 
Columbia (Attorney General) and there is a reference cited in 
the paper, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in our society, in order to be able to access . . . for equality 
and fairness, particularly for fairness, finances shouldn’t be a 
barrier to processes or decision-making processes, Mr. Speaker. 
It was interesting because the Law Reform Commission in their 
paper talks about court fees being a bar to access. 
 
CLASSIC, which operates actually in the member from 
Saskatoon Centre’s constituency, CLASSIC stands for 
Community Legal Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner City 
Inc. So CLASSIC surveyed its clients to determine how 
frequently tribunal and court fees were a barrier to pursuing 
legal avenues. So I’d just like to read this into the record: 
 

Of the clients who faced fees, 21 per cent were not able to 
pursue their matter because they could not afford the fee 
and no mechanism existed to have the fee waived. It is of 
significant concern that approximately one-fifth of 
low-income clients are not able to move forward with 
meritorious claims because they were not able to afford the 
fee. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Act should change and 
improve upon that situation, Mr. Speaker. Again your income 
should not be a barrier to achieving fairness, Mr. Speaker. That 
should definitely not be the case. 
 
I just want to read into the record here a couple of stories from 
the paper, the Law Reform Commission’s paper that I think are 
important to hear, for people, Mr. Speaker, very specific cases, 
if you’ll just bear with me. So this is a case that is cited, that 

CLASSIC, again the Community Legal Assistance Services for 
Saskatoon Inner City, which I know we often refer folks to in 
our constituency office as well. They do very good work: law 
students working with lawyers to provide legal assistance. So 
these are a couple cases, Mr. Speaker, where because of 
financial barriers people did not have access to justice. 
 
So this first case I’d like to read into the record, the first 
involved an application in the Court of Queen’s Bench: 
 

Ms. W. is an elderly woman whose only source of income 
is her pension. Her adult son has a brain injury and lives in 
a care home. Ms. W.’s daughter-in-law is her son’s 
personal and property guardian, but she has left the country 
and began neglecting her duties. 
 
Ms. W. wished to pursue guardianship for her son, to 
access the funds in his bank account to pay for his medical 
needs. Her application had a high probability of success. 
All other family members indicated that they would 
consent to the application and a hearing would not be 
necessary. 
 
When CLASSIC advised Ms. W. of the costs associated 
with the application (which included a $200 filing fee at 
the Court of Queen’s Bench), Ms. W. instructed us to drop 
the application. She said she would not be able to find the 
funds necessary to proceed. Ms. W. was forced to abandon 
her application because of the costs involved. She advised 
that she would continue caring for her son on her limited 
income as she could not afford to become his guardian. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those stories undoubtedly . . . I know the things 
that crop up in our constituency offices, Mr. Speaker, and that 
would not be a unique situation. 
 
Here’s another issue with, that came up in small claims court 
that was cited in the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan’s Access to Justice — Needy Person Certificates 
and Waiver of Fees documents. So this story involves small 
claims court: 
 

Ms. F lives on social assistance in Saskatoon. She 
contacted CLASSIC in 2008 for assistance after she 
slipped and fell at a chain grocery store. After attempting 
to settle with the grocery store, the supervising lawyer 
decided the best course of action would be to file a 
statement of claim with Small Claims Court for the amount 
of $20,000.00. The filing fee for such a claim is $100.00. 
Although Ms. F had known about the fee for some time, 
she was unable to gather the funds to pay it. CLASSIC has 
now lost contact with this client and, unless she contacts 
CLASSIC of her own volition, will most likely close the 
file once the limitation date for filing the claim passes. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are some cases that, or stories that 
hopefully will occur less frequently because of this particular 
bill, Bill 145, The Fee Waiver Act. But I do know when we 
have the opportunity in committee, I have colleagues who are 
lawyers who will undoubtedly have some very, very thoughtful 
questions specific to the bill. 
 
And I think those of us who work in some of the core 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5885 

communities . . . and it’s not just core communities, Mr. 
Speaker, poverty and low income exist throughout 
Saskatchewan. We just, I think, see it sometimes in large 
measure in some of the core communities, but the fact remains 
there are people of low income, people who work incredibly 
hard, often multiple jobs, who live across this province who this 
will have an impact on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just have to point out though the irony. I think it’s great that 
this government is in fact heeding the recommendations of its 
very own Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan in its May 
2013 report. But I just want to draw your attention to another 
report of May 2013 from the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan called Civil Rights in Saskatchewan Long-Term 
Care Facilities, Mr. Speaker. We actually had a bill, a private 
member’s bill, this spring that outlined many of the 
recommendations or included many of the recommendations 
from this very report, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 
chosen . . . well in the spring, voted unanimously against a bill 
that would ensure that seniors have more dignity and better 
care, Mr. Speaker.  
 
So I find it interesting that on one hand that the Minister of 
Justice is very happy to talk about using the Law Reform 
Commission of Saskatchewan, its own Law Reform 
Commission, to make changes on fee waivers, but the Minister 
of Health completely is disregarding the report from the same 
month actually, May 2013, on Civil Rights in Saskatchewan 
Long-Term Care Facilities. So I think that that’s a bit ironic, 
Mr. Speaker, and ashamed quite frankly. 
 
But I do know I have colleagues who will be very interested in 
adding their thoughts to Bill 145 — I almost said Bill 155, Mr. 
Speaker — Bill 145, The Fee Waiver Act. And with that I 
would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 146 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 146 — The Fee 
Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 
portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee 
Waiver Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
the debate on Bill No. 146, which is a complement to the Bill 
145 to which I just spoke, The Fee Waiver Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is an Act to make consequential amendments resulting 
from the enactment of The Fee Waiver Act. I think in my 
comments on Bill 145, I’ve covered off the gist of where we’re 
coming from and some of the benefits that could be accrued 

from the previous bill. But this particular bill will just be simply 
making consequential amendments to ensure that The Fee 
Waiver Act is in order, I guess, in essence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again if there are any issues or thoughts that crop up, we’ll 
have questions at committee. So with that I would like to move 
to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 146, The Fee Waiver Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:45] 
 

Bill No. 147 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 147 — The Class 
Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
enter into this debate on Bill No. 147, An Act to amend The 
Class Actions Act. And it’s a short Act. It’s only one page, two 
pages if you count in a bilingual, but they’re of the same . . . 
Very interesting debate that we could have about class actions. 
 
And I have to just recognize my colleague from Nutana who 
gave a very good speech on this, talking about the history of 
class actions or group litigation that she had presented in the 
House a few days ago. Because it really was quite interesting 
what the history is of class action lawsuits through time, since 
the early 1100s I understand, where this was the kind of thing 
that was often done because it was a way to deal with justice 
quickly because we know . . . And there’s that saying justice 
delayed is justice denied, and quite often there is a commonality 
between affronts to justice in our society. And there’s no need 
to take a long time and there’s no need to have individuals bring 
forward complaints where actually it’s a group that you could 
do things quite effectively, quite efficiently. 
 
So it is an interesting history that we have about class actions 
and that type of thing, and how it was sort of lost in the 1700s, 
and the impact of the American Revolution and the War of 
Independence, and how the whole move to individualism and 
how that lost the role of group justice. And so I think it’s 
something that we should all be cognizant of, that this is a 
common and a pretty effective way to have justice served, and 
that we don’t dismiss this kind of thing frivolously or out of 
hand, that we look at how can we make sure that we can have 
justice provided quickly and effectively to as many people as 
possible without making things so complicated. Because we 
know, and we’ve seen this and we see this in litigation, where 
things are drawn out for years and years and years. And we 
think this is an important discussion to have. 
 



5886 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2014 

But I will want to discuss the specifics because I think it is 
interesting because even though it’s just one page . . . And I will 
compare this to the section that it is repealing and talk about 
some of the differences between the two. And I’m no lawyer, 
but this is sort of where the common sense comes into it. So 
why are you taking out one section and putting in another 
section and what were the reasons for that? 
 
And I would want to at the same time reflect on the minister’s 
speech. And as we have talked about that there always is an 
interesting range of how effective or how enlightening the 
minister’s speeches are when it comes to second readings. 
Some can be quite articulate and answer a lot of questions that 
we may have, and it’s right there. And others leave a lot of 
questions unanswered.  
 
And in this case I think that that is the case, that we will have 
lots of questions for committee, for the minister, around what 
does this really mean for an effective justice system here in 
Saskatchewan because, after all, that’s what we want to strive 
for, that as I say, you know, if there’s a case of justice delayed, 
that it’s justice denied if people aren’t aware that in fact that 
they may have a complaint, but they’re grumbling or muttering 
to themselves at home not realizing that there’s actually a court 
case out there, that in fact it can be dealt with.  
 
And we see that arising more and more when it comes to 
environmental issues, whether it’s flooding, that kind of thing, 
where really it’s a group of people, a common class as they 
would say, a class of people who have the same concerns, who 
are affronted in the same way. Or consumerism, whether you’ve 
bought a car or you’ve bought some razors. I know some of us 
aren’t buying as many razors as we should these days. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all those kind of things, whether 
consumerism, environmentalism, and especially when we have 
issues around, you know, particularly in our society where both 
those issues are taking more and more prominence over in our 
day-to-day life, particularly in the issues of climate change, the 
impact that’s having. That may be unknown, but the fact of the 
matter is that somebody should have been held to a higher 
standard, or if there was impact, a company did not fulfill its 
contractual obligations, then we need to have action. 
 
And I think about that particularly when it comes to consumer 
products, whether it’s cars that we buy, trucks we buy, or 
homes that we buy, all of those things. And we’re seeing an 
onslaught of newer and newer products that may be untested or 
should have been tested or more fully tested, those kind of 
issues. And whether it’s safety issues, that’s all very, very 
important. 
 
So there’s a lot of issues here, Mr. Speaker, but I do want to 
take a minute to talk about essentially . . . And I will read the 
Act because it is so short, but it really talks about: 
 

Section 40 of The Class Actions Act is repealed and the 
following substituted: 
 
“Costs 

40(1) The court or the Court of Appeal may award costs 
that the court or Court of Appeal considers appropriate 
with respect to any application, action, or appeal 

pursuant to this Act. 
 

(2) In determining whether a costs award should be 
made pursuant to subsection (1), the Court of Appeal 
may take into account one or more of the following: 

 
(a) the public interest; 
 
(b) whether the action involved a novel point of law; 
 
(c) whether the action was a test case; 
 
(d) access to justice for members of the public using 
class action proceedings; 
 
(e) any other factor that the court or the Court of 
Appeal considers appropriate. 

 
And then: 
 

(3) Class members, other than persons appointed as 
representative plaintiff for the class, are not liable for 
costs except with respect to the determination of the 
class member’s individual claim. 

 
(4) This section applies to proceedings commenced . . . 
[or] costs incurred before . . . or after this section comes 
into force. 

 
And essentially that’s it. There’s a coming-into-force clause. 
This Act comes into force on assent. 
 
So I’ll start it with subsection (4). “This section applies to 
proceedings commenced and costs incurred before, on or after 
this section comes into force.” So essentially this is a retroactive 
bill, and we’re not sure how far back it goes. What is the impact 
of this on class action lawsuits and litigation that’s gone before? 
Is it 10 years prior, or what is the limitation to this? I don’t 
believe the minister was clear on that and we’ll have, in a few 
minutes, an opportunity to review what he had said about that. 
But it just seems to be an odd, odd situation and strange that 
you would have a piece of legislation coming forward from 
Justice that has a retroactivity to it that is not addressed. 
 
Is there a certain lawsuit that has brought this forward, makes 
this necessary? That there is . . . That it is retroactive? And if 
that was the case, the minister didn’t reference that in his 
remarks and we are very curious about that. What was the 
impetus for this clause? 
 
Now I am not a lawyer, as I’ve said, but this is our job here to 
say, hey, this doesn’t make a lot of common sense here because 
you’re really opening up a lot of issues that can go back quite a 
ways. Because it says, “. . . commenced and costs incurred 
before, on or after this section comes into force.” And as we 
know, class actions can be very, very expensive. This is not an 
individual lawsuit where you sort of have . . . the numbers are 
known. Because obviously when you have class action lawsuits 
they can be quite large in settlements, in the impact, and costs 
can be quite large. So we are very, very curious about that. 
 
And then that: 
 



November 17, 2014 Saskatchewan Hansard 5887 

(3) Class members, other than a person appointed as 
representative plaintiff for the class, are not liable for the 
costs except with respect to the determination of the 
class member’s individual claim. 

 
So it sounds like the class members are not liable for costs other 
than the person who has been appointed as the representative 
plaintiff. So we’re not sure how that process will work. It 
sounds like others are not responsible for the costs. I have 
questions. Is that fair? Is that the process that we have seen in 
other situations? How does that all work out? We understand it 
could be complicated, because how can you identify all 
members of the class? Especially if this is a case where it’s a 
voluntary thing to come forward and say, I’m part of that group. 
I’m part of that group that bought that car. I’m part of that 
group that has that environmental impact. I’m part of that group 
where justice was denied. 
 
And you know, we can go through different kinds of lawsuits 
that have been fought for or litigation or actions that have been 
brought forward, and, as my colleague from Nutana talked 
about, some of these are very, very major. So we have some 
questions about that. 
 
So I want to then talk about some of these (a) to (d) — the 
public interest. And when I look at this I’m not sure, you know, 
what is the definition of public interest? Clearly, you know, it 
says: 
 

In determining whether a costs award should be made 
pursuant to subsection (1), the court or the Court of Appeal 
may take into account one or more of the following: 

 
(a) the public interest. 

 
So I’m not sure if there’s a definition out there of what the 
public interest means, and that would be one of our questions. 
What is the intention? The Minister of Justice does not go into 
detail on that term. I think it’s a good term. I mean I think that 
we’re always very interested in making sure, you know, when 
we think of issues, particularly when we think of residential 
schools, the civil rights movement that happened in the States, 
some of those issues that have a broader impact in our society. 
Clearly if class actions can have an impact and can serve to help 
us understand those much better, then I would think that it’s a 
good idea that the court or the Court of Appeal take that into 
account. 
 
So that’s a good, a good piece of legislation. But again, as I’m 
saying, the weakness lies in, what is the definition of public 
interest? You know, we know we have that kind of definition 
when it comes to, for example, municipalities and how they act, 
their planning. There is a public interest and it’s articulated 
whether it’s environmental interest, whether it’s a cultural 
interest, whether it’s, you know, those kind of things. It’s 
articulated what the public interest is. I’m not sure if that speaks 
to this, or what do they really mean by public interest? 
 
The other one that I thought was of interest . . . I mean there’s a 
few here, but whether the action involved a novel point of law. 
So what is a novel point of law? I’m not sure. I don’t know 
what the definition of novel in this case of it than what we 
would look up in a dictionary and . . . unusual, or when we 

think that’s a novel comment. We know what it means, the 
noun, but not when it’s used as an adjective. Novel point of law. 
So what does that mean? And so clearly, are there examples of 
what a novel point of law is? And it would have been very 
helpful for the minister to be more clear about what kind of 
things in Saskatchewan are we talking about. 
 
And there’s lots of cases that we could be making use of the 
courts. But you know, this is always a big debate in the House 
is how much are we giving up to the court to decide, when 
really it’s up to us to decide. We’ve seen, since the constitution, 
the Supreme Court of Canada become very active in their 
decisions in terms of helping us decide what is the meaning, 
what are the implications of the constitution? Are those 
considered novel points of law? 
 
And again as a lawyer, or non-lawyer I mean, that a lawyer may 
have much more knowledge in this area, and maybe it’s a 
common term that they use and it’s one that goes without 
saying what a novel point of law is. But as someone who’s not 
practising law, what does that mean? And when I’m reading 
this Act, what will I take that to mean? Maybe I think a novel 
point of law is one thing, but it should be clear in the definitions 
whether that novel point of law is something that’s used to 
extend the law. Is it one that’s used to clarify a point of law? Or 
is it . . . You know, when I think of novel I think of something 
unusual or creative. When I think, that’s a novel approach to 
solving this problem, I think of it being more creative than 
anything else. 
 
The other point that I would say, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The House now stands recessed to 7 p.m. this 
evening. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 160 — The Lloydminster Constituency By-election Act 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5857 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 160 — The Lloydminster Constituency By-election Act 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5857 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 160 — The Lloydminster Constituency By-election Act ............................................................................................... 5857 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 160 — The Lloydminster Constituency By-election Act 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5858 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5858 
INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5858 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5859 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5859, 5870 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5859 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5860 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5860 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5860 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5860 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5860 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5860 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5860 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5861 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Welcome to the Member for Lloydminster 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5861 
 Battlefords Cowboy Harvest Parade 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5861 
 Pleasant Hill School Centenary 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5861 
 Saskatoon Volunteer Honoured by B’nai Brith 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5862 
 Multicultural Week 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5862 
 Northern Saskatchewan Football League Ends Second Season 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 5862 
 Lloydminster Sends Message 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5863 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Shelter for Homeless People 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5863 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5863 
 Provision of Social and Affordable Housing  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5864 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5864 
 Building Costs for New Schools 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5865 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5865 
 Costs and Benefits of Health Facility Tours 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5865 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5866 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5866 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Communities in Main Street Saskatchewan Program 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5867 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5868 
  
  



 

Regulatory Approval for Medical Isotopes 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5868 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5869 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5869 
 Bill No. 608 — The Fairness for Saskatchewan Businesses in Government Procurement Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5869 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5869 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5870 
 Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5874 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5874 
 Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5875 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5875 
 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5876 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5876 
 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 
 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5877 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5877 
 Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5878 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5878 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5880 
 Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5881 
 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence 
 Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5882 
 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5883 
 Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5885 
 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5885 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


